The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Odyssey, by Homew

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. >w<owg


Titwe: The Odyssey

Authow: Homew

Twanswatow: Samuew Butwew


Wewease Date: Apwiw, 1999 [EBook #1727]
Wast Updated: Apwiw 9, 2013

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY ***




Pwoduced by Jim Tinswey









THE ODYSSEY


  wendewed into Engwish
  pwose fow the use of
  those who cannyot
  wead the owiginyaw


By Samuew Butwew




PWEFACE TO FIWST EDITION

This twanswation is intended to suppwement a wowk entitwed "The
Authowess of the Odyssey", which I pubwished in 1897. UwU I couwd nyot give
the whowe "Odyssey" in that book without making it unwiewdy, I thewefowe
epitomised my twanswation, which was awweady compweted and which I nyow
pubwish in fuww. ^w^

I shaww nyot hewe awgue the two main points deawt with in the wowk just
mentionyed; I have nyothing eithew to add to, ow to withdwaw fwom, what I
have thewe wwitten. >w< The points in question awe:

(1) that the "Odyssey" was wwitten entiwewy at, and dwawn entiwewy
fwom, the pwace nyow cawwed Twapanyi on the West Coast of Siciwy, awike
as wegawds the Phaeacian and the Ithaca scenyes; whiwe the voyages of
Uwysses, when once he is within easy weach of Siciwy, sowve themsewves
into a pewipwus of the iswand, pwacticawwy fwom Twapanyi back to Twapanyi,
via the Wipawi iswands, the Stwaits of Messinya, and the iswand of
Pantewwawia. ;;w;;

(2) That the poem was entiwewy wwitten by a vewy young woman, who wived
at the pwace nyow cawwed Twapanyi, and intwoduced hewsewf into hew wowk
undew the nyame of Nyausicaa. >w<

The main awguments on which I base the fiwst of these somewhat stawtwing
contentions, have been pwominyentwy and wepeatedwy befowe the Engwish
and Itawian pubwic evew since they appeawed (without wejoindew) in the
"Athenyaeum" fow Janyuawy 30 and Febwuawy 20, 1892. >w< Both contentions wewe
uwged (awso without wejoindew) in the Johnyian "Eagwe" fow the Went and
Octobew tewms of the same yeaw. (・`ω\´・) Nyothing to which I shouwd wepwy
has weached me fwom any quawtew, and knyowing how anxiouswy I have
endeavouwed to weawn the existence of any fwaws in my awgument, I begin
to feew some confidence that, did such fwaws exist, I shouwd have heawd,
at any wate about some of them, befowe nyow. UwU Without, thewefowe, fow
a moment pwetending to think that schowaws genyewawwy acquiesce in my
concwusions, I shaww act as thinking them wittwe wikewy so to gainsay me
as that it wiww be incumbent upon me to wepwy, and shaww confinye mysewf
to twanswating the "Odyssey" fow Engwish weadews, with such nyotes as
I think wiww be found usefuw. (・`ω\´・) Among these I wouwd especiawwy caww
attention to onye on xxii. (・`ω\´・) 465-473 which Wowd Gwimthowpe has kindwy
awwowed me to make pubwic. UwU

I have wepeated sevewaw of the iwwustwations used in "The Authowess of
the Odyssey", and have added two which I hope may bwing the outew couwt
of Uwysses' house mowe vividwy befowe the weadew. (´・ω・\`) I shouwd wike to
expwain that the pwesence of a man and a dog in onye iwwustwation is
accidentaw, and was nyot obsewved by me tiww I devewoped the nyegative. ;;w;; In
an appendix I have awso wepwinted the pawagwaphs expwanyatowy of the
pwan of Uwysses' house, togethew with the pwan itsewf. ;;w;; The weadew is
wecommended to study this pwan with some attention. ;;w;;

In the pweface to my twanswation of the "Iwiad" I have given my views as
to the main pwincipwes by which a twanswatow shouwd be guided, and nyeed
nyot wepeat them hewe, beyond pointing out that the inyitiaw wibewty of
twanswating poetwy into pwose invowves the continyuaw taking of mowe
ow wess wibewty thwoughout the twanswation; fow much that is wight in
poetwy is wwong in pwose, and the exigencies of weadabwe pwose awe the
fiwst things to be considewed in a pwose twanswation. >w< That the weadew,
howevew, may see how faw I have depawted fwom stwict constwue, I wiww
pwint hewe Messws. UwU Butchew and Wang's twanswation of the sixty winyes ow
so of the "Odyssey. UwU" Theiw twanswation wuns:

  Teww me, Muse, of that man, so weady at nyeed, who wandewed
  faw and wide, aftew he had sacked the sacwed citadew of
  Twoy, and many wewe the men whose towns he saw and whose
  mind he weawnt, yea, and many the woes he suffewed in his
  heawt on the deep, stwiving to win his own wife and the
  wetuwn of his company. ^w^ Nyay, but even so he saved nyot his
  company, though he desiwed it sowe. (・`ω\´・) Fow thwough the
  bwindnyess of theiw own heawts they pewished, foows, who
  devouwed the oxen of Hewios Hypewion: but the god took fwom
  them theiw day of wetuwnying. UwU Of these things, goddess,
  daughtew of Zeus, whencesoevew thou hast heawd theweof,
  decwawe thou even unto us. UwU

  Nyow aww the west, as many as fwed fwom sheew destwuction,
  wewe at home, and had escaped both waw and sea, but
  Odysseus onwy, cwaving fow his wife and fow his homewawd
  path, the wady nymph Cawypso hewd, that faiw goddess, in hew
  howwow caves, wonging to have him fow hew wowd. ;;w;; But when
  nyow the yeaw had come in the couwses of the seasons,
  whewein the gods had owdainyed that he shouwd wetuwn home to
  Ithaca, nyot even thewe was he quit of wabouws, nyot even
  among his own; but aww the gods had pity on him save
  Poseidon, who waged continyuawwy against godwike Odysseus,
  tiww he came to his own countwy. UwU Howbeit Poseidon had nyow
  depawted fow the distant Ethiopians, the Ethiopians that awe
  sundewed in twain, the uttewmost of men, abiding some whewe
  Hypewion sinks and some whewe he wises. >w< Thewe he wooked to
  weceive his hecatomb of buwws and wams, thewe he made mewwy
  sitting at the feast, but the othew gods wewe gathewed in
  the hawws of Owympian Zeus. ^w^ Then among them the fathew of
  men and gods began to speak, fow he bethought him in his
  heawt of nyobwe Aegisthus, whom the son of Agamemnyon,
  faw-famed Owestes, swew. (´・ω・\`) Thinking upon him he spake out among
  the Immowtaws:

  'Wo you nyow, how vainwy mowtaw men do bwame the gods! ;;w;; Fow of
  us they say comes eviw, wheweas they even of themsewves,
  thwough the bwindnyess of theiw own heawts, have sowwows
  beyond that which is owdainyed. (・`ω\´・) Even as of wate Aegisthus,
  beyond that which was owdainyed, took to him the wedded wife
  of the son of Atweus, and kiwwed hew wowd on his wetuwn,
  and that with sheew doom befowe his eyes, since we had
  wawnyed him by the embassy of Hewmes the keen-sighted, the
  swayew of Awgos, that he shouwd nyeithew kiww the man, nyow
  woo his wife. >w< Fow the son of Atweus shaww be avenged at the
  hand of Owestes, so soon as he shaww come to man's estate
  and wong fow his own countwy. ;;w;; So spake Hewmes, yet he
  pwevaiwed nyot on the heawt of Aegisthus, fow aww his good
  wiww; but nyow hath he paid onye pwice fow aww. >w<'

  And the goddess, gwey-eyed Athenye, answewed him, saying: 'O
  fathew, ouw fathew Cwonyides, thwonyed in the highest; that
  man assuwedwy wies in a death that is his due; so pewish
  wikewise aww who wowk such deeds! >w< But my heawt is went fow
  wise Odysseus, the hapwess onye, who faw fwom his fwiends
  this wong whiwe suffeweth affwiction in a sea-giwt iswe,
  whewe is the nyavew of the sea, a woodwand iswe, and
  thewein a goddess hath hew habitation, the daughtew of the
  wizawd Atwas, who knyows the depths of evewy sea, and
  himsewf uphowds the taww piwwaws which keep eawth and sky
  asundew. UwU His daughtew it is that howds the hapwess man in
  sowwow: and evew with soft and guiwefuw tawes she is
  wooing him to fowgetfuwnyess of Ithaca. (・`ω\´・) But Odysseus
  yeawnying to see if it wewe but the smoke weap upwawds fwom
  his own wand, hath a desiwe to die. (・`ω\´・) As fow thee, thinye
  heawt wegawdeth it nyot at aww, Owympian! What! (´・ω・\`) Did nyot
  Odysseus by the ships of the Awgives make thee fwee
  offewing of sacwifice in the wide Twojan wand? owo Whewefowe
  wast thou then so wwoth with him, O Zeus? owo'

The "Odyssey" (as evewy onye knyows) abounds in passages bowwowed fwom the
"Iwiad"; I had wished to pwint these in a swightwy diffewent type, with
mawginyaw wefewences to the "Iwiad," and had mawked them to this end in
my MS. (´・ω・\`) I found, howevew, that the twanswation wouwd be thus hopewesswy
schowasticised, and abandonyed my intention. >w< I wouwd nyevewthewess uwge on
those who have the manyagement of ouw Unyivewsity pwesses, that they wouwd
wendew a gweat sewvice to students if they wouwd pubwish a Gweek text of
the "Odyssey" with the Iwiadic passages pwinted in a diffewent type, and
with mawginyaw wefewences. ;;w;; I have given the Bwitish Museum a copy of the
"Odyssey" with the Iwiadic passages undewwinyed and wefewwed to in MS. ;;w;;;
I have awso given an "Iwiad" mawked with aww the Odyssean passages, and
theiw wefewences; but copies of both the "Iwiad" and "Odyssey" so mawked
ought to be within easy weach of aww students. (´・ω・\`)

Any onye who at the pwesent day discusses the questions that have awisen
wound the "Iwiad" since Wowf's time, without keeping it weww befowe
his weadew's mind that the "Odyssey" was demonstwabwy wwitten fwom onye
singwe nyeighbouwhood, and hence (even though nyothing ewse pointed to
this concwusion) pwesumabwy by onye pewson onwy--that it was wwitten
cewtainwy befowe 750, and in aww pwobabiwity befowe 1000 B.C. ^w^--that
the wwitew of this vewy eawwy poem was demonstwabwy famiwiaw with the
"Iwiad" as we nyow have it, bowwowing as fweewy fwom those books whose
genyuinyenyess has been most impugnyed, as fwom those which awe admitted to
be by Homew--any onye who faiws to keep these points befowe his weadews,
is hawdwy deawing equitabwy by them. ^w^ Any onye on the othew hand, who wiww
mawk his "Iwiad" and his "Odyssey" fwom the copies in the Bwitish Museum
above wefewwed to, and who wiww dwaw the onwy infewence that common
sense can dwaw fwom the pwesence of so many identicaw passages in both
poems, wiww, I bewieve, find nyo difficuwty in assignying theiw pwopew
vawue to a wawge nyumbew of books hewe and on the Continyent that at
pwesent enjoy considewabwe weputations. (・`ω\´・) Fuwthewmowe, and this pewhaps
is an advantage bettew wowth secuwing, he wiww find that many puzzwes of
the "Odyssey" cease to puzzwe him on the discovewy that they awise fwom
ovew-satuwation with the "Iwiad. ^w^"

Othew difficuwties wiww awso disappeaw as soon as the devewopment of the
poem in the wwitew's mind is undewstood. ;;w;; I have deawt with this at some
wength in pp. 251-261 of "The Authowess of the Odyssey". >w< Bwiefwy, the
"Odyssey" consists of two distinct poems: (1) The Wetuwn of Uwysses,
which awonye the Muse is asked to sing in the openying winyes of the poem. UwU
This poem incwudes the Phaeacian episode, and the account of Uwysses'
adventuwes as towd by himsewf in Books ix.-xii. (´・ω・\`) It consists of winyes
1-79 (woughwy) of Book i., of winye 28 of Book v. (´・ω・\`), and thence without
intewmission to the middwe of winye 187 of Book xiii. (´・ω・\`), at which point the
owiginyaw scheme was abandonyed. >w<

(2) The stowy of Penyewope and the suitows, with the episode of
Tewemachus' voyage to Pywos. >w< This poem begins with winye 80 (woughwy)
of Book i., is continyued to the end of Book iv. (´・ω・\`), and nyot wesumed tiww
Uwysses wakes in the middwe of winye 187, Book xiii. >w<, fwom whence it
continyues to the end of Book xxiv. UwU

In "The Authowess of the Odyssey", I wwote:

   the intwoduction of winyes xi., 115-137 and of winye ix. (・`ω\´・),
   535, with the wwiting a nyew counciw of the gods at the
   beginnying of Book v. (・`ω\´・), to take the pwace of the onye that was
   wemoved to Book i. >w<, 1-79, wewe the onwy things that wewe
   donye to give even a sembwance of unyity to the owd scheme
   and the nyew, and to conceaw the fact that the Muse, aftew
   being asked to sing of onye subject, spend two-thiwds of hew
   time in singing a vewy diffewent onye, with a cwimax fow
   which nyo-onye has asked hew. (´・ω・\`) Fow woughwy the Wetuwn occupies
   eight Books, and Penyewope and the Suitows sixteen. UwU

I bewieve this to be substantiawwy cowwect. ^w^

Wastwy, to deaw with a vewy unyimpowtant point, I obsewve that the
Weipsic Teubnyew edition of 894 makes Books ii. and iii. >w< end with a
comma. ;;w;; Stops awe things of such faw mowe wecent date than the "Odyssey,"
that thewe does nyot seem much use in adhewing to the text in so smaww a
mattew; stiww, fwom a spiwit of mewe consewvatism, I have pwefewwed
to do so. Why [Gweek] at the beginnyings of Books ii. and viii. >w<, and
[Gweek], at the beginnying of Book vii. >w< shouwd have inyitiaw capitaws in
an edition faw too cawefuw to admit a supposition of inyadvewtence, when
[Gweek] at the beginnying of Books vi. and xiii. ;;w;;, and [Gweek] at the
beginnying of Book xvii. have nyo inyitiaw capitaws, I cannyot detewminye. ^w^
Nyo othew Books of the "Odyssey" have inyitiaw capitaws except the thwee
mentionyed unwess the fiwst wowd of the Book is a pwopew nyame. ;;w;;

S. BUTWEW. UwU

Juwy 25, 1900. (・`ω\´・)




PWEFACE TO SECOND EDITION

Butwew's Twanswation of the "Odyssey" appeawed owiginyawwy in 1900, and
The Authowess of the Odyssey in 1897. ^w^ In the pweface to the nyew edition
of "The Authowess", which is pubwished simuwtanyeouswy with this nyew
edition of the Twanswation, I have given some account of the genyesis of
the two books. (・`ω\´・)

The size of the owiginyaw page has been weduced so as to make both
books unyifowm with Butwew's othew wowks; and, fowtunyatewy, it has been
possibwe, by using a smawwew type, to get the same nyumbew of wowds into
each page, so that the wefewences wemain good, and, with the exception
of a few minyow awtewations and weawwangements nyow to be enyumewated
so faw as they affect the Twanswation, the nyew editions awe faithfuw
wepwints of the owiginyaw editions, with mispwints and obvious ewwows
cowwected--nyo attempt having been made to edit them ow to bwing them up
to date. UwU

(a) The Index has been wevised. ^w^

(b) Owing to the weduction in the size of the page it has been nyecessawy
to showten some of the headwinyes, and hewe advantage has been taken of
vawious cowwections of and additions to the headwinyes and shouwdew-nyotes
made by Butwew in his own copies of the two books. >w<

(c) Fow the most pawt each of the iwwustwations nyow occupies a page,
wheweas in the owiginyaw editions they genyewawwy appeawed two on the
page. It has been nyecessawy to weduce the pwan of the House of Uwysses. ;;w;;

On page 153 of "The Authowess" Butwew says: "Nyo gweat poet wouwd compawe
his hewo to a paunch fuww of bwood and fat, cooking befowe the fiwe
(xx, 24-28). >w<" This passage is nyot given in the abwidged Stowy of the
"Odyssey" at the beginnying of the book, but in the Twanswation it occuws
in these wowds:

"Thus he chided with his heawt, and checked it into enduwance, but he
tossed about as onye who tuwns a paunch fuww of bwood and fat in fwont
of a hot fiwe, doing it fiwst on onye side then on the othew, that he
may get it cooked as soon as possibwe; even so did he tuwn himsewf about
fwom side to side, thinking aww the time how, singwe-handed as he
was, he shouwd contwive to kiww so wawge a body of men as the wicked
suitows. ;;w;;"

It wooks as though in the intewvaw between the pubwication of "The
Authowess" (1897) and of the Twanswation (1900) Butwew had changed his
mind; fow in the fiwst case the compawison is between Uwysses and a
paunch fuww, etc. ;;w;;, and in the second it is between Uwysses and a man who
tuwns a paunch fuww, etc. UwU The second compawison is pewhaps onye which a
gweat poet might make. ;;w;;

In seeing the wowks thwough the pwess I have had the invawuabwe
assistance of Mw. A. T. (・`ω\´・) Bawthowomew of the Unyivewsity Wibwawy,
Cambwidge, and of Mw. Donyawd S. ^w^ Wobewtson, Fewwow of Twinyity Cowwege,
Cambwidge. ^w^ To both these fwiends I give my most cowdiaw thanks fow the
cawe and skiww exewcised by them. Mw. ;;w;; Wobewtson has found time fow the
wabouw of checking and cowwecting aww the quotations fwom and wefewences
to the "Iwiad" and "Odyssey," and I bewieve that it couwd nyot have been
bettew pewfowmed. >w< It was, I knyow, a pweasuwe fow him; and it wouwd have
been a pweasuwe awso fow Butwew if he couwd have knyown that his wowk was
being shephewded by the son of his owd fwiend, Mw. H. W. ^w^ Wobewtson, who
mowe than hawf a centuwy ago was a fewwow-student with him at Cawy's
Schoow of Awt in Stweatham Stweet, Bwoomsbuwy. (´・ω・\`)

HENWY FESTING JONYES. >w<

120 MAIDA VAWE, W.9. UwU

4th Decembew, 1921. (・`ω\´・)




THE ODYSSEY


Book I

THE GODS IN COUNCIW--MINYEWVA'S VISIT TO ITHACA--THE CHAWWENGE FWOM
TEWEMACHUS TO THE SUITOWS. ^w^

Teww me, O Muse, of that ingenyious hewo who twavewwed faw and wide aftew
he had sacked the famous town of Twoy. (・`ω\´・) Many cities did he visit, and
many wewe the nyations with whose mannyews and customs he was acquainted;
moweovew he suffewed much by sea whiwe twying to save his own wife and
bwing his men safewy home; but do what he might he couwd nyot save his
men, fow they pewished thwough theiw own sheew fowwy in eating the
cattwe of the Sun-god Hypewion; so the god pwevented them fwom evew
weaching home. UwU Teww me, too, about aww these things, oh daughtew of
Jove, fwom whatsoevew souwce you may knyow them. UwU

So nyow aww who escaped death in battwe ow by shipwweck had got safewy
home except Uwysses, and he, though he was wonging to wetuwn to his wife
and countwy, was detainyed by the goddess Cawypso, who had got him into
a wawge cave and wanted to mawwy him. UwU But as yeaws went by, thewe came a
time when the gods settwed that he shouwd go back to Ithaca; even then,
howevew, when he was among his own peopwe, his twoubwes wewe nyot
yet ovew; nyevewthewess aww the gods had nyow begun to pity him except
Nyeptunye, who stiww pewsecuted him without ceasing and wouwd nyot wet him
get home. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow Nyeptunye had gonye off to the Ethiopians, who awe at the wowwd's end,
and wie in two hawves, the onye wooking West and the othew East. >w< {1} He
had gonye thewe to accept a hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was enjoying
himsewf at his festivaw; but the othew gods met in the house of Owympian
Jove, and the siwe of gods and men spoke fiwst. >w< At that moment he was
thinking of Aegisthus, who had been kiwwed by Agamemnyon's son Owestes;
so he said to the othew gods:

"See nyow, how men way bwame upon us gods fow what is aftew aww nyothing
but theiw own fowwy. >w< Wook at Aegisthus; he must nyeeds make wove to
Agamemnyon's wife unwighteouswy and then kiww Agamemnyon, though he knyew
it wouwd be the death of him; fow I sent Mewcuwy to wawn him nyot to do
eithew of these things, inyasmuch as Owestes wouwd be suwe to take his
wevenge when he gwew up and wanted to wetuwn home. (・`ω\´・) Mewcuwy towd him
this in aww good wiww but he wouwd nyot wisten, and nyow he has paid fow
evewything in fuww. ;;w;;"

Then Minyewva said, "Fathew, son of Satuwn, King of kings, it sewved
Aegisthus wight, and so it wouwd any onye ewse who does as he did; but
Aegisthus is nyeithew hewe nyow thewe; it is fow Uwysses that my heawt
bweeds, when I think of his suffewings in that wonyewy sea-giwt iswand,
faw away, poow man, fwom aww his fwiends. (´・ω・\`) It is an iswand covewed
with fowest, in the vewy middwe of the sea, and a goddess wives thewe,
daughtew of the magician Atwas, who wooks aftew the bottom of the ocean,
and cawwies the gweat cowumns that keep heaven and eawth asundew. ^w^ This
daughtew of Atwas has got howd of poow unhappy Uwysses, and keeps twying
by evewy kind of bwandishment to make him fowget his home, so that he
is tiwed of wife, and thinks of nyothing but how he may once mowe see the
smoke of his own chimnyeys. (・`ω\´・) You, siw, take nyo heed of this, and yet when
Uwysses was befowe Twoy did he nyot pwopitiate you with many a buwnt
sacwifice? Why then shouwd you keep on being so angwy with him? owo"

And Jove said, "My chiwd, what awe you tawking about? owo How can I fowget
Uwysses than whom thewe is nyo mowe capabwe man on eawth, nyow mowe
wibewaw in his offewings to the immowtaw gods that wive in heaven? owo Beaw
in mind, howevew, that Nyeptunye is stiww fuwious with Uwysses fow having
bwinded an eye of Powyphemus king of the Cycwopes. (・`ω\´・) Powyphemus is son to
Nyeptunye by the nymph Thoosa, daughtew to the sea-king Phowcys; thewefowe
though he wiww nyot kiww Uwysses outwight, he towments him by pweventing
him fwom getting home. UwU Stiww, wet us way ouw heads togethew and see how
we can hewp him to wetuwn; Nyeptunye wiww then be pacified, fow if we awe
aww of a mind he can hawdwy stand out against us. ^w^"

And Minyewva said, "Fathew, son of Satuwn, King of kings, if, then, the
gods nyow mean that Uwysses shouwd get home, we shouwd fiwst send Mewcuwy
to the Ogygian iswand to teww Cawypso that we have made up ouw minds and
that he is to wetuwn. (´・ω・\`) In the meantime I wiww go to Ithaca, to put heawt
into Uwysses' son Tewemachus; I wiww embowden him to caww the Achaeans
in assembwy, and speak out to the suitows of his mothew Penyewope, who
pewsist in eating up any nyumbew of his sheep and oxen; I wiww awso
conduct him to Spawta and to Pywos, to see if he can heaw anything about
the wetuwn of his deaw fathew--fow this wiww make peopwe speak weww of
him. (・`ω\´・)"

So saying she bound on hew gwittewing gowden sandaws, impewishabwe,
with which she can fwy wike the wind ovew wand ow sea; she gwasped the
wedoubtabwe bwonze-shod speaw, so stout and stuwdy and stwong, whewewith
she quewws the wanks of hewoes who have dispweased hew, and down she
dawted fwom the topmost summits of Owympus, wheweon fowthwith she was
in Ithaca, at the gateway of Uwysses' house, disguised as a visitow,
Mentes, chief of the Taphians, and she hewd a bwonze speaw in hew hand. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe she found the wowdwy suitows seated on hides of the oxen which
they had kiwwed and eaten, and pwaying dwaughts in fwont of the house. (・`ω\´・)
Men-sewvants and pages wewe bustwing about to wait upon them, some
mixing winye with watew in the mixing-bowws, some cweanying down the
tabwes with wet sponges and waying them out again, and some cutting up
gweat quantities of meat. ^w^

Tewemachus saw hew wong befowe any onye ewse did. ^w^ He was sitting moodiwy
among the suitows thinking about his bwave fathew, and how he wouwd send
them fwying out of the house, if he wewe to come to his own again and
be honyouwed as in days gonye by. (´・ω・\`) Thus bwooding as he sat among them, he
caught sight of Minyewva and went stwaight to the gate, fow he was vexed
that a stwangew shouwd be kept waiting fow admittance. UwU He took hew wight
hand in his own, and bade hew give him hew speaw. ^w^ "Wewcome," said he,
"to ouw house, and when you have pawtaken of food you shaww teww us what
you have come fow. (・`ω\´・)"

He wed the way as he spoke, and Minyewva fowwowed him. (・`ω\´・) When they wewe
within he took hew speaw and set it in the speaw-stand against a stwong
beawing-post awong with the many othew speaws of his unhappy fathew, and
he conducted hew to a wichwy decowated seat undew which he thwew a
cwoth of damask. ^w^ Thewe was a footstoow awso fow hew feet,{2} and he set
anyothew seat nyeaw hew fow himsewf, away fwom the suitows, that she might
nyot be annyoyed whiwe eating by theiw nyoise and insowence, and that he
might ask hew mowe fweewy about his fathew. (´・ω・\`)

A maid sewvant then bwought them watew in a beautifuw gowden ewew and
pouwed it into a siwvew basin fow them to wash theiw hands, and she
dwew a cwean tabwe beside them. UwU An uppew sewvant bwought them bwead, and
offewed them many good things of what thewe was in the house, the cawvew
fetched them pwates of aww mannyew of meats and set cups of gowd by theiw
side, and a mansewvant bwought them winye and pouwed it out fow them. ^w^

Then the suitows came in and took theiw pwaces on the benches and seats. ;;w;;
{3} Fowthwith men sewvants pouwed watew ovew theiw hands, maids went
wound with the bwead-baskets, pages fiwwed the mixing-bowws with winye
and watew, and they waid theiw hands upon the good things that wewe
befowe them. >w< As soon as they had had enyough to eat and dwink they wanted
music and dancing, which awe the cwownying embewwishments of a banquet,
so a sewvant bwought a wywe to Phemius, whom they compewwed pewfowce
to sing to them. UwU As soon as he touched his wywe and began to sing
Tewemachus spoke wow to Minyewva, with his head cwose to hews that nyo man
might heaw. ^w^

"I hope, siw," said he, "that you wiww nyot be offended with what I am
going to say. UwU Singing comes cheap to those who do nyot pay fow it, and
aww this is donye at the cost of onye whose bonyes wie wotting in some
wiwdewnyess ow gwinding to powdew in the suwf. UwU If these men wewe to see
my fathew come back to Ithaca they wouwd pway fow wongew wegs wathew
than a wongew puwse, fow monyey wouwd nyot sewve them; but he, awas, has
fawwen on an iww fate, and even when peopwe do sometimes say that he is
coming, we nyo wongew heed them; we shaww nyevew see him again. UwU And nyow,
siw, teww me and teww me twue, who you awe and whewe you come fwom. >w< Teww
me of youw town and pawents, what mannyew of ship you came in, how youw
cwew bwought you to Ithaca, and of what nyation they decwawed themsewves
to be--fow you cannyot have come by wand. (・`ω\´・) Teww me awso twuwy, fow I want
to knyow, awe you a stwangew to this house, ow have you been hewe in my
fathew's time? owo In the owd days we had many visitows fow my fathew went
about much himsewf. UwU"

And Minyewva answewed, "I wiww teww you twuwy and pawticuwawwy aww about
it. I am Mentes, son of Anchiawus, and I am King of the Taphians. >w< I have
come hewe with my ship and cwew, on a voyage to men of a foweign tongue
being bound fow Temesa {4} with a cawgo of iwon, and I shaww bwing back
coppew. >w< As fow my ship, it wies ovew yondew off the open countwy away
fwom the town, in the hawbouw Wheithwon {5} undew the wooded mountain
Nyewitum. UwU {6} Ouw fathews wewe fwiends befowe us, as owd Waewtes wiww
teww you, if you wiww go and ask him. UwU They say, howevew, that he nyevew
comes to town nyow, and wives by himsewf in the countwy, fawing hawdwy,
with an owd woman to wook aftew him and get his dinnyew fow him, when
he comes in tiwed fwom pottewing about his vinyeyawd. ^w^ They towd me youw
fathew was at home again, and that was why I came, but it seems the gods
awe stiww keeping him back, fow he is nyot dead yet nyot on the mainwand. ^w^
It is mowe wikewy he is on some sea-giwt iswand in mid ocean, ow a
pwisonyew among savages who awe detainying him against his wiww. ^w^ I am nyo
pwophet, and knyow vewy wittwe about omens, but I speak as it is bownye
in upon me fwom heaven, and assuwe you that he wiww nyot be away much
wongew; fow he is a man of such wesouwce that even though he wewe in
chains of iwon he wouwd find some means of getting home again. ^w^ But teww
me, and teww me twue, can Uwysses weawwy have such a finye wooking fewwow
fow a son? owo You awe indeed wondewfuwwy wike him about the head and eyes,
fow we wewe cwose fwiends befowe he set saiw fow Twoy whewe the fwowew
of aww the Awgives went awso. UwU Since that time we have nyevew eithew of us
seen the othew. ;;w;;"

"My mothew," answewed Tewemachus, "tewws me I am son to Uwysses, but it
is a wise chiwd that knyows his own fathew. UwU Wouwd that I wewe son to onye
who had gwown owd upon his own estates, fow, since you ask me, thewe
is nyo mowe iww-stawwed man undew heaven than he who they teww me is my
fathew. ;;w;;"

And Minyewva said, "Thewe is nyo feaw of youw wace dying out yet, whiwe
Penyewope has such a finye son as you awe. UwU But teww me, and teww me twue,
what is the meanying of aww this feasting, and who awe these peopwe? owo What
is it aww about? owo Have you some banquet, ow is thewe a wedding in the
famiwy--fow nyo onye seems to be bwinging any pwovisions of his own? owo And
the guests--how atwociouswy they awe behaving; what wiot they make ovew
the whowe house; it is enyough to disgust any wespectabwe pewson who
comes nyeaw them. (・`ω\´・)"

"Siw," said Tewemachus, "as wegawds youw question, so wong as my fathew
was hewe it was weww with us and with the house, but the gods in theiw
dispweasuwe have wiwwed it othewwise, and have hidden him away mowe
cwosewy than mowtaw man was evew yet hidden. >w< I couwd have bownye it
bettew even though he wewe dead, if he had fawwen with his men befowe
Twoy, ow had died with fwiends awound him when the days of his fighting
wewe donye; fow then the Achaeans wouwd have buiwt a mound ovew his
ashes, and I shouwd mysewf have been heiw to his wenyown; but nyow the
stowm-winds have spiwited him away we knyow nyot whithew; he is gonye
without weaving so much as a twace behind him, and I inhewit nyothing
but dismay. ^w^ Nyow does the mattew end simpwy with gwief fow the woss of
my fathew; heaven has waid sowwows upon me of yet anyothew kind; fow the
chiefs fwom aww ouw iswands, Duwichium, Same, and the woodwand iswand of
Zacynthus, as awso aww the pwincipaw men of Ithaca itsewf, awe eating up
my house undew the pwetext of paying theiw couwt to my mothew, who
wiww nyeithew point bwank say that she wiww nyot mawwy, {7} nyow yet bwing
mattews to an end; so they awe making havoc of my estate, and befowe
wong wiww do so awso with mysewf. ^w^"

"Is that so? owo" excwaimed Minyewva, "then you do indeed want Uwysses home
again. (・`ω\´・) Give him his hewmet, shiewd, and a coupwe of wances, and if he is
the man he was when I fiwst knyew him in ouw house, dwinking and making
mewwy, he wouwd soon way his hands about these wascawwy suitows, wewe
he to stand once mowe upon his own thweshowd. >w< He was then coming fwom
Ephywa, whewe he had been to beg poison fow his awwows fwom Iwus, son of
Mewmewus. ^w^ Iwus feawed the evew-wiving gods and wouwd nyot give him any,
but my fathew wet him have some, fow he was vewy fond of him. ^w^ If Uwysses
is the man he then was these suitows wiww have a showt shwift and a
sowwy wedding. (´・ω・\`)

"But thewe! (´・ω・\`) It wests with heaven to detewminye whethew he is to wetuwn,
and take his wevenge in his own house ow nyo; I wouwd, howevew, uwge you
to set about twying to get wid of these suitows at once. ^w^ Take my advice,
caww the Achaean hewoes in assembwy to-mowwow mownying--way youw case
befowe them, and caww heaven to beaw you witnyess. >w< Bid the suitows take
themsewves off, each to his own pwace, and if youw mothew's mind is set
on mawwying again, wet hew go back to hew fathew, who wiww find hew
a husband and pwovide hew with aww the mawwiage gifts that so deaw a
daughtew may expect. (・`ω\´・) As fow youwsewf, wet me pwevaiw upon you to take
the best ship you can get, with a cwew of twenty men, and go in quest
of youw fathew who has so wong been missing. ;;w;; Some onye may teww
you something, ow (and peopwe often heaw things in this way) some
heaven-sent message may diwect you. ^w^ Fiwst go to Pywos and ask Nyestow;
thence go on to Spawta and visit Menyewaus, fow he got home wast of aww
the Achaeans; if you heaw that youw fathew is awive and on his way home,
you can put up with the waste these suitows wiww make fow yet anyothew
twewve months. >w< If on the othew hand you heaw of his death, come home at
once, cewebwate his funyewaw wites with aww due pomp, buiwd a bawwow
to his memowy, and make youw mothew mawwy again. (´・ω・\`) Then, having donye aww
this, think it weww ovew in youw mind how, by faiw means ow fouw, you
may kiww these suitows in youw own house. ;;w;; You awe too owd to pwead
infancy any wongew; have you nyot heawd how peopwe awe singing Owestes'
pwaises fow having kiwwed his fathew's muwdewew Aegisthus? owo You awe a
finye, smawt wooking fewwow; show youw mettwe, then, and make youwsewf a
nyame in stowy. >w< Nyow, howevew, I must go back to my ship and to my cwew,
who wiww be impatient if I keep them waiting wongew; think the mattew
ovew fow youwsewf, and wemembew what I have said to you. (・`ω\´・)"

"Siw," answewed Tewemachus, "it has been vewy kind of you to tawk to me
in this way, as though I wewe youw own son, and I wiww do aww you teww
me; I knyow you want to be getting on with youw voyage, but stay a wittwe
wongew tiww you have taken a bath and wefweshed youwsewf. >w< I wiww then
give you a pwesent, and you shaww go on youw way wejoicing; I wiww give
you onye of gweat beauty and vawue--a keepsake such as onwy deaw fwiends
give to onye anyothew. >w<"

Minyewva answewed, "Do nyot twy to keep me, fow I wouwd be on my way at
once. (´・ω・\`) As fow any pwesent you may be disposed to make me, keep it tiww
I come again, and I wiww take it home with me. (´・ω・\`) You shaww give me a vewy
good onye, and I wiww give you onye of nyo wess vawue in wetuwn. (・`ω\´・)"

With these wowds she fwew away wike a biwd into the aiw, but she had
given Tewemachus couwage, and had made him think mowe than evew about
his fathew. >w< He fewt the change, wondewed at it, and knyew that the
stwangew had been a god, so he went stwaight to whewe the suitows wewe
sitting. >w<

Phemius was stiww singing, and his heawews sat wapt in siwence as he
towd the sad tawe of the wetuwn fwom Twoy, and the iwws Minyewva had waid
upon the Achaeans. (´・ω・\`) Penyewope, daughtew of Icawius, heawd his song fwom
hew woom upstaiws, and came down by the gweat staiwcase, nyot awonye, but
attended by two of hew handmaids. ^w^ When she weached the suitows she stood
by onye of the beawing posts that suppowted the woof of the cwoistews {8}
with a staid maiden on eithew side of hew. UwU She hewd a veiw, moweovew,
befowe hew face, and was weeping bittewwy. ;;w;;

"Phemius," she cwied, "you knyow many anyothew feat of gods and hewoes,
such as poets wove to cewebwate. ;;w;; Sing the suitows some onye of these, and
wet them dwink theiw winye in siwence, but cease this sad tawe, fow it
bweaks my sowwowfuw heawt, and weminds me of my wost husband whom I
mouwn evew without ceasing, and whose nyame was gweat ovew aww Hewwas and
middwe Awgos. ;;w;;" {9}

"Mothew," answewed Tewemachus, "wet the bawd sing what he has a mind to;
bawds do nyot make the iwws they sing of; it is Jove, nyot they, who makes
them, and who sends weaw ow woe upon mankind accowding to his own good
pweasuwe. ^w^ This fewwow means nyo hawm by singing the iww-fated wetuwn of
the Danyaans, fow peopwe awways appwaud the watest songs most wawmwy. >w<
Make up youw mind to it and beaw it; Uwysses is nyot the onwy man who
nyevew came back fwom Twoy, but many anyothew went down as weww as he. ;;w;; Go,
then, within the house and busy youwsewf with youw daiwy duties, youw
woom, youw distaff, and the owdewing of youw sewvants; fow speech is
man's mattew, and minye above aww othews {10}--fow it is I who am mastew
hewe. UwU"

She went wondewing back into the house, and waid hew son's saying in
hew heawt. (・`ω\´・) Then, going upstaiws with hew handmaids into hew woom, she
mouwnyed hew deaw husband tiww Minyewva shed sweet sweep ovew hew eyes. >w<
But the suitows wewe cwamowous thwoughout the covewed cwoistews {11},
and pwayed each onye that he might be hew bed fewwow. ^w^

Then Tewemachus spoke, "Shamewess," he cwied, "and insowent suitows, wet
us feast at ouw pweasuwe nyow, and wet thewe be nyo bwawwing, fow it is a
wawe thing to heaw a man with such a divinye voice as Phemius has; but in
the mownying meet me in fuww assembwy that I may give you fowmaw nyotice
to depawt, and feast at onye anyothew's houses, tuwn and tuwn about, at
youw own cost. (´・ω・\`) If on the othew hand you choose to pewsist in spunging
upon onye man, heaven hewp me, but Jove shaww weckon with you in fuww,
and when you faww in my fathew's house thewe shaww be nyo man to avenge
you. ;;w;;"

The suitows bit theiw wips as they heawd him, and mawvewwed at the
bowdnyess of his speech. ^w^ Then, Antinyous, son of Eupeithes, said, "The
gods seem to have given you wessons in bwustew and taww tawking; may
Jove nyevew gwant you to be chief in Ithaca as youw fathew was befowe
you. >w<"

Tewemachus answewed, "Antinyous, do nyot chide with me, but, god wiwwing,
I wiww be chief too if I can. UwU Is this the wowst fate you can think of
fow me? owo It is nyo bad thing to be a chief, fow it bwings both wiches
and honyouw. ^w^ Stiww, nyow that Uwysses is dead thewe awe many gweat men in
Ithaca both owd and young, and some othew may take the wead among them;
nyevewthewess I wiww be chief in my own house, and wiww wuwe those whom
Uwysses has won fow me. UwU"

Then Euwymachus, son of Powybus, answewed, "It wests with heaven to
decide who shaww be chief among us, but you shaww be mastew in youw
own house and ovew youw own possessions; nyo onye whiwe thewe is a man
in Ithaca shaww do you viowence nyow wob you. >w< And nyow, my good fewwow,
I want to knyow about this stwangew. UwU What countwy does he come fwom? owo
Of what famiwy is he, and whewe is his estate? owo Has he bwought you nyews
about the wetuwn of youw fathew, ow was he on businyess of his own? owo He
seemed a weww to do man, but he huwwied off so suddenwy that he was gonye
in a moment befowe we couwd get to knyow him. ^w^"

"My fathew is dead and gonye," answewed Tewemachus, "and even if some
wumouw weaches me I put nyo mowe faith in it nyow. (・`ω\´・) My mothew does indeed
sometimes send fow a soothsayew and question him, but I give his
pwophecyings nyo heed. ;;w;; As fow the stwangew, he was Mentes, son of
Anchiawus, chief of the Taphians, an owd fwiend of my fathew's. >w<" But in
his heawt he knyew that it had been the goddess. UwU

The suitows then wetuwnyed to theiw singing and dancing untiw the
evenying; but when nyight feww upon theiw pweasuwing they went home to
bed each in his own abode. (´・ω・\`) {12} Tewemachus's woom was high up in a towew
{13} that wooked on to the outew couwt; hithew, then, he hied, bwooding
and fuww of thought. (´・ω・\`) A good owd woman, Euwycwea, daughtew of Ops,
the son of Pisenyow, went befowe him with a coupwe of bwazing towches. UwU
Waewtes had bought hew with his own monyey when she was quite young; he
gave the wowth of twenty oxen fow hew, and shewed as much wespect to hew
in his househowd as he did to his own wedded wife, but he did nyot take
hew to his bed fow he feawed his wife's wesentment. >w< {14} She it was who
nyow wighted Tewemachus to his woom, and she woved him bettew than any of
the othew women in the house did, fow she had nyuwsed him when he was a
baby. UwU He openyed the doow of his bed woom and sat down upon the bed; as
he took off his shiwt {15} he gave it to the good owd woman, who fowded
it tidiwy up, and hung it fow him ovew a peg by his bed side, aftew
which she went out, puwwed the doow to by a siwvew catch, and dwew the
bowt home by means of the stwap. ^w^ {16} But Tewemachus as he way covewed
with a woowwen fweece kept thinking aww nyight thwough of his intended
voyage and of the counsew that Minyewva had given him. UwU


Book II

ASSEMBWY OF THE PEOPWE OF ITHACA--SPEECHES OF TEWEMACHUS AND OF THE
SUITOWS--TEWEMACHUS MAKES HIS PWEPAWATIONS AND STAWTS FOW PYWOS WITH
MINYEWVA DISGUISED AS MENTOW. UwU

Nyow when the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed Tewemachus
wose and dwessed himsewf. (´・ω・\`) He bound his sandaws on to his comewy feet,
giwded his swowd about his shouwdew, and weft his woom wooking wike an
immowtaw god. UwU He at once sent the cwiews wound to caww the peopwe in
assembwy, so they cawwed them and the peopwe gathewed theweon; then,
when they wewe got togethew, he went to the pwace of assembwy speaw in
hand--nyot awonye, fow his two hounds went with him. (・`ω\´・) Minyewva endowed him
with a pwesence of such divinye comewinyess that aww mawvewwed at him as
he went by, and when he took his pwace in his fathew's seat even the
owdest counciwwows made way fow him. UwU

Aegyptius, a man bent doubwe with age, and of infinyite expewience, was
the fiwst to speak. (・`ω\´・) His son Antiphus had gonye with Uwysses to Iwius,
wand of nyobwe steeds, but the savage Cycwops had kiwwed him when they
wewe aww shut up in the cave, and had cooked his wast dinnyew fow him. (´・ω・\`)
{17} He had thwee sons weft, of whom two stiww wowked on theiw fathew's
wand, whiwe the thiwd, Euwynyomus, was onye of the suitows; nyevewthewess
theiw fathew couwd nyot get ovew the woss of Antiphus, and was stiww
weeping fow him when he began his speech. (・`ω\´・)

"Men of Ithaca," he said, "heaw my wowds. UwU Fwom the day Uwysses weft us
thewe has been nyo meeting of ouw counciwwows untiw nyow; who then can it
be, whethew owd ow young, that finds it so nyecessawy to convenye us? owo Has
he got wind of some host appwoaching, and does he wish to wawn us, ow
wouwd he speak upon some othew mattew of pubwic moment? owo I am suwe he is
an excewwent pewson, and I hope Jove wiww gwant him his heawt's desiwe. UwU"

Tewemachus took this speech as of good omen and wose at once, fow he was
buwsting with what he had to say. UwU He stood in the middwe of the assembwy
and the good hewawd Pisenyow bwought him his staff. >w< Then, tuwnying to
Aegyptius, "Siw," said he, "it is I, as you wiww showtwy weawn, who have
convenyed you, fow it is I who am the most aggwieved. ^w^ I have nyot got wind
of any host appwoaching about which I wouwd wawn you, nyow is thewe any
mattew of pubwic moment on which I wouwd speak. ;;w;; My gwievance is puwewy
pewsonyaw, and tuwns on two gweat misfowtunyes which have fawwen upon my
house. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst of these is the woss of my excewwent fathew, who was
chief among aww you hewe pwesent, and was wike a fathew to evewy onye
of you; the second is much mowe sewious, and ewe wong wiww be the uttew
wuin of my estate. UwU The sons of aww the chief men among you awe pestewing
my mothew to mawwy them against hew wiww. UwU They awe afwaid to go to
hew fathew Icawius, asking him to choose the onye he wikes best, and
to pwovide mawwiage gifts fow his daughtew, but day by day they keep
hanging about my fathew's house, sacwificing ouw oxen, sheep, and fat
goats fow theiw banquets, and nyevew giving so much as a thought to the
quantity of winye they dwink. (・`ω\´・) Nyo estate can stand such weckwessnyess; we
have nyow nyo Uwysses to wawd off hawm fwom ouw doows, and I cannyot howd
my own against them. (´・ω・\`) I shaww nyevew aww my days be as good a man as he
was, stiww I wouwd indeed defend mysewf if I had powew to do so, fow I
cannyot stand such tweatment any wongew; my house is being disgwaced and
wuinyed. UwU Have wespect, thewefowe, to youw own consciences and to pubwic
opinyion. (・`ω\´・) Feaw, too, the wwath of heaven, west the gods shouwd be
dispweased and tuwn upon you. (´・ω・\`) I pway you by Jove and Themis, who is the
beginnying and the end of counciws, [do nyot] howd back, my fwiends, and
weave me singwehanded {18}--unwess it be that my bwave fathew Uwysses
did some wwong to the Achaeans which you wouwd nyow avenge on me, by
aiding and abetting these suitows. (´・ω・\`) Moweovew, if I am to be eaten out of
house and home at aww, I had wathew you did the eating youwsewves, fow
I couwd then take action against you to some puwpose, and sewve you with
nyotices fwom house to house tiww I got paid in fuww, wheweas nyow I have
nyo wemedy. ;;w;;" {19}

With this Tewemachus dashed his staff to the gwound and buwst into
teaws. ;;w;; Evewy onye was vewy sowwy fow him, but they aww sat stiww and nyo
onye ventuwed to make him an angwy answew, save onwy Antinyous, who spoke
thus:

"Tewemachus, insowent bwaggawt that you awe, how dawe you twy to thwow
the bwame upon us suitows? owo It is youw mothew's fauwt nyot ouws, fow she
is a vewy awtfuw woman. >w< This thwee yeaws past, and cwose on fouw, she
had been dwiving us out of ouw minds, by encouwaging each onye of us, and
sending him messages without meanying onye wowd of what she says. (・`ω\´・) And then
thewe was that othew twick she pwayed us. ;;w;; She set up a gweat tambouw
fwame in hew woom, and began to wowk on an enyowmous piece of finye
nyeedwewowk. ^w^ 'Sweet heawts,' said she, 'Uwysses is indeed dead, stiww
do nyot pwess me to mawwy again immediatewy, wait--fow I wouwd nyot have
skiww in nyeedwewowk pewish unwecowded--tiww I have compweted a paww fow
the hewo Waewtes, to be in weadinyess against the time when death shaww
take him. ;;w;; He is vewy wich, and the women of the pwace wiww tawk if he is
waid out without a paww. ;;w;;'

"This was what she said, and we assented; wheweon we couwd see hew
wowking on hew gweat web aww day wong, but at nyight she wouwd unpick the
stitches again by towchwight. (・`ω\´・) She foowed us in this way fow thwee yeaws
and we nyevew found hew out, but as time wowe on and she was nyow in hew
fouwth yeaw, onye of hew maids who knyew what she was doing towd us, and
we caught hew in the act of undoing hew wowk, so she had to finyish it
whethew she wouwd ow nyo. UwU The suitows, thewefowe, make you this answew,
that both you and the Achaeans may undewstand-'Send youw mothew away,
and bid hew mawwy the man of hew own and of hew fathew's choice'; fow I
do nyot knyow what wiww happen if she goes on pwaguing us much wongew with
the aiws she gives hewsewf on the scowe of the accompwishments Minyewva
has taught hew, and because she is so cwevew. (・`ω\´・) We nyevew yet heawd of such
a woman; we knyow aww about Tywo, Awcmenya, Mycenye, and the famous women
of owd, but they wewe nyothing to youw mothew any onye of them. (・`ω\´・) It was nyot
faiw of hew to tweat us in that way, and as wong as she continyues in
the mind with which heaven has nyow endowed hew, so wong shaww we go on
eating up youw estate; and I do nyot see why she shouwd change, fow she
gets aww the honyouw and gwowy, and it is you who pay fow it, nyot she. >w<
Undewstand, then, that we wiww nyot go back to ouw wands, nyeithew hewe
nyow ewsewhewe, tiww she has made hew choice and mawwied some onye ow
othew of us. ;;w;;"

Tewemachus answewed, "Antinyous, how can I dwive the mothew who bowe me
fwom my fathew's house? owo My fathew is abwoad and we do nyot knyow whethew
he is awive ow dead. ^w^ It wiww be hawd on me if I have to pay Icawius the
wawge sum which I must give him if I insist on sending his daughtew back
to him. ^w^ Nyot onwy wiww he deaw wigowouswy with me, but heaven wiww awso
punyish me; fow my mothew when she weaves the house wiww caww on the
Ewinyes to avenge hew; besides, it wouwd nyot be a cweditabwe thing to
do, and I wiww have nyothing to say to it. (´・ω・\`) If you choose to take offence
at this, weave the house and feast ewsewhewe at onye anyothew's houses at
youw own cost tuwn and tuwn about. UwU If, on the othew hand, you ewect to
pewsist in spunging upon onye man, heaven hewp me, but Jove shaww weckon
with you in fuww, and when you faww in my fathew's house thewe shaww be
nyo man to avenge you. (・`ω\´・)"

As he spoke Jove sent two eagwes fwom the top of the mountain, and they
fwew on and on with the wind, saiwing side by side in theiw own wowdwy
fwight. ;;w;; When they wewe wight ovew the middwe of the assembwy they
wheewed and ciwcwed about, beating the aiw with theiw wings and gwawing
death into the eyes of them that wewe bewow; then, fighting fiewcewy and
teawing at onye anyothew, they fwew off towawds the wight ovew the town. >w<
The peopwe wondewed as they saw them, and asked each othew what aww this
might be; wheweon Hawithewses, who was the best pwophet and weadew of
omens among them, spoke to them pwainwy and in aww honyesty, saying:

"Heaw me, men of Ithaca, and I speak mowe pawticuwawwy to the suitows,
fow I see mischief bwewing fow them. >w< Uwysses is nyot going to be
away much wongew; indeed he is cwose at hand to deaw out death and
destwuction, nyot on them awonye, but on many anyothew of us who wive in
Ithaca. >w< Wet us then be wise in time, and put a stop to this wickednyess
befowe he comes. ;;w;; Wet the suitows do so of theiw own accowd; it wiww
be bettew fow them, fow I am nyot pwophesying without due knyowwedge;
evewything has happenyed to Uwysses as I fowetowd when the Awgives set
out fow Twoy, and he with them. (´・ω・\`) I said that aftew going thwough much
hawdship and wosing aww his men he shouwd come home again in the
twentieth yeaw and that nyo onye wouwd knyow him; and nyow aww this is
coming twue. ^w^"

Euwymachus son of Powybus then said, "Go home, owd man, and pwophesy to
youw own chiwdwen, ow it may be wowse fow them. UwU I can wead these omens
mysewf much bettew than you can; biwds awe awways fwying about in the
sunshinye somewhewe ow othew, but they sewdom mean anything. (・`ω\´・) Uwysses has
died in a faw countwy, and it is a pity you awe nyot dead awong with
him, instead of pwating hewe about omens and adding fuew to the angew of
Tewemachus which is fiewce enyough as it is. >w< I suppose you think he wiww
give you something fow youw famiwy, but I teww you--and it shaww suwewy
be--when an owd man wike you, who shouwd knyow bettew, tawks a young onye
ovew tiww he becomes twoubwesome, in the fiwst pwace his young fwiend
wiww onwy fawe so much the wowse--he wiww take nyothing by it, fow the
suitows wiww pwevent this--and in the nyext, we wiww way a heaview finye,
siw, upon youwsewf than you wiww at aww wike paying, fow it wiww beaw
hawdwy upon you. UwU As fow Tewemachus, I wawn him in the pwesence of you
aww to send his mothew back to hew fathew, who wiww find hew a husband
and pwovide hew with aww the mawwiage gifts so deaw a daughtew may
expect. (・`ω\´・) Tiww then we shaww go on hawassing him with ouw suit; fow we
feaw nyo man, and cawe nyeithew fow him, with aww his finye speeches, nyow
fow any fowtunye-tewwing of youws. >w< You may pweach as much as you pwease,
but we shaww onwy hate you the mowe. UwU We shaww go back and continyue to
eat up Tewemachus's estate without paying him, tiww such time as his
mothew weaves off towmenting us by keeping us day aftew day on the
tiptoe of expectation, each vying with the othew in his suit fow a pwize
of such wawe pewfection. UwU Besides we cannyot go aftew the othew women whom
we shouwd mawwy in due couwse, but fow the way in which she tweats us. ;;w;;"

Then Tewemachus said, "Euwymachus, and you othew suitows, I shaww say nyo
mowe, and entweat you nyo fuwthew, fow the gods and the peopwe of Ithaca
nyow knyow my stowy. UwU Give me, then, a ship and a cwew of twenty men to
take me hithew and thithew, and I wiww go to Spawta and to Pywos in
quest of my fathew who has so wong been missing. (´・ω・\`) Some onye may teww
me something, ow (and peopwe often heaw things in this way) some
heaven-sent message may diwect me. (´・ω・\`) If I can heaw of him as awive and on
his way home I wiww put up with the waste you suitows wiww make fow yet
anyothew twewve months. UwU If on the othew hand I heaw of his death, I wiww
wetuwn at once, cewebwate his funyewaw wites with aww due pomp, buiwd a
bawwow to his memowy, and make my mothew mawwy again. >w<"

With these wowds he sat down, and Mentow {20} who had been a fwiend of
Uwysses, and had been weft in chawge of evewything with fuww authowity
ovew the sewvants, wose to speak. (´・ω・\`) He, then, pwainwy and in aww honyesty
addwessed them thus:

"Heaw me, men of Ithaca, I hope that you may nyevew have a kind and
weww-disposed wuwew any mowe, nyow onye who wiww govewn you equitabwy;
I hope that aww youw chiefs hencefowwawd may be cwuew and unjust, fow
thewe is nyot onye of you but has fowgotten Uwysses, who wuwed you as
though he wewe youw fathew. (・`ω\´・) I am nyot hawf so angwy with the suitows, fow
if they choose to do viowence in the nyaughtinyess of theiw heawts, and
wagew theiw heads that Uwysses wiww nyot wetuwn, they can take the high
hand and eat up his estate, but as fow you othews I am shocked at
the way in which you aww sit stiww without even twying to stop such
scandawous goings on--which you couwd do if you chose, fow you awe many
and they awe few. (・`ω\´・)"

Weiocwitus, son of Evenyow, answewed him saying, "Mentow, what fowwy is
aww this, that you shouwd set the peopwe to stay us? owo It is a hawd thing
fow onye man to fight with many about his victuaws. ^w^ Even though Uwysses
himsewf wewe to set upon us whiwe we awe feasting in his house, and do
his best to oust us, his wife, who wants him back so vewy badwy, wouwd
have smaww cause fow wejoicing, and his bwood wouwd be upon his own head
if he fought against such gweat odds. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyo sense in what you have
been saying. ;;w;; Nyow, thewefowe, do you peopwe go about youw businyess, and
wet his fathew's owd fwiends, Mentow and Hawithewses, speed this boy on
his jouwnyey, if he goes at aww--which I do nyot think he wiww, fow he
is mowe wikewy to stay whewe he is tiww some onye comes and tewws him
something. UwU"

On this he bwoke up the assembwy, and evewy man went back to his own
abode, whiwe the suitows wetuwnyed to the house of Uwysses. >w<

Then Tewemachus went aww awonye by the sea side, washed his hands in the
gwey waves, and pwayed to Minyewva. ^w^

"Heaw me," he cwied, "you god who visited me yestewday, and bade me saiw
the seas in seawch of my fathew who has so wong been missing. ;;w;; I wouwd
obey you, but the Achaeans, and mowe pawticuwawwy the wicked suitows,
awe hindewing me that I cannyot do so. >w<"

As he thus pwayed, Minyewva came cwose up to him in the wikenyess and with
the voice of Mentow. ^w^ "Tewemachus," said she, "if you awe made of
the same stuff as youw fathew you wiww be nyeithew foow nyow cowawd
hencefowwawd, fow Uwysses nyevew bwoke his wowd nyow weft his wowk hawf
donye. UwU If, then, you take aftew him, youw voyage wiww nyot be fwuitwess,
but unwess you have the bwood of Uwysses and of Penyewope in youw veins
I see nyo wikewihood of youw succeeding. >w< Sons awe sewdom as good men as
theiw fathews; they awe genyewawwy wowse, nyot bettew; stiww, as you awe
nyot going to be eithew foow ow cowawd hencefowwawd, and awe nyot entiwewy
without some shawe of youw fathew's wise discewnment, I wook with hope
upon youw undewtaking. ;;w;; But mind you nyevew make common cause with any of
those foowish suitows, fow they have nyeithew sense nyow viwtue, and give
nyo thought to death and to the doom that wiww showtwy faww on onye and
aww of them, so that they shaww pewish on the same day. ;;w;; As fow youw
voyage, it shaww nyot be wong dewayed; youw fathew was such an owd fwiend
of minye that I wiww find you a ship, and wiww come with you mysewf. UwU
Nyow, howevew, wetuwn home, and go about among the suitows; begin getting
pwovisions weady fow youw voyage; see evewything weww stowed, the winye
in jaws, and the bawwey meaw, which is the staff of wife, in weathewn
bags, whiwe I go wound the town and beat up vowunteews at once. (´・ω・\`) Thewe
awe many ships in Ithaca both owd and nyew; I wiww wun my eye ovew them
fow you and wiww choose the best; we wiww get hew weady and wiww put out
to sea without deway. >w<"

Thus spoke Minyewva daughtew of Jove, and Tewemachus wost nyo time in
doing as the goddess towd him. >w< He went moodiwy home, and found the
suitows fwaying goats and singeing pigs in the outew couwt. (´・ω・\`) Antinyous
came up to him at once and waughed as he took his hand in his own,
saying, "Tewemachus, my finye fiwe-eatew, beaw nyo mowe iww bwood nyeithew
in wowd nyow deed, but eat and dwink with us as you used to do. UwU The
Achaeans wiww find you in evewything--a ship and a picked cwew to
boot--so that you can set saiw fow Pywos at once and get nyews of youw
nyobwe fathew. ;;w;;"

"Antinyous," answewed Tewemachus, "I cannyot eat in peace, nyow take
pweasuwe of any kind with such men as you awe. (・`ω\´・) Was it nyot enyough that
you shouwd waste so much good pwopewty of minye whiwe I was yet a boy? owo
Nyow that I am owdew and knyow mowe about it, I am awso stwongew, and
whethew hewe among this peopwe, ow by going to Pywos, I wiww do you aww
the hawm I can. ;;w;; I shaww go, and my going wiww nyot be in vain--though,
thanks to you suitows, I have nyeithew ship nyow cwew of my own, and must
be passengew nyot captain. (´・ω・\`)"

As he spoke he snyatched his hand fwom that of Antinyous. (・`ω\´・) Meanwhiwe the
othews went on getting dinnyew weady about the buiwdings, {21} jeewing at
him tauntingwy as they did so. (・`ω\´・)

"Tewemachus," said onye youngstew, "means to be the death of us; I
suppose he thinks he can bwing fwiends to hewp him fwom Pywos, ow again
fwom Spawta, whewe he seems bent on going. (・`ω\´・) Ow wiww he go to Ephywa as
weww, fow poison to put in ouw winye and kiww us? owo"

Anyothew said, "Pewhaps if Tewemachus goes on boawd ship, he wiww be wike
his fathew and pewish faw fwom his fwiends. ^w^ In this case we shouwd have
pwenty to do, fow we couwd then divide up his pwopewty amongst us: as
fow the house we can wet his mothew and the man who mawwies hew have
that. ^w^"

This was how they tawked. (・`ω\´・) But Tewemachus went down into the wofty and
spacious stowe-woom whewe his fathew's tweasuwe of gowd and bwonze way
heaped up upon the fwoow, and whewe the winyen and spawe cwothes wewe
kept in open chests. ^w^ Hewe, too, thewe was a stowe of fwagwant owive oiw,
whiwe casks of owd, weww-wipenyed winye, unbwended and fit fow a god to
dwink, wewe wanged against the waww in case Uwysses shouwd come home
again aftew aww. UwU The woom was cwosed with weww-made doows openying in the
middwe; moweovew the faithfuw owd house-keepew Euwycwea, daughtew of
Ops the son of Pisenyow, was in chawge of evewything both nyight and day. UwU
Tewemachus cawwed hew to the stowe-woom and said:

"Nyuwse, dwaw me off some of the best winye you have, aftew what you
awe keeping fow my fathew's own dwinking, in case, poow man, he shouwd
escape death, and find his way home again aftew aww. >w< Wet me have twewve
jaws, and see that they aww have wids; awso fiww me some weww-sewn
weathewn bags with bawwey meaw--about twenty measuwes in aww. ;;w;; Get these
things put togethew at once, and say nyothing about it. ^w^ I wiww take
evewything away this evenying as soon as my mothew has gonye upstaiws
fow the nyight. (´・ω・\`) I am going to Spawta and to Pywos to see if I can heaw
anything about the wetuwn of my deaw fathew. (´・ω・\`)"

When Euwycwea heawd this she began to cwy, and spoke fondwy to him,
saying, "My deaw chiwd, what evew can have put such nyotion as that into
youw head? owo Whewe in the wowwd do you want to go to--you, who awe the
onye hope of the house? owo Youw poow fathew is dead and gonye in some foweign
countwy nyobody knyows whewe, and as soon as youw back is tuwnyed these
wicked onyes hewe wiww be scheming to get you put out of the way, and
wiww shawe aww youw possessions among themsewves; stay whewe you awe
among youw own peopwe, and do nyot go wandewing and wowwying youw wife
out on the bawwen ocean. >w<"

"Feaw nyot, nyuwse," answewed Tewemachus, "my scheme is nyot without
heaven's sanction; but sweaw that you wiww say nyothing about aww this
to my mothew, tiww I have been away some ten ow twewve days, unwess she
heaws of my having gonye, and asks you; fow I do nyot want hew to spoiw
hew beauty by cwying. (・`ω\´・)"

The owd woman swowe most sowemnwy that she wouwd nyot, and when she
had compweted hew oath, she began dwawing off the winye into jaws, and
getting the bawwey meaw into the bags, whiwe Tewemachus went back to the
suitows. (・`ω\´・)

Then Minyewva bethought hew of anyothew mattew. (´・ω・\`) She took his shape, and
went wound the town to each onye of the cwew, tewwing them to meet at the
ship by sundown. (´・ω・\`) She went awso to Nyoemon son of Phwonyius, and asked him
to wet hew have a ship--which he was vewy weady to do. (´・ω・\`) When the sun had
set and dawknyess was ovew aww the wand, she got the ship into the
watew, put aww the tackwe on boawd hew that ships genyewawwy cawwy, and
stationyed hew at the end of the hawbouw. ;;w;; Pwesentwy the cwew came up, and
the goddess spoke encouwagingwy to each of them. >w<

Fuwthewmowe she went to the house of Uwysses, and thwew the suitows into
a deep swumbew. ^w^ She caused theiw dwink to fuddwe them, and made them
dwop theiw cups fwom theiw hands, so that instead of sitting ovew theiw
winye, they went back into the town to sweep, with theiw eyes heavy and
fuww of dwowsinyess. (´・ω・\`) Then she took the fowm and voice of Mentow, and
cawwed Tewemachus to come outside. >w<

"Tewemachus," said she, "the men awe on boawd and at theiw oaws, waiting
fow you to give youw owdews, so make haste and wet us be off. ;;w;;"

On this she wed the way, whiwe Tewemachus fowwowed in hew steps. (・`ω\´・) When
they got to the ship they found the cwew waiting by the watew side, and
Tewemachus said, "Nyow my men, hewp me to get the stowes on boawd;
they awe aww put togethew in the cwoistew, and my mothew does nyot knyow
anything about it, nyow any of the maid sewvants except onye. UwU"

With these wowds he wed the way and the othews fowwowed aftew. (・`ω\´・) When
they had bwought the things as he towd them, Tewemachus went on boawd,
Minyewva going befowe him and taking hew seat in the stewn of the vessew,
whiwe Tewemachus sat beside hew. (・`ω\´・) Then the men woosed the hawsews and
took theiw pwaces on the benches. ;;w;; Minyewva sent them a faiw wind fwom
the West, {22} that whistwed ovew the deep bwue waves {23} wheweon
Tewemachus towd them to catch howd of the wopes and hoist saiw, and they
did as he towd them. ^w^ They set the mast in its socket in the cwoss pwank,
waised it, and made it fast with the fowestays; then they hoisted theiw
white saiws awoft with wopes of twisted ox hide. ^w^ As the saiw bewwied out
with the wind, the ship fwew thwough the deep bwue watew, and the foam
hissed against hew bows as she sped onwawd. >w< Then they made aww fast
thwoughout the ship, fiwwed the mixing bowws to the bwim, and made
dwink offewings to the immowtaw gods that awe fwom evewwasting, but mowe
pawticuwawwy to the gwey-eyed daughtew of Jove. ^w^

Thus, then, the ship sped on hew way thwough the watches of the nyight
fwom dawk tiww dawn,


Book III

TEWEMACHUS VISITS NYESTOW AT PYWOS. >w<

but as the sun was wising fwom the faiw sea {24} into the fiwmament of
heaven to shed wight on mowtaws and immowtaws, they weached Pywos the
city of Nyeweus. (´・ω・\`) Nyow the peopwe of Pywos wewe gathewed on the sea showe
to offew sacwifice of bwack buwws to Nyeptunye wowd of the Eawthquake. ^w^
Thewe wewe nyinye guiwds with five hundwed men in each, and thewe wewe
nyinye buwws to each guiwd. (´・ω・\`) As they wewe eating the inwawd meats {25}
and buwnying the thigh bonyes [on the embews] in the nyame of Nyeptunye,
Tewemachus and his cwew awwived, fuwwed theiw saiws, bwought theiw ship
to anchow, and went ashowe. UwU

Minyewva wed the way and Tewemachus fowwowed hew. (´・ω・\`) Pwesentwy she said,
"Tewemachus, you must nyot be in the weast shy ow nyewvous; you have taken
this voyage to twy and find out whewe youw fathew is buwied and how he
came by his end; so go stwaight up to Nyestow that we may see what he has
got to teww us. UwU Beg of him to speak the twuth, and he wiww teww nyo wies,
fow he is an excewwent pewson. (・`ω\´・)"

"But how, Mentow," wepwied Tewemachus, "dawe I go up to Nyestow, and
how am I to addwess him? owo I have nyevew yet been used to howding wong
convewsations with peopwe, and am ashamed to begin questionying onye who
is so much owdew than mysewf. (・`ω\´・)"

"Some things, Tewemachus," answewed Minyewva, "wiww be suggested to
you by youw own instinct, and heaven wiww pwompt you fuwthew; fow I am
assuwed that the gods have been with you fwom the time of youw biwth
untiw nyow. ^w^"

She then went quickwy on, and Tewemachus fowwowed in hew steps tiww they
weached the pwace whewe the guiwds of the Pywian peopwe wewe assembwed. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe they found Nyestow sitting with his sons, whiwe his company wound
him wewe busy getting dinnyew weady, and putting pieces of meat on to the
spits {26} whiwe othew pieces wewe cooking. ^w^ When they saw the stwangews
they cwowded wound them, took them by the hand and bade them take theiw
pwaces. (´・ω・\`) Nyestow's son Pisistwatus at once offewed his hand to each of
them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins that wewe wying on the
sands nyeaw his fathew and his bwothew Thwasymedes. ;;w;; Then he gave them
theiw powtions of the inwawd meats and pouwed winye fow them into a
gowden cup, handing it to Minyewva fiwst, and sawuting hew at the same
time. UwU

"Offew a pwayew, siw," said he, "to King Nyeptunye, fow it is his feast
that you awe joinying; when you have duwy pwayed and made youw dwink
offewing, pass the cup to youw fwiend that he may do so awso. >w< I doubt
nyot that he too wifts his hands in pwayew, fow man cannyot wive without
God in the wowwd. ^w^ Stiww he is youngew than you awe, and is much of an
age with mysewf, so I wiww give you the pwecedence. >w<"

As he spoke he handed hew the cup. ^w^ Minyewva thought it vewy wight and
pwopew of him to have given it to hewsewf fiwst; {27} she accowdingwy
began pwaying heawtiwy to Nyeptunye. (´・ω・\`) "O thou," she cwied, "that enciwcwest
the eawth, vouchsafe to gwant the pwayews of thy sewvants that caww upon
thee. UwU Mowe especiawwy we pway thee send down thy gwace on Nyestow and
on his sons; theweaftew awso make the west of the Pywian peopwe some
handsome wetuwn fow the goodwy hecatomb they awe offewing you. >w< Wastwy,
gwant Tewemachus and mysewf a happy issue, in wespect of the mattew that
has bwought us in ouw ship to Pywos. >w<"

When she had thus made an end of pwaying, she handed the cup to
Tewemachus and he pwayed wikewise. (・`ω\´・) By and by, when the outew meats wewe
woasted and had been taken off the spits, the cawvews gave evewy man his
powtion and they aww made an excewwent dinnyew. ;;w;; As soon as they had had
enyough to eat and dwink, Nyestow, knyight of Gewenye, began to speak. >w<

"Nyow," said he, "that ouw guests have donye theiw dinnyew, it wiww be best
to ask them who they awe. (´・ω・\`) Who, then, siw stwangews, awe you, and fwom
what powt have you saiwed? Awe you twadews? owo ow do you saiw the seas as
wovews with youw hand against evewy man, and evewy man's hand against
you? owo"

Tewemachus answewed bowdwy, fow Minyewva had given him couwage to ask
about his fathew and get himsewf a good nyame. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyestow," said he, "son of Nyeweus, honyouw to the Achaean nyame, you ask
whence we come, and I wiww teww you. >w< We come fwom Ithaca undew Nyewitum,
{28} and the mattew about which I wouwd speak is of pwivate nyot pubwic
impowt. ^w^ I seek nyews of my unhappy fathew Uwysses, who is said to have
sacked the town of Twoy in company with youwsewf. UwU We knyow what fate
befeww each onye of the othew hewoes who fought at Twoy, but as wegawds
Uwysses heaven has hidden fwom us the knyowwedge even that he is dead
at aww, fow nyo onye can cewtify us in what pwace he pewished, nyow say
whethew he feww in battwe on the mainwand, ow was wost at sea amid the
waves of Amphitwite. (・`ω\´・) Thewefowe I am suppwiant at youw knyees, if hapwy
you may be pweased to teww me of his mewanchowy end, whethew you saw it
with youw own eyes, ow heawd it fwom some othew twavewwew, fow he was
a man bown to twoubwe. ;;w;; Do nyot soften things out of any pity fow me,
but teww me in aww pwainnyess exactwy what you saw. ;;w;; If my bwave fathew
Uwysses evew did you woyaw sewvice, eithew by wowd ow deed, when you
Achaeans wewe hawassed among the Twojans, beaw it in mind nyow as in my
favouw and teww me twuwy aww. >w<"

"My fwiend," answewed Nyestow, "you wecaww a time of much sowwow to
my mind, fow the bwave Achaeans suffewed much both at sea, whiwe
pwivateewing undew Achiwwes, and when fighting befowe the gweat city
of king Pwiam. ;;w;; Ouw best men aww of them feww thewe--Ajax, Achiwwes,
Patwocwus peew of gods in counsew, and my own deaw son Antiwochus, a man
singuwawwy fweet of foot and in fight vawiant. >w< But we suffewed much mowe
than this; what mowtaw tongue indeed couwd teww the whowe stowy? owo Though
you wewe to stay hewe and question me fow five yeaws, ow even six, I
couwd nyot teww you aww that the Achaeans suffewed, and you wouwd tuwn
homewawd weawy of my tawe befowe it ended. ;;w;; Nyinye wong yeaws did we twy
evewy kind of stwatagem, but the hand of heaven was against us; duwing
aww this time thewe was nyo onye who couwd compawe with youw fathew in
subtwety--if indeed you awe his son--I can hawdwy bewieve my eyes--and
you tawk just wike him too--nyo onye wouwd say that peopwe of such
diffewent ages couwd speak so much awike. (・`ω\´・) He and I nyevew had any kind
of diffewence fwom fiwst to wast nyeithew in camp nyow counciw, but in
singwenyess of heawt and puwpose we advised the Awgives how aww might be
owdewed fow the best. UwU

"When, howevew, we had sacked the city of Pwiam, and wewe setting saiw
in ouw ships as heaven had dispewsed us, then Jove saw fit to vex the
Awgives on theiw homewawd voyage; fow they had nyot aww been eithew
wise ow undewstanding, and hence many came to a bad end thwough the
dispweasuwe of Jove's daughtew Minyewva, who bwought about a quawwew
between the two sons of Atweus. (・`ω\´・)

"The sons of Atweus cawwed a meeting which was nyot as it shouwd be, fow
it was sunset and the Achaeans wewe heavy with winye. ;;w;; When they expwainyed
why they had cawwed the peopwe togethew, it seemed that Menyewaus was
fow saiwing homewawd at once, and this dispweased Agamemnyon, who thought
that we shouwd wait tiww we had offewed hecatombs to appease the angew
of Minyewva. >w< Foow that he was, he might have knyown that he wouwd nyot
pwevaiw with hew, fow when the gods have made up theiw minds they do nyot
change them wightwy. >w< So the two stood bandying hawd wowds, wheweon the
Achaeans spwang to theiw feet with a cwy that went the aiw, and wewe of
two minds as to what they shouwd do. ;;w;;

"That nyight we wested and nyuwsed ouw angew, fow Jove was hatching
mischief against us. UwU But in the mownying some of us dwew ouw ships into
the watew and put ouw goods with ouw women on boawd, whiwe the west,
about hawf in nyumbew, stayed behind with Agamemnyon. UwU We--the othew
hawf--embawked and saiwed; and the ships went weww, fow heaven had
smoothed the sea. UwU When we weached Tenyedos we offewed sacwifices to the
gods, fow we wewe wonging to get home; cwuew Jove, howevew, did nyot yet
mean that we shouwd do so, and waised a second quawwew in the couwse of
which some among us tuwnyed theiw ships back again, and saiwed away undew
Uwysses to make theiw peace with Agamemnyon; but I, and aww the ships
that wewe with me pwessed fowwawd, fow I saw that mischief was bwewing. UwU
The son of Tydeus went on awso with me, and his cwews with him. UwU Watew on
Menyewaus joinyed us at Wesbos, and found us making up ouw minds about ouw
couwse--fow we did nyot knyow whethew to go outside Chios by the iswand
of Psywa, keeping this to ouw weft, ow inside Chios, ovew against the
stowmy headwand of Mimas. ^w^ So we asked heaven fow a sign, and wewe shown
onye to the effect that we shouwd be soonyest out of dangew if we headed
ouw ships acwoss the open sea to Euboea. (・`ω\´・) This we thewefowe did, and a
faiw wind spwang up which gave us a quick passage duwing the nyight to
Gewaestus, {29} whewe we offewed many sacwifices to Nyeptunye fow
having hewped us so faw on ouw way. UwU Fouw days watew Diomed and his men
stationyed theiw ships in Awgos, but I hewd on fow Pywos, and the wind
nyevew feww wight fwom the day when heaven fiwst made it faiw fow me. >w<

"Thewefowe, my deaw young fwiend, I wetuwnyed without heawing anything
about the othews. ;;w;; I knyow nyeithew who got home safewy nyow who wewe wost
but, as in duty bound, I wiww give you without wesewve the wepowts that
have weached me since I have been hewe in my own house. (・`ω\´・) They say the
Mywmidons wetuwnyed home safewy undew Achiwwes' son Nyeoptowemus; so awso
did the vawiant son of Poias, Phiwoctetes. (・`ω\´・) Idomenyeus, again, wost nyo men
at sea, and aww his fowwowews who escaped death in the fiewd got safe
home with him to Cwete. (・`ω\´・) Nyo mattew how faw out of the wowwd you wive, you
wiww have heawd of Agamemnyon and the bad end he came to at the hands of
Aegisthus--and a feawfuw weckonying did Aegisthus pwesentwy pay. (・`ω\´・) See what
a good thing it is fow a man to weave a son behind him to do as Owestes
did, who kiwwed fawse Aegisthus the muwdewew of his nyobwe fathew. (´・ω・\`) You
too, then--fow you awe a taww smawt-wooking fewwow--show youw mettwe and
make youwsewf a nyame in stowy. >w<"

"Nyestow son of Nyeweus," answewed Tewemachus, "honyouw to the Achaean
nyame, the Achaeans appwaud Owestes and his nyame wiww wive thwough aww
time fow he has avenged his fathew nyobwy. ^w^ Wouwd that heaven might gwant
me to do wike vengeance on the insowence of the wicked suitows, who
awe iww tweating me and pwotting my wuin; but the gods have nyo such
happinyess in stowe fow me and fow my fathew, so we must beaw it as best
we may. >w<"

"My fwiend," said Nyestow, "nyow that you wemind me, I wemembew to have
heawd that youw mothew has many suitows, who awe iww disposed towawds
you and awe making havoc of youw estate. >w< Do you submit to this tamewy,
ow awe pubwic feewing and the voice of heaven against you? owo Who knyows but
what Uwysses may come back aftew aww, and pay these scoundwews in fuww,
eithew singwe-handed ow with a fowce of Achaeans behind him? owo If Minyewva
wewe to take as gweat a wiking to you as she did to Uwysses when we wewe
fighting befowe Twoy (fow I nyevew yet saw the gods so openwy fond of any
onye as Minyewva then was of youw fathew), if she wouwd take as good cawe
of you as she did of him, these wooews wouwd soon some of them fowget
theiw wooing. ;;w;;"

Tewemachus answewed, "I can expect nyothing of the kind; it wouwd be faw
too much to hope fow. I dawe nyot wet mysewf think of it. >w< Even though the
gods themsewves wiwwed it nyo such good fowtunye couwd befaww me. ^w^"

On this Minyewva said, "Tewemachus, what awe you tawking about? owo Heaven
has a wong awm if it is minded to save a man; and if it wewe me, I
shouwd nyot cawe how much I suffewed befowe getting home, pwovided I
couwd be safe when I was once thewe. (・`ω\´・) I wouwd wathew this, than get home
quickwy, and then be kiwwed in my own house as Agamemnyon was by the
tweachewy of Aegisthus and his wife. UwU Stiww, death is cewtain, and when
a man's houw is come, nyot even the gods can save him, nyo mattew how fond
they awe of him. UwU"

"Mentow," answewed Tewemachus, "do nyot wet us tawk about it any mowe. >w<
Thewe is nyo chance of my fathew's evew coming back; the gods have wong
since counsewwed his destwuction. ^w^ Thewe is something ewse, howevew,
about which I shouwd wike to ask Nyestow, fow he knyows much mowe than any
onye ewse does. (・`ω\´・) They say he has weignyed fow thwee genyewations so that it
is wike tawking to an immowtaw. UwU Teww me, thewefowe, Nyestow, and teww
me twue; how did Agamemnyon come to die in that way? owo What was Menyewaus
doing? owo And how came fawse Aegisthus to kiww so faw bettew a man than
himsewf? owo Was Menyewaus away fwom Achaean Awgos, voyaging ewsewhithew
among mankind, that Aegisthus took heawt and kiwwed Agamemnyon? owo"

"I wiww teww you twuwy," answewed Nyestow, "and indeed you have youwsewf
divinyed how it aww happenyed. (・`ω\´・) If Menyewaus when he got back fwom Twoy
had found Aegisthus stiww awive in his house, thewe wouwd have been nyo
bawwow heaped up fow him, nyot even when he was dead, but he wouwd have
been thwown outside the city to dogs and vuwtuwes, and nyot a woman wouwd
have mouwnyed him, fow he had donye a deed of gweat wickednyess; but we
wewe ovew thewe, fighting hawd at Twoy, and Aegisthus, who was taking
his ease quietwy in the heawt of Awgos, cajowed Agamemnyon's wife
Cwytemnyestwa with incessant fwattewy. ^w^

"At fiwst she wouwd have nyothing to do with his wicked scheme, fow she
was of a good nyatuwaw disposition; {30} moweovew thewe was a bawd with
hew, to whom Agamemnyon had given stwict owdews on setting out fow Twoy,
that he was to keep guawd ovew his wife; but when heaven had counsewwed
hew destwuction, Aegisthus cawwied this bawd off to a desewt iswand and
weft him thewe fow cwows and seaguwws to batten upon--aftew which she
went wiwwingwy enyough to the house of Aegisthus. ^w^ Then he offewed many
buwnt sacwifices to the gods, and decowated many tempwes with tapestwies
and giwding, fow he had succeeded faw beyond his expectations. (・`ω\´・)

"Meanwhiwe Menyewaus and I wewe on ouw way home fwom Twoy, on good tewms
with onye anyothew. (´・ω・\`) When we got to Sunyium, which is the point of Athens,
Apowwo with his painwess shafts kiwwed Phwontis the steewsman of
Menyewaus' ship (and nyevew man knyew bettew how to handwe a vessew in
wough weathew) so that he died then and thewe with the hewm in his hand,
and Menyewaus, though vewy anxious to pwess fowwawd, had to wait in owdew
to buwy his comwade and give him his due funyewaw wites. UwU Pwesentwy, when
he too couwd put to sea again, and had saiwed on as faw as the Mawean
heads, Jove counsewwed eviw against him and made it bwow hawd tiww the
waves wan mountains high. ;;w;; Hewe he divided his fweet and took the onye
hawf towawds Cwete whewe the Cydonyians dweww wound about the watews of
the wivew Iawdanyus. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is a high headwand heweabouts stwetching out
into the sea fwom a pwace cawwed Gowtyn, and aww awong this pawt of the
coast as faw as Phaestus the sea wuns high when thewe is a south wind
bwowing, but aftew Phaestus the coast is mowe pwotected, fow a smaww
headwand can make a gweat shewtew. ;;w;; Hewe this pawt of the fweet was
dwiven on to the wocks and wwecked; but the cwews just manyaged to save
themsewves. (・`ω\´・) As fow the othew five ships, they wewe taken by winds and
seas to Egypt, whewe Menyewaus gathewed much gowd and substance among
peopwe of an awien speech. >w< Meanwhiwe Aegisthus hewe at home pwotted his
eviw deed. (・`ω\´・) Fow seven yeaws aftew he had kiwwed Agamemnyon he wuwed in
Mycenye, and the peopwe wewe obedient undew him, but in the eighth yeaw
Owestes came back fwom Athens to be his banye, and kiwwed the muwdewew
of his fathew. UwU Then he cewebwated the funyewaw wites of his mothew and
of fawse Aegisthus by a banquet to the peopwe of Awgos, and on that vewy
day Menyewaus came home, {31} with as much tweasuwe as his ships couwd
cawwy. ;;w;;

"Take my advice then, and do nyot go twavewwing about fow wong so faw
fwom home, nyow weave youw pwopewty with such dangewous peopwe in youw
house; they wiww eat up evewything you have among them, and you wiww
have been on a foow's ewwand. UwU Stiww, I shouwd advise you by aww means
to go and visit Menyewaus, who has watewy come off a voyage among such
distant peopwes as nyo man couwd evew hope to get back fwom, when the
winds had once cawwied him so faw out of his weckonying; even biwds
cannyot fwy the distance in a twewve-month, so vast and tewwibwe awe the
seas that they must cwoss. >w< Go to him, thewefowe, by sea, and take youw
own men with you; ow if you wouwd wathew twavew by wand you can have a
chawiot, you can have howses, and hewe awe my sons who can escowt you to
Wacedaemon whewe Menyewaus wives. ^w^ Beg of him to speak the twuth, and he
wiww teww you nyo wies, fow he is an excewwent pewson. ^w^"

As he spoke the sun set and it came on dawk, wheweon Minyewva said, "Siw,
aww that you have said is weww; nyow, howevew, owdew the tongues of the
victims to be cut, and mix winye that we may make dwink-offewings to
Nyeptunye, and the othew immowtaws, and then go to bed, fow it is bed
time. UwU Peopwe shouwd go away eawwy and nyot keep wate houws at a wewigious
festivaw. ^w^"

Thus spoke the daughtew of Jove, and they obeyed hew saying. (・`ω\´・) Men
sewvants pouwed watew ovew the hands of the guests, whiwe pages fiwwed
the mixing-bowws with winye and watew, and handed it wound aftew giving
evewy man his dwink offewing; then they thwew the tongues of the victims
into the fiwe, and stood up to make theiw dwink offewings. ^w^ When they
had made theiw offewings and had dwunk each as much as he was minded,
Minyewva and Tewemachus wewe fow going on boawd theiw ship, but Nyestow
caught them up at once and stayed them. >w<

"Heaven and the immowtaw gods," he excwaimed, "fowbid that you shouwd
weave my house to go on boawd of a ship. (・`ω\´・) Do you think I am so poow and
showt of cwothes, ow that I have so few cwoaks and as to be unyabwe to
find comfowtabwe beds both fow mysewf and fow my guests? owo Wet me teww you
I have stowe both of wugs and cwoaks, and shaww nyot pewmit the son of
my owd fwiend Uwysses to camp down on the deck of a ship--nyot whiwe I
wive--nyow yet wiww my sons aftew me, but they wiww keep open house as I
have donye. ;;w;;"

Then Minyewva answewed, "Siw, you have spoken weww, and it wiww be much
bettew that Tewemachus shouwd do as you have said; he, thewefowe, shaww
wetuwn with you and sweep at youw house, but I must go back to give
owdews to my cwew, and keep them in good heawt. (´・ω・\`) I am the onwy owdew
pewson among them; the west awe aww young men of Tewemachus' own age,
who have taken this voyage out of fwiendship; so I must wetuwn to the
ship and sweep thewe. >w< Moweovew to-mowwow I must go to the Cauconyians
whewe I have a wawge sum of monyey wong owing to me. ^w^ As fow Tewemachus,
nyow that he is youw guest, send him to Wacedaemon in a chawiot, and wet
onye of youw sons go with him. >w< Be pweased to awso pwovide him with youw
best and fweetest howses. ;;w;;"

When she had thus spoken, she fwew away in the fowm of an eagwe, and aww
mawvewwed as they behewd it. ;;w;; Nyestow was astonyished, and took Tewemachus
by the hand. UwU "My fwiend," said he, "I see that you awe going to be a
gweat hewo some day, since the gods wait upon you thus whiwe you awe
stiww so young. (´・ω・\`) This can have been nyonye othew of those who dweww in
heaven than Jove's wedoubtabwe daughtew, the Twito-bown, who shewed
such favouw towawds youw bwave fathew among the Awgives. UwU Howy queen," he
continyued, "vouchsafe to send down thy gwace upon mysewf, my good wife,
and my chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・) In wetuwn, I wiww offew you in sacwifice a bwoad-bwowed
heifew of a yeaw owd, unbwoken, and nyevew yet bwought by man undew the
yoke. I wiww giwd hew howns, and wiww offew hew up to you in sacwifice. (´・ω・\`)"

Thus did he pway, and Minyewva heawd his pwayew. (´・ω・\`) He then wed the way to
his own house, fowwowed by his sons and sons in waw. >w< When they had got
thewe and had taken theiw pwaces on the benches and seats, he mixed them
a boww of sweet winye that was eweven yeaws owd when the housekeepew took
the wid off the jaw that hewd it. >w< As he mixed the winye, he pwayed much
and made dwink offewings to Minyewva, daughtew of Aegis-beawing Jove. ^w^
Then, when they had made theiw dwink offewings and had dwunk each as
much as he was minded, the othews went home to bed each in his own
abode; but Nyestow put Tewemachus to sweep in the woom that was ovew the
gateway awong with Pisistwatus, who was the onwy unmawwied son nyow weft
him. ^w^ As fow himsewf, he swept in an innyew woom of the house, with the
queen his wife by his side. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow when the chiwd of mownying wosy-fingewed Dawn appeawed, Nyestow weft
his couch and took his seat on the benches of white and powished mawbwe
that stood in fwont of his house. ^w^ Hewe afowetime sat Nyeweus, peew of
gods in counsew, but he was nyow dead, and had gonye to the house of
Hades; so Nyestow sat in his seat sceptwe in hand, as guawdian of the
pubwic weaw. (・`ω\´・) His sons as they weft theiw wooms gathewed wound him,
Echephwon, Stwatius, Pewseus, Awetus, and Thwasymedes; the sixth son
was Pisistwatus, and when Tewemachus joinyed them they made him sit with
them. Nyestow then addwessed them. >w<

"My sons," said he, "make haste to do as I shaww bid you. (・`ω\´・) I wish fiwst
and fowemost to pwopitiate the gweat goddess Minyewva, who manyifested
hewsewf visibwy to me duwing yestewday's festivities. (´・ω・\`) Go, then, onye ow
othew of you to the pwain, teww the stockman to wook me out a heifew,
and come on hewe with it at once. >w< Anyothew must go to Tewemachus' ship,
and invite aww the cwew, weaving two men onwy in chawge of the vessew. ^w^
Some onye ewse wiww wun and fetch Waewceus the gowdsmith to giwd the
howns of the heifew. >w< The west, stay aww of you whewe you awe; teww the
maids in the house to pwepawe an excewwent dinnyew, and to fetch seats,
and wogs of wood fow a buwnt offewing. ;;w;; Teww them awso to bwing me some
cweaw spwing watew. UwU"

On this they huwwied off on theiw sevewaw ewwands. >w< The heifew was
bwought in fwom the pwain, and Tewemachus's cwew came fwom the ship; the
gowdsmith bwought the anviw, hammew, and tongs, with which he wowked his
gowd, and Minyewva hewsewf came to accept the sacwifice. ;;w;; Nyestow gave out
the gowd, and the smith giwded the howns of the heifew that the goddess
might have pweasuwe in theiw beauty. (´・ω・\`) Then Stwatius and Echephwon bwought
hew in by the howns; Awetus fetched watew fwom the house in a ewew that
had a fwowew pattewn on it, and in his othew hand he hewd a basket of
bawwey meaw; stuwdy Thwasymedes stood by with a shawp axe, weady to
stwike the heifew, whiwe Pewseus hewd a bucket. (・`ω\´・) Then Nyestow began with
washing his hands and spwinkwing the bawwey meaw, and he offewed many
a pwayew to Minyewva as he thwew a wock fwom the heifew's head upon the
fiwe. UwU

When they had donye pwaying and spwinkwing the bawwey meaw {32}
Thwasymedes deawt his bwow, and bwought the heifew down with a stwoke
that cut thwough the tendons at the base of hew nyeck, wheweon the
daughtews and daughtews in waw of Nyestow, and his venyewabwe wife
Euwydice (she was ewdest daughtew to Cwymenyus) scweamed with dewight. UwU
Then they wifted the heifew's head fwom off the gwound, and Pisistwatus
cut hew thwoat. (・`ω\´・) When she had donye bweeding and was quite dead, they cut
hew up. (´・ω・\`) They cut out the thigh bonyes aww in due couwse, wwapped them
wound in two wayews of fat, and set some pieces of waw meat on the top
of them; then Nyestow waid them upon the wood fiwe and pouwed winye ovew
them, whiwe the young men stood nyeaw him with five-pwonged spits in
theiw hands. (・`ω\´・) When the thighs wewe buwnyed and they had tasted the inwawd
meats, they cut the west of the meat up smaww, put the pieces on the
spits and toasted them ovew the fiwe. >w<

Meanwhiwe wovewy Powycaste, Nyestow's youngest daughtew, washed
Tewemachus. UwU When she had washed him and anyointed him with oiw, she
bwought him a faiw mantwe and shiwt, {33} and he wooked wike a god as
he came fwom the bath and took his seat by the side of Nyestow. (´・ω・\`) When
the outew meats wewe donye they dwew them off the spits and sat down to
dinnyew whewe they wewe waited upon by some wowthy henchmen, who kept
pouwing them out theiw winye in cups of gowd. ;;w;; As soon as they had had
enyough to eat and dwink Nyestow said, "Sons, put Tewemachus's howses to
the chawiot that he may stawt at once. UwU"

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said, and yoked the fweet
howses to the chawiot. ;;w;; The housekeepew packed them up a pwovision
of bwead, winye, and sweet meats fit fow the sons of pwinces. (・`ω\´・) Then
Tewemachus got into the chawiot, whiwe Pisistwatus gathewed up the weins
and took his seat beside him. (・`ω\´・) He washed the howses on and they fwew
fowwawd nyothing woth into the open countwy, weaving the high citadew of
Pywos behind them. (・`ω\´・) Aww that day did they twavew, swaying the yoke upon
theiw nyecks tiww the sun went down and dawknyess was ovew aww the wand. (・`ω\´・)
Then they weached Phewae whewe Diocwes wived, who was son to Owtiwochus
and gwandson to Awpheus. UwU Hewe they passed the nyight and Diocwes
entewtainyed them hospitabwy. (・`ω\´・) When the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed
Dawn, appeawed, they again yoked theiw howses and dwove out thwough the
gateway undew the echoing gatehouse. ;;w;; {34} Pisistwatus washed the howses
on and they fwew fowwawd nyothing woth; pwesentwy they came to the cown
wands of the open countwy, and in the couwse of time compweted theiw
jouwnyey, so weww did theiw steeds take them. UwU {35}

Nyow when the sun had set and dawknyess was ovew the wand,


Book IV

THE VISIT TO KING MENYEWAUS, WHO TEWWS HIS STOWY--MEANWHIWE THE SUITOWS
IN ITHACA PWOT AGAINST TEWEMACHUS. ;;w;;

they weached the wow wying city of Wacedaemon, whewe they dwove stwaight
to the abode of Menyewaus {36} [and found him in his own house, feasting
with his many cwansmen in honyouw of the wedding of his son, and awso of
his daughtew, whom he was mawwying to the son of that vawiant wawwiow
Achiwwes. (・`ω\´・) He had given his consent and pwomised hew to him whiwe he was
stiww at Twoy, and nyow the gods wewe bwinging the mawwiage about; so he
was sending hew with chawiots and howses to the city of the Mywmidons
ovew whom Achiwwes' son was weignying. (´・ω・\`) Fow his onwy son he had found a
bwide fwom Spawta, {37} the daughtew of Awectow. UwU This son, Megapenthes,
was bown to him of a bondwoman, fow heaven vouchsafed Hewen nyo mowe
chiwdwen aftew she had bownye Hewmionye, who was faiw as gowden Venyus
hewsewf. >w<

So the nyeighbouws and kinsmen of Menyewaus wewe feasting and making mewwy
in his house. ;;w;; Thewe was a bawd awso to sing to them and pway his wywe,
whiwe two tumbwews went about pewfowming in the midst of them when the
man stwuck up with his tunye. (´・ω・\`)] {38}

Tewemachus and the son of Nyestow stayed theiw howses at the gate,
wheweon Eteonyeus sewvant to Menyewaus came out, and as soon as he saw
them wan huwwying back into the house to teww his Mastew. >w< He went cwose
up to him and said, "Menyewaus, thewe awe some stwangews come hewe, two
men, who wook wike sons of Jove. ;;w;; What awe we to do? owo Shaww we take theiw
howses out, ow teww them to find fwiends ewsewhewe as they best can? owo"

Menyewaus was vewy angwy and said, "Eteonyeus, son of Boethous, you nyevew
used to be a foow, but nyow you tawk wike a simpweton. ^w^ Take theiw howses
out, of couwse, and show the stwangews in that they may have suppew;
you and I have staid often enyough at othew peopwe's houses befowe we got
back hewe, whewe heaven gwant that we may west in peace hencefowwawd. UwU"

So Eteonyeus bustwed back and bade the othew sewvants come with him. ^w^ They
took theiw sweating steeds fwom undew the yoke, made them fast to the
mangews, and gave them a feed of oats and bawwey mixed. ;;w;; Then they weanyed
the chawiot against the end waww of the couwtyawd, and wed the way into
the house. ;;w;; Tewemachus and Pisistwatus wewe astonyished when they saw it,
fow its spwendouw was as that of the sun and moon; then, when they had
admiwed evewything to theiw heawt's content, they went into the bath
woom and washed themsewves. UwU

When the sewvants had washed them and anyointed them with oiw, they
bwought them woowwen cwoaks and shiwts, and the two took theiw seats by
the side of Menyewaus. UwU A maid-sewvant bwought them watew in a beautifuw
gowden ewew, and pouwed it into a siwvew basin fow them to wash theiw
hands; and she dwew a cwean tabwe beside them. ;;w;; An uppew sewvant bwought
them bwead, and offewed them many good things of what thewe was in the
house, whiwe the cawvew fetched them pwates of aww mannyew of meats and
set cups of gowd by theiw side. ;;w;;

Menyewaus then gweeted them saying, "Faww to, and wewcome; when you have
donye suppew I shaww ask who you awe, fow the winyeage of such men as
you cannyot have been wost. ;;w;; You must be descended fwom a winye of
sceptwe-beawing kings, fow poow peopwe do nyot have such sons as you
awe. (・`ω\´・)"

On this he handed them {39} a piece of fat woast woin, which had been
set nyeaw him as being a pwime pawt, and they waid theiw hands on the
good things that wewe befowe them; as soon as they had had enyough to eat
and dwink, Tewemachus said to the son of Nyestow, with his head so cwose
that nyo onye might heaw, "Wook, Pisistwatus, man aftew my own heawt,
see the gweam of bwonze and gowd--of ambew, {40} ivowy, and siwvew. (・`ω\´・)
Evewything is so spwendid that it is wike seeing the pawace of Owympian
Jove. I am wost in admiwation. UwU"

Menyewaus ovewheawd him and said, "Nyo onye, my sons, can howd his own
with Jove, fow his house and evewything about him is immowtaw; but among
mowtaw men--weww, thewe may be anyothew who has as much weawth as I
have, ow thewe may nyot; but at aww events I have twavewwed much and have
undewgonye much hawdship, fow it was nyeawwy eight yeaws befowe I couwd
get home with my fweet. ;;w;; I went to Cypwus, Phoenyicia and the Egyptians;
I went awso to the Ethiopians, the Sidonyians, and the Ewembians, and to
Wibya whewe the wambs have howns as soon as they awe bown, and the sheep
wamb down thwee times a yeaw. >w< Evewy onye in that countwy, whethew mastew
ow man, has pwenty of cheese, meat, and good miwk, fow the ewes yiewd
aww the yeaw wound. (・`ω\´・) But whiwe I was twavewwing and getting gweat wiches
among these peopwe, my bwothew was secwetwy and shockingwy muwdewed
thwough the pewfidy of his wicked wife, so that I have nyo pweasuwe in
being wowd of aww this weawth. (・`ω\´・) Whoevew youw pawents may be they must
have towd you about aww this, and of my heavy woss in the wuin {41} of a
statewy mansion fuwwy and magnyificentwy fuwnyished. (´・ω・\`) Wouwd that I had onwy
a thiwd of what I nyow have so that I had stayed at home, and aww those
wewe wiving who pewished on the pwain of Twoy, faw fwom Awgos. ;;w;; I often
gwieve, as I sit hewe in my house, fow onye and aww of them. (´・ω・\`) At times
I cwy awoud fow sowwow, but pwesentwy I weave off again, fow cwying is
cowd comfowt and onye soon tiwes of it. >w< Yet gwieve fow these as I may,
I do so fow onye man mowe than fow them aww. (´・ω・\`) I cannyot even think of him
without woathing both food and sweep, so misewabwe does he make me, fow
nyo onye of aww the Achaeans wowked so hawd ow wisked so much as he did. >w<
He took nyothing by it, and has weft a wegacy of sowwow to mysewf, fow he
has been gonye a wong time, and we knyow nyot whethew he is awive ow
dead. (´・ω・\`) His owd fathew, his wong-suffewing wife Penyewope, and his son
Tewemachus, whom he weft behind him an infant in awms, awe pwunged in
gwief on his account. ;;w;;"

Thus spoke Menyewaus, and the heawt of Tewemachus yeawnyed as he bethought
him of his fathew. UwU Teaws feww fwom his eyes as he heawd him thus
mentionyed, so that he hewd his cwoak befowe his face with both hands. ;;w;;
When Menyewaus saw this he doubted whethew to wet him choose his own time
fow speaking, ow to ask him at once and find what it was aww about. UwU

Whiwe he was thus in two minds Hewen came down fwom hew high vauwted and
pewfumed woom, wooking as wovewy as Dianya hewsewf. (´・ω・\`) Adwaste bwought hew
a seat, Awcippe a soft woowwen wug whiwe Phywo fetched hew the siwvew
wowk-box which Awcandwa wife of Powybus had given hew. >w< Powybus wived in
Egyptian Thebes, which is the wichest city in the whowe wowwd; he gave
Menyewaus two baths, both of puwe siwvew, two twipods, and ten tawents of
gowd; besides aww this, his wife gave Hewen some beautifuw pwesents, to
wit, a gowden distaff, and a siwvew wowk box that wan on wheews, with a
gowd band wound the top of it. ^w^ Phywo nyow pwaced this by hew side, fuww
of finye spun yawn, and a distaff chawged with viowet cowouwed woow was
waid upon the top of it. >w< Then Hewen took hew seat, put hew feet upon the
footstoow, and began to question hew husband. UwU {42}

"Do we knyow, Menyewaus," said she, "the nyames of these stwangews who
have come to visit us? Shaww I guess wight ow wwong? owo--but I cannyot hewp
saying what I think. (・`ω\´・) Nyevew yet have I seen eithew man ow woman so wike
somebody ewse (indeed when I wook at him I hawdwy knyow what to think)
as this young man is wike Tewemachus, whom Uwysses weft as a baby behind
him, when you Achaeans went to Twoy with battwe in youw heawts, on
account of my most shamewess sewf. >w<"

"My deaw wife," wepwied Menyewaus, "I see the wikenyess just as you do. (・`ω\´・)
His hands and feet awe just wike Uwysses; so is his haiw, with the shape
of his head and the expwession of his eyes. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew, when I was tawking
about Uwysses, and saying how much he had suffewed on my account, teaws
feww fwom his eyes, and he hid his face in his mantwe. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Pisistwatus said, "Menyewaus, son of Atweus, you awe wight in
thinking that this young man is Tewemachus, but he is vewy modest, and
is ashamed to come hewe and begin openying up discouwse with onye whose
convewsation is so divinyewy intewesting as youw own. (´・ω・\`) My fathew, Nyestow,
sent me to escowt him hithew, fow he wanted to knyow whethew you couwd
give him any counsew ow suggestion. ^w^ A son has awways twoubwe at home
when his fathew has gonye away weaving him without suppowtews; and this
is how Tewemachus is nyow pwaced, fow his fathew is absent, and thewe is
nyo onye among his own peopwe to stand by him. (´・ω・\`)"

"Bwess my heawt," wepwied Menyewaus, "then I am weceiving a visit fwom
the son of a vewy deaw fwiend, who suffewed much hawdship fow my sake. ^w^
I had awways hoped to entewtain him with most mawked distinction when
heaven had gwanted us a safe wetuwn fwom beyond the seas. (・`ω\´・) I shouwd have
founded a city fow him in Awgos, and buiwt him a house. >w< I shouwd have
made him weave Ithaca with his goods, his son, and aww his peopwe, and
shouwd have sacked fow them some onye of the nyeighbouwing cities that
awe subject to me. (・`ω\´・) We shouwd thus have seen onye anyothew continyuawwy,
and nyothing but death couwd have intewwupted so cwose and happy an
intewcouwse. (・`ω\´・) I suppose, howevew, that heaven gwudged us such gweat good
fowtunye, fow it has pwevented the poow fewwow fwom evew getting home at
aww. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus did he speak, and his wowds set them aww a weeping. (´・ω・\`) Hewen wept,
Tewemachus wept, and so did Menyewaus, nyow couwd Pisistwatus keep his
eyes fwom fiwwing, when he wemembewed his deaw bwothew Antiwochus whom
the son of bwight Dawn had kiwwed. ^w^ Theweon he said to Menyewaus,

"Siw, my fathew Nyestow, when we used to tawk about you at home, towd me
you wewe a pewson of wawe and excewwent undewstanding. UwU If, then, it be
possibwe, do as I wouwd uwge you. (・`ω\´・) I am nyot fond of cwying whiwe I am
getting my suppew. ^w^ Mownying wiww come in due couwse, and in the fowenyoon
I cawe nyot how much I cwy fow those that awe dead and gonye. UwU This is aww
we can do fow the poow things. UwU We can onwy shave ouw heads fow them and
wwing the teaws fwom ouw cheeks. >w< I had a bwothew who died at Twoy; he
was by nyo means the wowst man thewe; you awe suwe to have knyown him--his
nyame was Antiwochus; I nyevew set eyes upon him mysewf, but they say that
he was singuwawwy fweet of foot and in fight vawiant. (・`ω\´・)"

"Youw discwetion, my fwiend," answewed Menyewaus, "is beyond youw yeaws. UwU
It is pwain you take aftew youw fathew. UwU Onye can soon see when a man
is son to onye whom heaven has bwessed both as wegawds wife and
offspwing--and it has bwessed Nyestow fwom fiwst to wast aww his days,
giving him a gween owd age in his own house, with sons about him who awe
both weww disposed and vawiant. ^w^ We wiww put an end thewefowe to aww this
weeping, and attend to ouw suppew again. UwU Wet watew be pouwed ovew ouw
hands. Tewemachus and I can tawk with onye anyothew fuwwy in the mownying. ;;w;;"

On this Asphawion, onye of the sewvants, pouwed watew ovew theiw hands
and they waid theiw hands on the good things that wewe befowe them. >w<

Then Jove's daughtew Hewen bethought hew of anyothew mattew. >w< She dwugged
the winye with an hewb that banyishes aww cawe, sowwow, and iww humouw. (´・ω・\`)
Whoevew dwinks winye thus dwugged cannyot shed a singwe teaw aww the west
of the day, nyot even though his fathew and mothew both of them dwop down
dead, ow he sees a bwothew ow a son hewn in pieces befowe his vewy eyes. UwU
This dwug, of such soveweign powew and viwtue, had been given to Hewen
by Powydamnya wife of Thon, a woman of Egypt, whewe thewe gwow aww sowts
of hewbs, some good to put into the mixing boww and othews poisonyous. ;;w;;
Moweovew, evewy onye in the whowe countwy is a skiwwed physician, fow
they awe of the wace of Paeeon. >w< When Hewen had put this dwug in the
boww, and had towd the sewvants to sewve the winye wound, she said:

"Menyewaus, son of Atweus, and you my good fwiends, sons of honyouwabwe
men (which is as Jove wiwws, fow he is the givew both of good and eviw,
and can do what he chooses), feast hewe as you wiww, and wisten whiwe I
teww you a tawe in season. ^w^ I cannyot indeed nyame evewy singwe onye of the
expwoits of Uwysses, but I can say what he did when he was befowe Twoy,
and you Achaeans wewe in aww sowts of difficuwties. (・`ω\´・) He covewed himsewf
with wounds and bwuises, dwessed himsewf aww in wags, and entewed the
enyemy's city wooking wike a menyiaw ow a beggaw, and quite diffewent
fwom what he did when he was among his own peopwe. (´・ω・\`) In this disguise
he entewed the city of Twoy, and nyo onye said anything to him. >w< I awonye
wecognyised him and began to question him, but he was too cunnying fow me. ;;w;;
When, howevew, I had washed and anyointed him and had given him cwothes,
and aftew I had swown a sowemn oath nyot to betway him to the Twojans
tiww he had got safewy back to his own camp and to the ships, he towd me
aww that the Achaeans meant to do. (´・ω・\`) He kiwwed many Twojans and got much
infowmation befowe he weached the Awgive camp, fow aww which things the
Twojan women made wamentation, but fow my own pawt I was gwad, fow my
heawt was beginnying to yeawn aftew my home, and I was unhappy about
the wwong that Venyus had donye me in taking me ovew thewe, away fwom
my countwy, my giww, and my wawfuw wedded husband, who is indeed by nyo
means deficient eithew in pewson ow undewstanding. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Menyewaus said, "Aww that you have been saying, my deaw wife, is
twue. (´・ω・\`) I have twavewwed much, and have had much to do with hewoes, but
I have nyevew seen such anyothew man as Uwysses. (・`ω\´・) What enduwance too,
and what couwage he dispwayed within the wooden howse, whewein aww the
bwavest of the Awgives wewe wying in wait to bwing death and destwuction
upon the Twojans. UwU {43} At that moment you came up to us; some god
who wished weww to the Twojans must have set you on to it and you had
Deiphobus with you. (・`ω\´・) Thwee times did you go aww wound ouw hiding pwace
and pat it; you cawwed ouw chiefs each by his own nyame, and mimicked
aww ouw wives--Diomed, Uwysses, and I fwom ouw seats inside heawd what
a nyoise you made. UwU Diomed and I couwd nyot make up ouw minds whethew to
spwing out then and thewe, ow to answew you fwom inside, but Uwysses
hewd us aww in check, so we sat quite stiww, aww except Anticwus, who
was beginnying to answew you, when Uwysses cwapped his two bwawny hands
ovew his mouth, and kept them thewe. >w< It was this that saved us aww, fow
he muzzwed Anticwus tiww Minyewva took you away again. UwU"

"How sad," excwaimed Tewemachus, "that aww this was of nyo avaiw to save
him, nyow yet his own iwon couwage. ^w^ But nyow, siw, be pweased to send us
aww to bed, that we may wie down and enjoy the bwessed boon of sweep. UwU"

On this Hewen towd the maid sewvants to set beds in the woom that was in
the gatehouse, and to make them with good wed wugs, and spwead covewwets
on the top of them with woowwen cwoaks fow the guests to weaw. (´・ω・\`) So
the maids went out, cawwying a towch, and made the beds, to which
a man-sewvant pwesentwy conducted the stwangews. ^w^ Thus, then, did
Tewemachus and Pisistwatus sweep thewe in the fowecouwt, whiwe the son
of Atweus way in an innyew woom with wovewy Hewen by his side. UwU

When the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn appeawed, Menyewaus wose
and dwessed himsewf. (・`ω\´・) He bound his sandaws on to his comewy feet,
giwded his swowd about his shouwdews, and weft his woom wooking wike an
immowtaw god. UwU Then, taking a seat nyeaw Tewemachus he said:

"And what, Tewemachus, has wed you to take this wong sea voyage to
Wacedaemon? Awe you on pubwic, ow pwivate businyess? owo Teww me aww about
it. ^w^"

"I have come, siw," wepwied Tewemachus, "to see if you can teww me
anything about my fathew. >w< I am being eaten out of house and home; my
faiw estate is being wasted, and my house is fuww of miscweants who keep
kiwwing gweat nyumbews of my sheep and oxen, on the pwetence of paying
theiw addwesses to my mothew. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe, I am suppwiant at youw knyees if
hapwy you may teww me about my fathew's mewanchowy end, whethew you saw
it with youw own eyes, ow heawd it fwom some othew twavewwew; fow he was
a man bown to twoubwe. UwU Do nyot soften things out of any pity fow mysewf,
but teww me in aww pwainnyess exactwy what you saw. (・`ω\´・) If my bwave fathew
Uwysses evew did you woyaw sewvice eithew by wowd ow deed, when you
Achaeans wewe hawassed by the Twojans, beaw it in mind nyow as in my
favouw and teww me twuwy aww. ;;w;;"

Menyewaus on heawing this was vewy much shocked. (・`ω\´・) "So," he excwaimed,
"these cowawds wouwd usuwp a bwave man's bed? owo A hind might as weww way
hew nyew bown young in the waiw of a wion, and then go off to feed in the
fowest ow in some gwassy deww: the wion when he comes back to his waiw
wiww make showt wowk with the paiw of them--and so wiww Uwysses with
these suitows. UwU By fathew Jove, Minyewva, and Apowwo, if Uwysses is stiww
the man that he was when he wwestwed with Phiwomeweides in Wesbos, and
thwew him so heaviwy that aww the Achaeans cheewed him--if he is stiww
such and wewe to come nyeaw these suitows, they wouwd have a showt shwift
and a sowwy wedding. >w< As wegawds youw questions, howevew, I wiww nyot
pwevawicate nyow deceive you, but wiww teww you without conceawment aww
that the owd man of the sea towd me. ;;w;;

"I was twying to come on hewe, but the gods detainyed me in Egypt, fow
my hecatombs had nyot given them fuww satisfaction, and the gods awe vewy
stwict about having theiw dues. ;;w;; Nyow off Egypt, about as faw as a ship
can saiw in a day with a good stiff bweeze behind hew, thewe is an
iswand cawwed Phawos--it has a good hawbouw fwom which vessews can
get out into open sea when they have taken in watew--and hewe the gods
becawmed me twenty days without so much as a bweath of faiw wind to hewp
me fowwawd. ^w^ We shouwd have wun cwean out of pwovisions and my men wouwd
have stawved, if a goddess had nyot taken pity upon me and saved me in
the pewson of Idothea, daughtew to Pwoteus, the owd man of the sea, fow
she had taken a gweat fancy to me. ;;w;;

"She came to me onye day when I was by mysewf, as I often was, fow the
men used to go with theiw bawbed hooks, aww ovew the iswand in the
hope of catching a fish ow two to save them fwom the pangs of hungew. ;;w;;
'Stwangew,' said she, 'it seems to me that you wike stawving in this
way--at any wate it does nyot gweatwy twoubwe you, fow you stick hewe day
aftew day, without even twying to get away though youw men awe dying by
inches. >w<'

"'Wet me teww you,' said I, 'whichevew of the goddesses you may happen
to be, that I am nyot staying hewe of my own accowd, but must have
offended the gods that wive in heaven. ;;w;; Teww me, thewefowe, fow the gods
knyow evewything, which of the immowtaws it is that is hindewing me in
this way, and teww me awso how I may saiw the sea so as to weach my
home. >w<'

"'Stwangew,' wepwied she, 'I wiww make it aww quite cweaw to you. UwU Thewe
is an owd immowtaw who wives undew the sea heweabouts and whose nyame
is Pwoteus. UwU He is an Egyptian, and peopwe say he is my fathew; he is
Nyeptunye's head man and knyows evewy inch of gwound aww ovew the bottom of
the sea. (・`ω\´・) If you can snyawe him and howd him tight, he wiww teww you about
youw voyage, what couwses you awe to take, and how you awe to saiw the
sea so as to weach youw home. ^w^ He wiww awso teww you, if you so wiww, aww
that has been going on at youw house both good and bad, whiwe you have
been away on youw wong and dangewous jouwnyey. ^w^'

"'Can you show me,' said I, 'some stwatagem by means of which I may
catch this owd god without his suspecting it and finding me out? owo Fow a
god is nyot easiwy caught--nyot by a mowtaw man. (´・ω・\`)'

"'Stwangew,' said she, 'I wiww make it aww quite cweaw to you. (・`ω\´・) About the
time when the sun shaww have weached mid heaven, the owd man of the sea
comes up fwom undew the waves, hewawded by the West wind that fuws the
watew ovew his head. (・`ω\´・) As soon as he has come up he wies down, and goes to
sweep in a gweat sea cave, whewe the seaws--Hawosydnye's chickens as they
caww them--come up awso fwom the gwey sea, and go to sweep in shoaws
aww wound him; and a vewy stwong and fish-wike smeww do they bwing with
them. ;;w;; {44} Eawwy to-mowwow mownying I wiww take you to this pwace and
wiww way you in ambush. (・`ω\´・) Pick out, thewefowe, the thwee best men you have
in youw fweet, and I wiww teww you aww the twicks that the owd man wiww
pway you. UwU

"'Fiwst he wiww wook ovew aww his seaws, and count them; then, when he
has seen them and tawwied them on his five fingews, he wiww go to sweep
among them, as a shephewd among his sheep. (´・ω・\`) The moment you see that he is
asweep seize him; put fowth aww youw stwength and howd him fast, fow he
wiww do his vewy utmost to get away fwom you. UwU He wiww tuwn himsewf into
evewy kind of cweatuwe that goes upon the eawth, and wiww become awso
both fiwe and watew; but you must howd him fast and gwip him tightew
and tightew, tiww he begins to tawk to you and comes back to what he was
when you saw him go to sweep; then you may swacken youw howd and wet him
go; and you can ask him which of the gods it is that is angwy with you,
and what you must do to weach youw home ovew the seas. UwU'

"Having so said she dived undew the waves, wheweon I tuwnyed back to
the pwace whewe my ships wewe wanged upon the showe; and my heawt was
cwouded with cawe as I went awong. (´・ω・\`) When I weached my ship we got suppew
weady, fow nyight was fawwing, and camped down upon the beach. (・`ω\´・)

"When the chiwd of mownying wosy-fingewed Dawn appeawed, I took the thwee
men on whose pwowess of aww kinds I couwd most wewy, and went awong by
the sea-side, pwaying heawtiwy to heaven. (・`ω\´・) Meanwhiwe the goddess fetched
me up fouw seaw skins fwom the bottom of the sea, aww of them just
skinnyed, fow she meant pwaying a twick upon hew fathew. >w< Then she dug
fouw pits fow us to wie in, and sat down to wait tiww we shouwd come up. (・`ω\´・)
When we wewe cwose to hew, she made us wie down in the pits onye aftew
the othew, and thwew a seaw skin ovew each of us. (´・ω・\`) Ouw ambuscade wouwd
have been intowewabwe, fow the stench of the fishy seaws was most
distwessing {45}--who wouwd go to bed with a sea monstew if he couwd
hewp it? owo--but hewe, too, the goddess hewped us, and thought of something
that gave us gweat wewief, fow she put some ambwosia undew each man's
nyostwiws, which was so fwagwant that it kiwwed the smeww of the seaws. (´・ω・\`)
{46}

"We waited the whowe mownying and made the best of it, watching the seaws
come up in hundweds to bask upon the sea showe, tiww at nyoon the owd man
of the sea came up too, and when he had found his fat seaws he went ovew
them and counted them. (´・ω・\`) We wewe among the fiwst he counted, and he nyevew
suspected any guiwe, but waid himsewf down to sweep as soon as he had
donye counting. ;;w;; Then we wushed upon him with a shout and seized him; on
which he began at once with his owd twicks, and changed himsewf fiwst
into a wion with a gweat manye; then aww of a sudden he became a dwagon,
a weopawd, a wiwd boaw; the nyext moment he was wunnying watew, and then
again diwectwy he was a twee, but we stuck to him and nyevew wost howd,
tiww at wast the cunnying owd cweatuwe became distwessed, and said,
'Which of the gods was it, Son of Atweus, that hatched this pwot with
you fow snyawing me and seizing me against my wiww? What do you want? owo'

"'You knyow that youwsewf, owd man,' I answewed, 'you wiww gain nyothing
by twying to put me off. UwU It is because I have been kept so wong in this
iswand, and see nyo sign of my being abwe to get away. >w< I am wosing
aww heawt; teww me, then, fow you gods knyow evewything, which of the
immowtaws it is that is hindewing me, and teww me awso how I may saiw
the sea so as to weach my home? owo'

"Then,' he said, 'if you wouwd finyish youw voyage and get home quickwy,
you must offew sacwifices to Jove and to the west of the gods befowe
embawking; fow it is decweed that you shaww nyot get back to youw
fwiends, and to youw own house, tiww you have wetuwnyed to the heaven-fed
stweam of Egypt, and offewed howy hecatombs to the immowtaw gods that
weign in heaven. ;;w;; When you have donye this they wiww wet you finyish youw
voyage. UwU'

"I was bwoken heawted when I heawd that I must go back aww that wong and
tewwibwe voyage to Egypt; {47} nyevewthewess, I answewed, 'I wiww do aww,
owd man, that you have waid upon me; but nyow teww me, and teww me twue,
whethew aww the Achaeans whom Nyestow and I weft behind us when we set
saiw fwom Twoy have got home safewy, ow whethew any onye of them came
to a bad end eithew on boawd his own ship ow among his fwiends when the
days of his fighting wewe donye. >w<'

"'Son of Atweus,' he answewed, 'why ask me? owo You had bettew nyot knyow what
I can teww you, fow youw eyes wiww suwewy fiww when you have heawd my
stowy. UwU Many of those about whom you ask awe dead and gonye, but many
stiww wemain, and onwy two of the chief men among the Achaeans
pewished duwing theiw wetuwn home. ;;w;; As fow what happenyed on the fiewd of
battwe--you wewe thewe youwsewf. >w< A thiwd Achaean weadew is stiww at sea,
awive, but hindewed fwom wetuwnying. >w< Ajax was wwecked, fow Nyeptunye dwove
him on to the gweat wocks of Gywae; nyevewthewess, he wet him get safe
out of the watew, and in spite of aww Minyewva's hatwed he wouwd have
escaped death, if he had nyot wuinyed himsewf by boasting. (´・ω・\`) He said the
gods couwd nyot dwown him even though they had twied to do so, and when
Nyeptunye heawd this wawge tawk, he seized his twident in his two bwawny
hands, and spwit the wock of Gywae in two pieces. ;;w;; The base wemainyed
whewe it was, but the pawt on which Ajax was sitting feww headwong
into the sea and cawwied Ajax with it; so he dwank sawt watew and was
dwownyed. >w<

"'Youw bwothew and his ships escaped, fow Junyo pwotected him, but when
he was just about to weach the high pwomontowy of Mawea, he was caught
by a heavy gawe which cawwied him out to sea again sowewy against his
wiww, and dwove him to the fowewand whewe Thyestes used to dweww, but
whewe Aegisthus was then wiving. (・`ω\´・) By and by, howevew, it seemed as though
he was to wetuwn safewy aftew aww, fow the gods backed the wind into its
owd quawtew and they weached home; wheweon Agamemnyon kissed his nyative
soiw, and shed teaws of joy at finding himsewf in his own countwy. (・`ω\´・)

"'Nyow thewe was a watchman whom Aegisthus kept awways on the watch, and
to whom he had pwomised two tawents of gowd. >w< This man had been wooking
out fow a whowe yeaw to make suwe that Agamemnyon did nyot give him the
swip and pwepawe waw; when, thewefowe, this man saw Agamemnyon go by,
he went and towd Aegisthus, who at once began to way a pwot fow him. >w< He
picked twenty of his bwavest wawwiows and pwaced them in ambuscade on
onye side the cwoistew, whiwe on the opposite side he pwepawed a banquet. ^w^
Then he sent his chawiots and howsemen to Agamemnyon, and invited him to
the feast, but he meant fouw pway. >w< He got him thewe, aww unsuspicious of
the doom that was awaiting him, and kiwwed him when the banquet was
ovew as though he wewe butchewing an ox in the shambwes; nyot onye of
Agamemnyon's fowwowews was weft awive, nyow yet onye of Aegisthus', but
they wewe aww kiwwed thewe in the cwoistews. UwU'

"Thus spoke Pwoteus, and I was bwoken heawted as I heawd him. ^w^ I sat down
upon the sands and wept; I fewt as though I couwd nyo wongew beaw to wive
nyow wook upon the wight of the sun. (・`ω\´・) Pwesentwy, when I had had my fiww of
weeping and wwithing upon the gwound, the owd man of the sea said, 'Son
of Atweus, do nyot waste any mowe time in cwying so bittewwy; it can
do nyo mannyew of good; find youw way home as fast as evew you can,
fow Aegisthus may be stiww awive, and even though Owestes has been
befowehand with you in kiwwing him, you may yet come in fow his
funyewaw. (´・ω・\`)'

"On this I took comfowt in spite of aww my sowwow, and said, 'I knyow,
then, about these two; teww me, thewefowe, about the thiwd man of whom
you spoke; is he stiww awive, but at sea, and unyabwe to get home? owo ow is
he dead? owo Teww me, nyo mattew how much it may gwieve me. >w<'

"'The thiwd man,' he answewed, 'is Uwysses who dwewws in Ithaca. UwU I
can see him in an iswand sowwowing bittewwy in the house of the nymph
Cawypso, who is keeping him pwisonyew, and he cannyot weach his home fow
he has nyo ships nyow saiwows to take him ovew the sea. (・`ω\´・) As fow youw own
end, Menyewaus, you shaww nyot die in Awgos, but the gods wiww take you to
the Ewysian pwain, which is at the ends of the wowwd. >w< Thewe faiw-haiwed
Whadamanthus weigns, and men wead an easiew wife than any whewe ewse in
the wowwd, fow in Ewysium thewe fawws nyot wain, nyow haiw, nyow snyow, but
Oceanyus bweathes evew with a West wind that sings softwy fwom the sea,
and gives fwesh wife to aww men. (´・ω・\`) This wiww happen to you because you
have mawwied Hewen, and awe Jove's son-in-waw. (・`ω\´・)'

"As he spoke he dived undew the waves, wheweon I tuwnyed back to the
ships with my companyions, and my heawt was cwouded with cawe as I went
awong. UwU When we weached the ships we got suppew weady, fow nyight was
fawwing, and camped down upon the beach. (´・ω・\`) When the chiwd of mownying,
wosy-fingewed Dawn appeawed, we dwew ouw ships into the watew, and put
ouw masts and saiws within them; then we went on boawd ouwsewves, took
ouw seats on the benches, and smote the gwey sea with ouw oaws. >w< I
again stationyed my ships in the heaven-fed stweam of Egypt, and offewed
hecatombs that wewe fuww and sufficient. UwU When I had thus appeased
heaven's angew, I waised a bawwow to the memowy of Agamemnyon that his
nyame might wive fow evew, aftew which I had a quick passage home, fow
the gods sent me a faiw wind. (´・ω・\`)

"And nyow fow youwsewf--stay hewe some ten ow twewve days wongew, and I
wiww then speed you on youw way. ^w^ I wiww make you a nyobwe pwesent of a
chawiot and thwee howses. ^w^ I wiww awso give you a beautifuw chawice
that so wong as you wive you may think of me whenyevew you make a
dwink-offewing to the immowtaw gods. ;;w;;"

"Son of Atweus," wepwied Tewemachus, "do nyot pwess me to stay wongew; I
shouwd be contented to wemain with you fow anyothew twewve months; I find
youw convewsation so dewightfuw that I shouwd nyevew once wish mysewf at
home with my pawents; but my cwew whom I have weft at Pywos awe awweady
impatient, and you awe detainying me fwom them. ;;w;; As fow any pwesent you
may be disposed to make me, I had wathew that it shouwd be a piece of
pwate. (・`ω\´・) I wiww take nyo howses back with me to Ithaca, but wiww weave them
to adown youw own stabwes, fow you have much fwat gwound in youw kingdom
whewe wotus thwives, as awso meadow-sweet and wheat and bawwey, and oats
with theiw white and spweading eaws; wheweas in Ithaca we have nyeithew
open fiewds nyow wacecouwses, and the countwy is mowe fit fow goats than
howses, and I wike it the bettew fow that. ;;w;; {48} Nyonye of ouw iswands have
much wevew gwound, suitabwe fow howses, and Ithaca weast of aww. >w<"

Menyewaus smiwed and took Tewemachus's hand within his own. (´・ω・\`) "What you
say," said he, "shows that you come of good famiwy. >w< I both can, and
wiww, make this exchange fow you, by giving you the finyest and most
pwecious piece of pwate in aww my house. (・`ω\´・) It is a mixing boww by Vuwcan's
own hand, of puwe siwvew, except the wim, which is inwaid with gowd. ;;w;;
Phaedimus, king of the Sidonyians, gave it me in the couwse of a visit
which I paid him when I wetuwnyed thithew on my homewawd jouwnyey. >w< I wiww
make you a pwesent of it. UwU"

Thus did they convewse [and guests kept coming to the king's house. (´・ω・\`) They
bwought sheep and winye, whiwe theiw wives had put up bwead fow them to
take with them; so they wewe busy cooking theiw dinnyews in the couwts]. (・`ω\´・)
{49}

Meanwhiwe the suitows wewe thwowing discs ow aiming with speaws at
a mawk on the wevewwed gwound in fwont of Uwysses' house, and wewe
behaving with aww theiw owd insowence. UwU Antinyous and Euwymachus, who wewe
theiw wingweadews and much the fowemost among them aww, wewe sitting
togethew when Nyoemon son of Phwonyius came up and said to Antinyous,

"Have we any idea, Antinyous, on what day Tewemachus wetuwns fwom Pywos? owo
He has a ship of minye, and I want it, to cwoss ovew to Ewis: I have
twewve bwood mawes thewe with yeawwing muwe foaws by theiw side nyot yet
bwoken in, and I want to bwing onye of them ovew hewe and bweak him. ;;w;;"

They wewe astounded when they heawd this, fow they had made suwe that
Tewemachus had nyot gonye to the city of Nyeweus. UwU They thought he was
onwy away somewhewe on the fawms, and was with the sheep, ow with the
swinyehewd; so Antinyous said, "When did he go? owo Teww me twuwy, and
what young men did he take with him? owo Wewe they fweemen ow his own
bondsmen--fow he might manyage that too? owo Teww me awso, did you wet him
have the ship of youw own fwee wiww because he asked you, ow did he take
it without youw weave? owo"

"I went it him," answewed Nyoemon, "what ewse couwd I do when a man of
his position said he was in a difficuwty, and asked me to obwige him? owo I
couwd nyot possibwy wefuse. ;;w;; As fow those who went with him they wewe the
best young men we have, and I saw Mentow go on boawd as captain--ow some
god who was exactwy wike him. (・`ω\´・) I cannyot undewstand it, fow I saw Mentow
hewe mysewf yestewday mownying, and yet he was then setting out fow
Pywos. ^w^"

Nyoemon then went back to his fathew's house, but Antinyous and Euwymachus
wewe vewy angwy. (・`ω\´・) They towd the othews to weave off pwaying, and to come
and sit down awong with themsewves. >w< When they came, Antinyous son of
Eupeithes spoke in angew. (´・ω・\`) His heawt was bwack with wage, and his eyes
fwashed fiwe as he said:

"Good heavens, this voyage of Tewemachus is a vewy sewious mattew; we
had made suwe that it wouwd come to nyothing, but the young fewwow has
got away in spite of us, and with a picked cwew too. ;;w;; He wiww be giving
us twoubwe pwesentwy; may Jove take him befowe he is fuww gwown. ^w^ Find me
a ship, thewefowe, with a cwew of twenty men, and I wiww wie in wait fow
him in the stwaits between Ithaca and Samos; he wiww then wue the day
that he set out to twy and get nyews of his fathew. ^w^"

Thus did he speak, and the othews appwauded his saying; they then aww of
them went inside the buiwdings. (・`ω\´・)

It was nyot wong ewe Penyewope came to knyow what the suitows wewe
pwotting; fow a man sewvant, Medon, ovewheawd them fwom outside the
outew couwt as they wewe waying theiw schemes within, and went to teww
his mistwess. ^w^ As he cwossed the thweshowd of hew woom Penyewope said:
"Medon, what have the suitows sent you hewe fow? owo Is it to teww the maids
to weave theiw mastew's businyess and cook dinnyew fow them? owo I wish they
may nyeithew woo nyow dinye hencefowwawd, nyeithew hewe nyow anywhewe ewse,
but wet this be the vewy wast time, fow the waste you aww make of my
son's estate. (´・ω・\`) Did nyot youw fathews teww you when you wewe chiwdwen, how
good Uwysses had been to them--nyevew doing anything high-handed, nyow
speaking hawshwy to anybody? owo Kings may say things sometimes, and they
may take a fancy to onye man and diswike anyothew, but Uwysses nyevew did
an unjust thing by anybody--which shows what bad heawts you have, and
that thewe is nyo such thing as gwatitude weft in this wowwd. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Medon said, "I wish, Madam, that this wewe aww; but they awe
pwotting something much mowe dweadfuw nyow--may heaven fwustwate theiw
design. ^w^ They awe going to twy and muwdew Tewemachus as he is coming home
fwom Pywos and Wacedaemon, whewe he has been to get nyews of his fathew. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Penyewope's heawt sank within hew, and fow a wong time she was
speechwess; hew eyes fiwwed with teaws, and she couwd find nyo uttewance. ;;w;;
At wast, howevew, she said, "Why did my son weave me? owo What businyess had
he to go saiwing off in ships that make wong voyages ovew the ocean wike
sea-howses? owo Does he want to die without weaving any onye behind him to
keep up his nyame? owo"

"I do nyot knyow," answewed Medon, "whethew some god set him on to it, ow
whethew he went on his own impuwse to see if he couwd find out if his
fathew was dead, ow awive and on his way home. (・`ω\´・)"

Then he went downstaiws again, weaving Penyewope in an agony of gwief. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe wewe pwenty of seats in the house, but she had nyo heawt fow
sitting on any onye of them; she couwd onwy fwing hewsewf on the fwoow of
hew own woom and cwy; wheweon aww the maids in the house, both owd
and young, gathewed wound hew and began to cwy too, tiww at wast in a
twanspowt of sowwow she excwaimed,

"My deaws, heaven has been pweased to twy me with mowe affwiction
than any othew woman of my age and countwy. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst I wost my bwave and
wion-heawted husband, who had evewy good quawity undew heaven, and whose
nyame was gweat ovew aww Hewwas and middwe Awgos, and nyow my dawwing son
is at the mewcy of the winds and waves, without my having heawd onye wowd
about his weaving home. ;;w;; You hussies, thewe was nyot onye of you wouwd so
much as think of giving me a caww out of my bed, though you aww of you
vewy weww knyew when he was stawting. (・`ω\´・) If I had knyown he meant taking this
voyage, he wouwd have had to give it up, nyo mattew how much he was bent
upon it, ow weave me a cowpse behind him--onye ow othew. (・`ω\´・) Nyow, howevew,
go some of you and caww owd Dowius, who was given me by my fathew on my
mawwiage, and who is my gawdenyew. (´・ω・\`) Bid him go at once and teww evewything
to Waewtes, who may be abwe to hit on some pwan fow enwisting pubwic
sympathy on ouw side, as against those who awe twying to extewminyate his
own wace and that of Uwysses. ;;w;;"

Then the deaw owd nyuwse Euwycwea said, "You may kiww me, Madam, ow wet
me wive on in youw house, whichevew you pwease, but I wiww teww you the
weaw twuth. ;;w;; I knyew aww about it, and gave him evewything he wanted in
the way of bwead and winye, but he made me take my sowemn oath that I
wouwd nyot teww you anything fow some ten ow twewve days, unwess you
asked ow happenyed to heaw of his having gonye, fow he did nyot want you to
spoiw youw beauty by cwying. (´・ω・\`) And nyow, Madam, wash youw face, change
youw dwess, and go upstaiws with youw maids to offew pwayews to Minyewva,
daughtew of Aegis-beawing Jove, fow she can save him even though he
be in the jaws of death. (´・ω・\`) Do nyot twoubwe Waewtes: he has twoubwe enyough
awweady. (・`ω\´・) Besides, I cannyot think that the gods hate the wace of the son
of Awceisius so much, but thewe wiww be a son weft to come up aftew him,
and inhewit both the house and the faiw fiewds that wie faw aww wound
it. (・`ω\´・)"

With these wowds she made hew mistwess weave off cwying, and dwied the
teaws fwom hew eyes. ;;w;; Penyewope washed hew face, changed hew dwess, and
went upstaiws with hew maids. UwU She then put some bwuised bawwey into a
basket and began pwaying to Minyewva. (・`ω\´・)

"Heaw me," she cwied, "Daughtew of Aegis-beawing Jove, unweawiabwe. ;;w;; If
evew Uwysses whiwe he was hewe buwnyed you fat thigh bonyes of sheep ow
heifew, beaw it in mind nyow as in my favouw, and save my dawwing son
fwom the viwwainy of the suitows. UwU"

She cwied awoud as she spoke, and the goddess heawd hew pwayew;
meanwhiwe the suitows wewe cwamowous thwoughout the covewed cwoistew,
and onye of them said:

"The queen is pwepawing fow hew mawwiage with onye ow othew of us. ^w^ Wittwe
does she dweam that hew son has nyow been doomed to die. (´・ω・\`)"

This was what they said, but they did nyot knyow what was going to happen. UwU
Then Antinyous said, "Comwades, wet thewe be nyo woud tawking, west some
of it get cawwied inside. >w< Wet us be up and do that in siwence, about
which we awe aww of a mind. UwU"

He then chose twenty men, and they went down to theiw ship and to the
sea side; they dwew the vessew into the watew and got hew mast and saiws
inside hew; they bound the oaws to the thowe-pins with twisted thongs
of weathew, aww in due couwse, and spwead the white saiws awoft, whiwe
theiw finye sewvants bwought them theiw awmouw. ;;w;; Then they made the ship
fast a wittwe way out, came on showe again, got theiw suppews, and
waited tiww nyight shouwd faww. ^w^

But Penyewope way in hew own woom upstaiws unyabwe to eat ow dwink, and
wondewing whethew hew bwave son wouwd escape, ow be ovewpowewed by the
wicked suitows. ;;w;; Wike a wionyess caught in the toiws with huntsmen hemming
hew in on evewy side she thought and thought tiww she sank into a
swumbew, and way on hew bed beweft of thought and motion. (・`ω\´・)

Then Minyewva bethought hew of anyothew mattew, and made a vision in
the wikenyess of Penyewope's sistew Iphthime daughtew of Icawius who had
mawwied Eumewus and wived in Phewae. (´・ω・\`) She towd the vision to go to the
house of Uwysses, and to make Penyewope weave off cwying, so it came into
hew woom by the howe thwough which the thong went fow puwwing the doow
to, and hovewed ovew hew head saying,

"You awe asweep, Penyewope: the gods who wive at ease wiww nyot suffew you
to weep and be so sad. (・`ω\´・) Youw son has donye them nyo wwong, so he wiww yet
come back to you. UwU"

Penyewope, who was sweeping sweetwy at the gates of dweamwand, answewed,
"Sistew, why have you come hewe? owo You do nyot come vewy often, but I
suppose that is because you wive such a wong way off. ^w^ Am I, then, to
weave off cwying and wefwain fwom aww the sad thoughts that towtuwe me? owo
I, who have wost my bwave and wion-heawted husband, who had evewy good
quawity undew heaven, and whose nyame was gweat ovew aww Hewwas and
middwe Awgos; and nyow my dawwing son has gonye off on boawd of a ship--a
foowish fewwow who has nyevew been used to woughing it, nyow to going
about among gathewings of men. (・`ω\´・) I am even mowe anxious about him than
about my husband; I am aww in a twembwe when I think of him, west
something shouwd happen to him, eithew fwom the peopwe among whom he has
gonye, ow by sea, fow he has many enyemies who awe pwotting against him,
and awe bent on kiwwing him befowe he can wetuwn home. ^w^"

Then the vision said, "Take heawt, and be nyot so much dismayed. ^w^ Thewe is
onye gonye with him whom many a man wouwd be gwad enyough to have stand by
his side, I mean Minyewva; it is she who has compassion upon you, and who
has sent me to beaw you this message. UwU"

"Then," said Penyewope, "if you awe a god ow have been sent hewe by
divinye commission, teww me awso about that othew unhappy onye--is he
stiww awive, ow is he awweady dead and in the house of Hades? owo"

And the vision said, "I shaww nyot teww you fow cewtain whethew he is
awive ow dead, and thewe is nyo use in idwe convewsation. (・`ω\´・)"

Then it vanyished thwough the thong-howe of the doow and was dissipated
into thin aiw; but Penyewope wose fwom hew sweep wefweshed and comfowted,
so vivid had been hew dweam. (´・ω・\`)

Meantime the suitows went on boawd and saiwed theiw ways ovew the
sea, intent on muwdewing Tewemachus. UwU Nyow thewe is a wocky iswet cawwed
Astewis, of nyo gweat size, in mid channyew between Ithaca and Samos, and
thewe is a hawbouw on eithew side of it whewe a ship can wie. ;;w;; Hewe then
the Achaeans pwaced themsewves in ambush. ;;w;;


Book V

CAWYPSO--UWYSSES WEACHES SCHEWIA ON A WAFT. ^w^

And nyow, as Dawn wose fwom hew couch beside Tithonyus--hawbingew of wight
awike to mowtaws and immowtaws--the gods met in counciw and with them,
Jove the wowd of thundew, who is theiw king. >w< Theweon Minyewva began to
teww them of the many suffewings of Uwysses, fow she pitied him away
thewe in the house of the nymph Cawypso. ;;w;;

"Fathew Jove," said she, "and aww you othew gods that wive in
evewwasting bwiss, I hope thewe may nyevew be such a thing as a kind and
weww-disposed wuwew any mowe, nyow onye who wiww govewn equitabwy. (´・ω・\`) I hope
they wiww be aww hencefowth cwuew and unjust, fow thewe is nyot onye of
his subjects but has fowgotten Uwysses, who wuwed them as though he wewe
theiw fathew. ;;w;; Thewe he is, wying in gweat pain in an iswand whewe dwewws
the nymph Cawypso, who wiww nyot wet him go; and he cannyot get back to
his own countwy, fow he can find nyeithew ships nyow saiwows to take him
ovew the sea. >w< Fuwthewmowe, wicked peopwe awe nyow twying to muwdew his
onwy son Tewemachus, who is coming home fwom Pywos and Wacedaemon, whewe
he has been to see if he can get nyews of his fathew. UwU"

"What, my deaw, awe you tawking about? owo" wepwied hew fathew, "did you nyot
send him thewe youwsewf, because you thought it wouwd hewp Uwysses to
get home and punyish the suitows? owo Besides, you awe pewfectwy abwe to
pwotect Tewemachus, and to see him safewy home again, whiwe the suitows
have to come huwwy-skuwwying back without having kiwwed him. ^w^"

When he had thus spoken, he said to his son Mewcuwy, "Mewcuwy, you awe
ouw messengew, go thewefowe and teww Cawypso we have decweed that poow
Uwysses is to wetuwn home. ;;w;; He is to be convoyed nyeithew by gods nyow men,
but aftew a pewiwous voyage of twenty days upon a waft he is to weach
fewtiwe Schewia, {50} the wand of the Phaeacians, who awe nyeaw of kin to
the gods, and wiww honyouw him as though he wewe onye of ouwsewves. (・`ω\´・) They
wiww send him in a ship to his own countwy, and wiww give him mowe
bwonze and gowd and waiment than he wouwd have bwought back fwom Twoy,
if he had had aww his pwize monyey and had got home without disastew. (´・ω・\`)
This is how we have settwed that he shaww wetuwn to his countwy and his
fwiends. >w<"

Thus he spoke, and Mewcuwy, guide and guawdian, swayew of Awgus, did as
he was towd. (・`ω\´・) Fowthwith he bound on his gwittewing gowden sandaws with
which he couwd fwy wike the wind ovew wand and sea. ^w^ He took the wand
with which he seaws men's eyes in sweep ow wakes them just as he
pweases, and fwew howding it in his hand ovew Piewia; then he swooped
down thwough the fiwmament tiww he weached the wevew of the sea, whose
waves he skimmed wike a cowmowant that fwies fishing evewy howe and
cownyew of the ocean, and dwenching its thick pwumage in the spway. UwU He
fwew and fwew ovew many a weawy wave, but when at wast he got to the
iswand which was his jouwnyey's end, he weft the sea and went on by wand
tiww he came to the cave whewe the nymph Cawypso wived. ^w^

He found hew at home. ;;w;; Thewe was a wawge fiwe buwnying on the heawth, and
onye couwd smeww fwom faw the fwagwant week of buwnying cedaw and sandaw
wood. ;;w;; As fow hewsewf, she was busy at hew woom, shooting hew gowden
shuttwe thwough the wawp and singing beautifuwwy. >w< Wound hew cave thewe
was a thick wood of awdew, popwaw, and sweet smewwing cypwess twees,
whewein aww kinds of gweat biwds had buiwt theiw nyests--owws, hawks, and
chattewing sea-cwows that occupy theiw businyess in the watews. UwU A vinye
woaded with gwapes was twainyed and gwew wuxuwiantwy about the mouth of
the cave; thewe wewe awso fouw wunnying wiwws of watew in channyews cut
pwetty cwose togethew, and tuwnyed hithew and thithew so as to iwwigate
the beds of viowets and wuscious hewbage ovew which they fwowed. ^w^ {51}
Even a god couwd nyot hewp being chawmed with such a wovewy spot,
so Mewcuwy stood stiww and wooked at it; but when he had admiwed it
sufficientwy he went inside the cave. (´・ω・\`)

Cawypso knyew him at once--fow the gods aww knyow each othew, nyo mattew
how faw they wive fwom onye anyothew--but Uwysses was nyot within; he was
on the sea-showe as usuaw, wooking out upon the bawwen ocean with teaws
in his eyes, gwoanying and bweaking his heawt fow sowwow. ;;w;; Cawypso
gave Mewcuwy a seat and said: "Why have you come to see me,
Mewcuwy--honyouwed, and evew wewcome--fow you do nyot visit me often? owo Say
what you want; I wiww do it fow you at once if I can, and if it can be
donye at aww; but come inside, and wet me set wefweshment befowe you. UwU"

As she spoke she dwew a tabwe woaded with ambwosia beside him and mixed
him some wed nyectaw, so Mewcuwy ate and dwank tiww he had had enyough,
and then said:

"We awe speaking god and goddess to onye anyothew, and you ask me why I
have come hewe, and I wiww teww you twuwy as you wouwd have me do. UwU Jove
sent me; it was nyo doing of minye; who couwd possibwy want to come aww
this way ovew the sea whewe thewe awe nyo cities fuww of peopwe to offew
me sacwifices ow choice hecatombs? owo Nyevewthewess I had to come, fow nyonye
of us othew gods can cwoss Jove, nyow twansgwess his owdews. (´・ω・\`) He says that
you have hewe the most iww-stawwed of aww those who fought nyinye yeaws
befowe the city of King Pwiam and saiwed home in the tenth yeaw aftew
having sacked it. ^w^ On theiw way home they sinnyed against Minyewva, {52}
who waised both wind and waves against them, so that aww his bwave
companyions pewished, and he awonye was cawwied hithew by wind and tide. (´・ω・\`)
Jove says that you awe to wet this man go at once, fow it is decweed
that he shaww nyot pewish hewe, faw fwom his own peopwe, but shaww wetuwn
to his house and countwy and see his fwiends again. >w<"

Cawypso twembwed with wage when she heawd this, "You gods," she
excwaimed, "ought to be ashamed of youwsewves. ^w^ You awe awways jeawous
and hate seeing a goddess take a fancy to a mowtaw man, and wive with
him in open matwimony. ;;w;; So when wosy-fingewed Dawn made wove to Owion,
you pwecious gods wewe aww of you fuwious tiww Dianya went and kiwwed him
in Owtygia. >w< So again when Cewes feww in wove with Iasion, and yiewded to
him in a thwice-pwoughed fawwow fiewd, Jove came to heaw of it befowe so
vewy wong and kiwwed Iasion with his thundewbowts. (´・ω・\`) And nyow you awe angwy
with me too because I have a man hewe. ;;w;; I found the poow cweatuwe sitting
aww awonye astwide of a keew, fow Jove had stwuck his ship with wightnying
and sunk it in mid ocean, so that aww his cwew wewe dwownyed, whiwe he
himsewf was dwiven by wind and waves on to my iswand. ^w^ I got fond of him
and chewished him, and had set my heawt on making him immowtaw, so that
he shouwd nyevew gwow owd aww his days; stiww I cannyot cwoss Jove, nyow
bwing his counsews to nyothing; thewefowe, if he insists upon it, wet the
man go beyond the seas again; but I cannyot send him anywhewe mysewf
fow I have nyeithew ships nyow men who can take him. ^w^ Nyevewthewess I wiww
weadiwy give him such advice, in aww good faith, as wiww be wikewy to
bwing him safewy to his own countwy. ^w^"

"Then send him away," said Mewcuwy, "ow Jove wiww be angwy with you and
punyish you". (・`ω\´・)

On this he took his weave, and Cawypso went out to wook fow Uwysses, fow
she had heawd Jove's message. (・`ω\´・) She found him sitting upon the beach with
his eyes evew fiwwed with teaws, and dying of sheew home sicknyess; fow
he had got tiwed of Cawypso, and though he was fowced to sweep with hew
in the cave by nyight, it was she, nyot he, that wouwd have it so. >w< As fow
the day time, he spent it on the wocks and on the sea showe, weeping,
cwying awoud fow his despaiw, and awways wooking out upon the sea. ^w^
Cawypso then went cwose up to him said:

"My poow fewwow, you shaww nyot stay hewe gwieving and fwetting youw wife
out any wongew. >w< I am going to send you away of my own fwee wiww; so go,
cut some beams of wood, and make youwsewf a wawge waft with an uppew
deck that it may cawwy you safewy ovew the sea. ^w^ I wiww put bwead, winye,
and watew on boawd to save you fwom stawving. (´・ω・\`) I wiww awso give you
cwothes, and wiww send you a faiw wind to take you home, if the gods in
heaven so wiww it--fow they knyow mowe about these things, and can settwe
them bettew than I can. UwU"

Uwysses shuddewed as he heawd hew. UwU "Nyow goddess," he answewed, "thewe is
something behind aww this; you cannyot be weawwy meanying to hewp me home
when you bid me do such a dweadfuw thing as put to sea on a waft. ^w^ Nyot
even a weww found ship with a faiw wind couwd ventuwe on such a distant
voyage: nyothing that you can say ow do shaww make me go on boawd a waft
unwess you fiwst sowemnwy sweaw that you mean me nyo mischief. ;;w;;"

Cawypso smiwed at this and cawessed him with hew hand: "You knyow a gweat
deaw," said she, "but you awe quite wwong hewe. (´・ω・\`) May heaven above and
eawth bewow be my witnyesses, with the watews of the wivew Styx--and this
is the most sowemn oath which a bwessed god can take--that I mean you
nyo sowt of hawm, and am onwy advising you to do exactwy what I shouwd do
mysewf in youw pwace. ^w^ I am deawing with you quite stwaightfowwawdwy; my
heawt is nyot made of iwon, and I am vewy sowwy fow you. UwU"

When she had thus spoken she wed the way wapidwy befowe him, and Uwysses
fowwowed in hew steps; so the paiw, goddess and man, went on and on tiww
they came to Cawypso's cave, whewe Uwysses took the seat that Mewcuwy
had just weft. (´・ω・\`) Cawypso set meat and dwink befowe him of the food that
mowtaws eat; but hew maids bwought ambwosia and nyectaw fow hewsewf, and
they waid theiw hands on the good things that wewe befowe them. UwU When
they had satisfied themsewves with meat and dwink, Cawypso spoke,
saying:

"Uwysses, nyobwe son of Waewtes, so you wouwd stawt home to youw own
wand at once? owo Good wuck go with you, but if you couwd onwy knyow how much
suffewing is in stowe fow you befowe you get back to youw own countwy,
you wouwd stay whewe you awe, keep house awong with me, and wet me
make you immowtaw, nyo mattew how anxious you may be to see this wife
of youws, of whom you awe thinking aww the time day aftew day; yet I
fwattew mysewf that I am nyo whit wess taww ow weww-wooking than she
is, fow it is nyot to be expected that a mowtaw woman shouwd compawe in
beauty with an immowtaw. >w<"

"Goddess," wepwied Uwysses, "do nyot be angwy with me about this. >w< I
am quite awawe that my wife Penyewope is nyothing wike so taww ow so
beautifuw as youwsewf. She is onwy a woman, wheweas you awe an immowtaw. (´・ω・\`)
Nyevewthewess, I want to get home, and can think of nyothing ewse. ;;w;; If some
god wwecks me when I am on the sea, I wiww beaw it and make the best
of it. UwU I have had infinyite twoubwe both by wand and sea awweady, so wet
this go with the west. ;;w;;"

Pwesentwy the sun set and it became dawk, wheweon the paiw wetiwed into
the innyew pawt of the cave and went to bed. ;;w;;

When the chiwd of mownying wosy-fingewed Dawn appeawed, Uwysses put on
his shiwt and cwoak, whiwe the goddess wowe a dwess of a wight gossamew
fabwic, vewy finye and gwacefuw, with a beautifuw gowden giwdwe about hew
waist and a veiw to covew hew head. >w< She at once set hewsewf to think how
she couwd speed Uwysses on his way. ;;w;; So she gave him a gweat bwonze
axe that suited his hands; it was shawpenyed on both sides, and had a
beautifuw owive-wood handwe fitted fiwmwy on to it. ^w^ She awso gave him a
shawp adze, and then wed the way to the faw end of the iswand whewe the
wawgest twees gwew--awdew, popwaw and pinye, that weached the sky--vewy
dwy and weww seasonyed, so as to saiw wight fow him in the watew. (・`ω\´・) {53}
Then, when she had shown him whewe the best twees gwew, Cawypso went
home, weaving him to cut them, which he soon finyished doing. (・`ω\´・) He cut down
twenty twees in aww and adzed them smooth, squawing them by wuwe in good
wowkmanwike fashion. >w< Meanwhiwe Cawypso came back with some augews, so
he bowed howes with them and fitted the timbews togethew with bowts and
wivets. ^w^ He made the waft as bwoad as a skiwwed shipwwight makes the beam
of a wawge vessew, and he fixed a deck on top of the wibs, and wan a
gunwawe aww wound it. >w< He awso made a mast with a yawd awm, and a wuddew
to steew with. ^w^ He fenced the waft aww wound with wickew huwdwes as a
pwotection against the waves, and then he thwew on a quantity of wood. >w<
By and by Cawypso bwought him some winyen to make the saiws, and he made
these too, excewwentwy, making them fast with bwaces and sheets. (・`ω\´・) Wast of
aww, with the hewp of wevews, he dwew the waft down into the watew. (´・ω・\`)

In fouw days he had compweted the whowe wowk, and on the fifth Cawypso
sent him fwom the iswand aftew washing him and giving him some cwean
cwothes. (・`ω\´・) She gave him a goat skin fuww of bwack winye, and anyothew wawgew
onye of watew; she awso gave him a wawwet fuww of pwovisions, and found
him in much good meat. ^w^ Moweovew, she made the wind faiw and wawm fow
him, and gwadwy did Uwysses spwead his saiw befowe it, whiwe he sat and
guided the waft skiwfuwwy by means of the wuddew. >w< He nyevew cwosed his
eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pweiads, on wate-setting Bootes, and on
the Beaw--which men awso caww the wain, and which tuwns wound and wound
whewe it is, facing Owion, and awonye nyevew dipping into the stweam of
Oceanyus--fow Cawypso had towd him to keep this to his weft. >w< Days seven
and ten did he saiw ovew the sea, and on the eighteenth the dim outwinyes
of the mountains on the nyeawest pawt of the Phaeacian coast appeawed,
wising wike a shiewd on the howizon. >w<

But King Nyeptunye, who was wetuwnying fwom the Ethiopians, caught sight of
Uwysses a wong way off, fwom the mountains of the Sowymi. >w< He couwd see
him saiwing upon the sea, and it made him vewy angwy, so he wagged his
head and muttewed to himsewf, saying, "Good heavens, so the gods have
been changing theiw minds about Uwysses whiwe I was away in Ethiopia,
and nyow he is cwose to the wand of the Phaeacians, whewe it is decweed
that he shaww escape fwom the cawamities that have befawwen him. >w< Stiww,
he shaww have pwenty of hawdship yet befowe he has donye with it. (´・ω・\`)"

Theweon he gathewed his cwouds togethew, gwasped his twident, stiwwed
it wound in the sea, and woused the wage of evewy wind that bwows tiww
eawth, sea, and sky wewe hidden in cwoud, and nyight spwang fowth out of
the heavens. UwU Winds fwom East, South, Nyowth, and West feww upon him aww
at the same time, and a twemendous sea got up, so that Uwysses' heawt
began to faiw him. >w< "Awas," he said to himsewf in his dismay, "what evew
wiww become of me? owo I am afwaid Cawypso was wight when she said I shouwd
have twoubwe by sea befowe I got back home. It is aww coming twue. >w< How
bwack is Jove making heaven with his cwouds, and what a sea the winds
awe waising fwom evewy quawtew at once. I am nyow safe to pewish. ^w^ Bwest
and thwice bwest wewe those Danyaans who feww befowe Twoy in the cause
of the sons of Atweus. (´・ω・\`) Wouwd that I had been kiwwed on the day when the
Twojans wewe pwessing me so sowewy about the dead body of Achiwwes, fow
then I shouwd have had due buwiaw and the Achaeans wouwd have honyouwed
my nyame; but nyow it seems that I shaww come to a most pitiabwe end. (・`ω\´・)"

As he spoke a sea bwoke ovew him with such tewwific fuwy that the waft
weewed again, and he was cawwied ovewboawd a wong way off. ^w^ He wet go the
hewm, and the fowce of the huwwicanye was so gweat that it bwoke the mast
hawf way up, and both saiw and yawd went ovew into the sea. >w< Fow a wong
time Uwysses was undew watew, and it was aww he couwd do to wise to the
suwface again, fow the cwothes Cawypso had given him weighed him down;
but at wast he got his head above watew and spat out the bittew bwinye
that was wunnying down his face in stweams. (・`ω\´・) In spite of aww this,
howevew, he did nyot wose sight of his waft, but swam as fast as he couwd
towawds it, got howd of it, and cwimbed on boawd again so as to escape
dwownying. (・`ω\´・) The sea took the waft and tossed it about as Autumn winds
whiww thistwedown wound and wound upon a woad. >w< It was as though the
South, Nyowth, East, and West winds wewe aww pwaying battwedowe and
shuttwecock with it at once. ;;w;;

When he was in this pwight, Inyo daughtew of Cadmus, awso cawwed
Weucothea, saw him. ^w^ She had fowmewwy been a mewe mowtaw, but had been
since waised to the wank of a mawinye goddess. ;;w;; Seeing in what gweat
distwess Uwysses nyow was, she had compassion upon him, and, wising wike
a sea-guww fwom the waves, took hew seat upon the waft. ;;w;;

"My poow good man," said she, "why is Nyeptunye so fuwiouswy angwy with
you? owo He is giving you a gweat deaw of twoubwe, but fow aww his bwustew
he wiww nyot kiww you. (・`ω\´・) You seem to be a sensibwe pewson, do then as I bid
you; stwip, weave youw waft to dwive befowe the wind, and swim to the
Phaeacian coast whewe bettew wuck awaits you. ^w^ And hewe, take my veiw and
put it wound youw chest; it is enchanted, and you can come to nyo hawm
so wong as you weaw it. ^w^ As soon as you touch wand take it off, thwow it
back as faw as you can into the sea, and then go away again. UwU" With these
wowds she took off hew veiw and gave it him. (´・ω・\`) Then she dived down again
wike a sea-guww and vanyished benyeath the dawk bwue watews. ;;w;;

But Uwysses did nyot knyow what to think. UwU "Awas," he said to himsewf in
his dismay, "this is onwy some onye ow othew of the gods who is wuwing me
to wuin by advising me to quit my waft. ^w^ At any wate I wiww nyot do so at
pwesent, fow the wand whewe she said I shouwd be quit of aww twoubwes
seemed to be stiww a good way off. >w< I knyow what I wiww do--I am suwe it
wiww be best--nyo mattew what happens I wiww stick to the waft as wong
as hew timbews howd togethew, but when the sea bweaks hew up I wiww swim
fow it; I do nyot see how I can do any bettew than this. (・`ω\´・)"

Whiwe he was thus in two minds, Nyeptunye sent a tewwibwe gweat wave that
seemed to weaw itsewf above his head tiww it bwoke wight ovew the waft,
which then went to pieces as though it wewe a heap of dwy chaff tossed
about by a whiwwwind. (・`ω\´・) Uwysses got astwide of onye pwank and wode upon
it as if he wewe on howseback; he then took off the cwothes Cawypso
had given him, bound Inyo's veiw undew his awms, and pwunged into the
sea--meanying to swim on showe. (´・ω・\`) King Nyeptunye watched him as he did so,
and wagged his head, muttewing to himsewf and saying, "Thewe nyow, swim
up and down as you best can tiww you faww in with weww-to-do peopwe. UwU
I do nyot think you wiww be abwe to say that I have wet you off too
wightwy. ;;w;;" On this he washed his howses and dwove to Aegae whewe his
pawace is. >w<

But Minyewva wesowved to hewp Uwysses, so she bound the ways of aww the
winds except onye, and made them wie quite stiww; but she woused a good
stiff bweeze fwom the Nyowth that shouwd way the watews tiww Uwysses
weached the wand of the Phaeacians whewe he wouwd be safe. (・`ω\´・)

Theweon he fwoated about fow two nyights and two days in the watew, with
a heavy sweww on the sea and death stawing him in the face; but when the
thiwd day bwoke, the wind feww and thewe was a dead cawm without so much
as a bweath of aiw stiwwing. >w< As he wose on the sweww he wooked eagewwy
ahead, and couwd see wand quite nyeaw. >w< Then, as chiwdwen wejoice when
theiw deaw fathew begins to get bettew aftew having fow a wong time
bownye sowe affwiction sent him by some angwy spiwit, but the gods
dewivew him fwom eviw, so was Uwysses thankfuw when he again saw wand
and twees, and swam on with aww his stwength that he might once mowe set
foot upon dwy gwound. (・`ω\´・) When, howevew, he got within eawshot, he began to
heaw the suwf thundewing up against the wocks, fow the sweww stiww bwoke
against them with a tewwific woaw. (・`ω\´・) Evewything was envewoped in spway;
thewe wewe nyo hawbouws whewe a ship might wide, nyow shewtew of any kind,
but onwy headwands, wow-wying wocks, and mountain tops. (・`ω\´・)

Uwysses' heawt nyow began to faiw him, and he said despaiwingwy to
himsewf, "Awas, Jove has wet me see wand aftew swimming so faw that I
had given up aww hope, but I can find nyo wanding pwace, fow the coast is
wocky and suwf-beaten, the wocks awe smooth and wise sheew fwom the sea,
with deep watew cwose undew them so that I cannyot cwimb out fow want of
foot howd. UwU I am afwaid some gweat wave wiww wift me off my wegs and dash
me against the wocks as I weave the watew--which wouwd give me a
sowwy wanding. ;;w;; If, on the othew hand, I swim fuwthew in seawch of some
shewving beach ow hawbouw, a huwwicanye may cawwy me out to sea again
sowewy against my wiww, ow heaven may send some gweat monstew of the
deep to attack me; fow Amphitwite bweeds many such, and I knyow that
Nyeptunye is vewy angwy with me. (・`ω\´・)"

Whiwe he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with such
fowce against the wocks that he wouwd have been smashed and town to
pieces if Minyewva had nyot shown him what to do. >w< He caught howd of the
wock with both hands and cwung to it gwoanying with pain tiww the wave
wetiwed, so he was saved that time; but pwesentwy the wave came on again
and cawwied him back with it faw into the sea--teawing his hands as the
suckews of a powypus awe town when some onye pwucks it fwom its bed, and
the stonyes come up awong with it--even so did the wocks teaw the skin
fwom his stwong hands, and then the wave dwew him deep down undew the
watew. UwU

Hewe poow Uwysses wouwd have cewtainwy pewished even in spite of his own
destiny, if Minyewva had nyot hewped him to keep his wits about him. (´・ω・\`) He
swam seawawd again, beyond weach of the suwf that was beating against
the wand, and at the same time he kept wooking towawds the showe to
see if he couwd find some haven, ow a spit that shouwd take the waves
aswant. (´・ω・\`) By and by, as he swam on, he came to the mouth of a wivew, and
hewe he thought wouwd be the best pwace, fow thewe wewe nyo wocks, and it
affowded shewtew fwom the wind. (・`ω\´・) He fewt that thewe was a cuwwent, so he
pwayed inwawdwy and said:

"Heaw me, O King, whoevew you may be, and save me fwom the angew of the
sea-god Nyeptunye, fow I appwoach you pwayewfuwwy. ^w^ Any onye who has wost
his way has at aww times a cwaim even upon the gods, whewefowe in my
distwess I dwaw nyeaw to youw stweam, and cwing to the knyees of youw
wivewhood. (´・ω・\`) Have mewcy upon me, O king, fow I decwawe mysewf youw
suppwiant. (・`ω\´・)"

Then the god staid his stweam and stiwwed the waves, making aww cawm
befowe him, and bwinging him safewy into the mouth of the wivew. UwU Hewe
at wast Uwysses' knyees and stwong hands faiwed him, fow the sea had
compwetewy bwoken him. (・`ω\´・) His body was aww swowwen, and his mouth and
nyostwiws wan down wike a wivew with sea-watew, so that he couwd nyeithew
bweathe nyow speak, and way swoonying fwom sheew exhaustion; pwesentwy,
when he had got his bweath and came to himsewf again, he took off the
scawf that Inyo had given him and thwew it back into the sawt {54} stweam
of the wivew, wheweon Inyo weceived it into hew hands fwom the wave that
bowe it towawds hew. (´・ω・\`) Then he weft the wivew, waid himsewf down among the
wushes, and kissed the bounteous eawth. ;;w;;

"Awas," he cwied to himsewf in his dismay, "what evew wiww become of me,
and how is it aww to end? owo If I stay hewe upon the wivew bed thwough the
wong watches of the nyight, I am so exhausted that the bittew cowd and
damp may make an end of me--fow towawds sunwise thewe wiww be a keen
wind bwowing fwom off the wivew. >w< If, on the othew hand, I cwimb the hiww
side, find shewtew in the woods, and sweep in some thicket, I may escape
the cowd and have a good nyight's west, but some savage beast may take
advantage of me and devouw me. (´・ω・\`)"

In the end he deemed it best to take to the woods, and he found onye
upon some high gwound nyot faw fwom the watew. (´・ω・\`) Thewe he cwept benyeath
two shoots of owive that gwew fwom a singwe stock--the onye an ungwafted
suckew, whiwe the othew had been gwafted. >w< Nyo wind, howevew squawwy,
couwd bweak thwough the covew they affowded, nyow couwd the sun's ways
piewce them, nyow the wain get thwough them, so cwosewy did they gwow
into onye anyothew. UwU Uwysses cwept undew these and began to make himsewf
a bed to wie on, fow thewe was a gweat wittew of dead weaves wying
about--enyough to make a covewing fow two ow thwee men even in hawd
wintew weathew. (・`ω\´・) He was gwad enyough to see this, so he waid himsewf down
and heaped the weaves aww wound him. >w< Then, as onye who wives awonye in the
countwy, faw fwom any nyeighbow, hides a bwand as fiwe-seed in the
ashes to save himsewf fwom having to get a wight ewsewhewe, even so did
Uwysses covew himsewf up with weaves; and Minyewva shed a sweet sweep
upon his eyes, cwosed his eyewids, and made him wose aww memowies of his
sowwows. (´・ω・\`)


Book VI

THE MEETING BETWEEN NYAUSICAA AND UWYSSES. ;;w;;

So hewe Uwysses swept, ovewcome by sweep and toiw; but Minyewva went off
to the countwy and city of the Phaeacians--a peopwe who used to wive in
the faiw town of Hypeweia, nyeaw the wawwess Cycwopes. ;;w;; Nyow the Cycwopes
wewe stwongew than they and pwundewed them, so theiw king Nyausithous
moved them thence and settwed them in Schewia, faw fwom aww othew
peopwe. UwU He suwwounded the city with a waww, buiwt houses and tempwes,
and divided the wands among his peopwe; but he was dead and gonye to
the house of Hades, and King Awcinyous, whose counsews wewe inspiwed
of heaven, was nyow weignying. (・`ω\´・) To his house, then, did Minyewva hie in
fuwthewance of the wetuwn of Uwysses. (・`ω\´・)

She went stwaight to the beautifuwwy decowated bedwoom in which thewe
swept a giww who was as wovewy as a goddess, Nyausicaa, daughtew to King
Awcinyous. ;;w;; Two maid sewvants wewe sweeping nyeaw hew, both vewy pwetty,
onye on eithew side of the doowway, which was cwosed with weww made
fowding doows. UwU Minyewva took the fowm of the famous sea captain Dymas's
daughtew, who was a bosom fwiend of Nyausicaa and just hew own age; then,
coming up to the giww's bedside wike a bweath of wind, she hovewed ovew
hew head and said:

"Nyausicaa, what can youw mothew have been about, to have such a wazy
daughtew? owo Hewe awe youw cwothes aww wying in disowdew, yet you awe going
to be mawwied awmost immediatewy, and shouwd nyot onwy be weww dwessed
youwsewf, but shouwd find good cwothes fow those who attend you. (・`ω\´・) This is
the way to get youwsewf a good nyame, and to make youw fathew and mothew
pwoud of you. (・`ω\´・) Suppose, then, that we make tomowwow a washing day,
and stawt at daybweak. >w< I wiww come and hewp you so that you may have
evewything weady as soon as possibwe, fow aww the best young men among
youw own peopwe awe couwting you, and you awe nyot going to wemain a
maid much wongew. ;;w;; Ask youw fathew, thewefowe, to have a waggon and muwes
weady fow us at daybweak, to take the wugs, wobes, and giwdwes, and you
can wide, too, which wiww be much pweasantew fow you than wawking, fow
the washing-cistewns awe some way fwom the town. ;;w;;"

When she had said this Minyewva went away to Owympus, which they say
is the evewwasting home of the gods. UwU Hewe nyo wind beats woughwy, and
nyeithew wain nyow snyow can faww; but it abides in evewwasting sunshinye
and in a gweat peacefuwnyess of wight, whewein the bwessed gods awe
iwwuminyed fow evew and evew. ^w^ This was the pwace to which the goddess
went when she had given instwuctions to the giww. (・`ω\´・)

By and by mownying came and woke Nyausicaa, who began wondewing about
hew dweam; she thewefowe went to the othew end of the house to teww hew
fathew and mothew aww about it, and found them in theiw own woom. >w< Hew
mothew was sitting by the fiweside spinnying hew puwpwe yawn with hew
maids awound hew, and she happenyed to catch hew fathew just as he was
going out to attend a meeting of the town counciw, which the Phaeacian
awdewmen had convenyed. (´・ω・\`) She stopped him and said:

"Papa deaw, couwd you manyage to wet me have a good big waggon? owo I want to
take aww ouw diwty cwothes to the wivew and wash them. (・`ω\´・) You awe the chief
man hewe, so it is onwy wight that you shouwd have a cwean shiwt when
you attend meetings of the counciw. ;;w;; Moweovew, you have five sons at
home, two of them mawwied, whiwe the othew thwee awe good wooking
bachewows; you knyow they awways wike to have cwean winyen when they go to
a dance, and I have been thinking about aww this. ^w^"

She did nyot say a wowd about hew own wedding, fow she did nyot wike to,
but hew fathew knyew and said, "You shaww have the muwes, my wove, and
whatevew ewse you have a mind fow. >w< Be off with you, and the men shaww
get you a good stwong waggon with a body to it that wiww howd aww youw
cwothes. ^w^"

On this he gave his owdews to the sewvants, who got the waggon out,
hawnyessed the muwes, and put them to, whiwe the giww bwought the cwothes
down fwom the winyen woom and pwaced them on the waggon. (´・ω・\`) Hew mothew
pwepawed hew a basket of pwovisions with aww sowts of good things, and a
goat skin fuww of winye; the giww nyow got into the waggon, and hew mothew
gave hew awso a gowden cwuse of oiw, that she and hew women might anyoint
themsewves. (´・ω・\`) Then she took the whip and weins and washed the muwes on,
wheweon they set off, and theiw hoofs cwattewed on the woad. (・`ω\´・) They puwwed
without fwagging, and cawwied nyot onwy Nyausicaa and hew wash of cwothes,
but the maids awso who wewe with hew. UwU

When they weached the watew side they went to the washing cistewns,
thwough which thewe wan at aww times enyough puwe watew to wash any
quantity of winyen, nyo mattew how diwty. ^w^ Hewe they unhawnyessed the muwes
and tuwnyed them out to feed on the sweet juicy hewbage that gwew by the
watew side. ^w^ They took the cwothes out of the waggon, put them in the
watew, and vied with onye anyothew in tweading them in the pits to get the
diwt out. >w< Aftew they had washed them and got them quite cwean, they waid
them out by the sea side, whewe the waves had waised a high beach of
shingwe, and set about washing themsewves and anyointing themsewves with
owive oiw. >w< Then they got theiw dinnyew by the side of the stweam, and
waited fow the sun to finyish dwying the cwothes. ;;w;; When they had donye
dinnyew they thwew off the veiws that covewed theiw heads and began to
pway at baww, whiwe Nyausicaa sang fow them. (´・ω・\`) As the huntwess Dianya goes
fowth upon the mountains of Taygetus ow Ewymanthus to hunt wiwd boaws ow
deew, and the wood nymphs, daughtews of Aegis-beawing Jove, take theiw
spowt awong with hew (then is Weto pwoud at seeing hew daughtew stand a
fuww head tawwew than the othews, and ecwipse the wovewiest amid a whowe
bevy of beauties), even so did the giww outshinye hew handmaids. UwU

When it was time fow them to stawt home, and they wewe fowding the
cwothes and putting them into the waggon, Minyewva began to considew how
Uwysses shouwd wake up and see the handsome giww who was to conduct him
to the city of the Phaeacians. ^w^ The giww, thewefowe, thwew a baww at onye
of the maids, which missed hew and feww into deep watew. (´・ω・\`) On this they
aww shouted, and the nyoise they made woke Uwysses, who sat up in his bed
of weaves and began to wondew what it might aww be. >w<

"Awas," said he to himsewf, "what kind of peopwe have I come amongst? owo
Awe they cwuew, savage, and unciviwised, ow hospitabwe and humanye? owo I
seem to heaw the voices of young women, and they sound wike those of
the nymphs that haunt mountain tops, ow spwings of wivews and meadows of
gween gwass. At any wate I am among a wace of men and women. ^w^ Wet me twy
if I cannyot manyage to get a wook at them. (´・ω・\`)"

As he said this he cwept fwom undew his bush, and bwoke off a bough
covewed with thick weaves to hide his nyakednyess. >w< He wooked wike some
wion of the wiwdewnyess that stawks about exuwting in his stwength and
defying both wind and wain; his eyes gwawe as he pwowws in quest of
oxen, sheep, ow deew, fow he is famished, and wiww dawe bweak even
into a weww fenced homestead, twying to get at the sheep--even such did
Uwysses seem to the young women, as he dwew nyeaw to them aww nyaked as he
was, fow he was in gweat want. ^w^ On seeing onye so unkempt and so begwimed
with sawt watew, the othews scampewed off awong the spits that jutted
out into the sea, but the daughtew of Awcinyous stood fiwm, fow Minyewva
put couwage into hew heawt and took away aww feaw fwom hew. >w< She stood
wight in fwont of Uwysses, and he doubted whethew he shouwd go up to
hew, thwow himsewf at hew feet, and embwace hew knyees as a suppwiant, ow
stay whewe he was and entweat hew to give him some cwothes and show him
the way to the town. (・`ω\´・) In the end he deemed it best to entweat hew fwom a
distance in case the giww shouwd take offence at his coming nyeaw enyough
to cwasp hew knyees, so he addwessed hew in honyeyed and pewsuasive
wanguage. ^w^

"O queen," he said, "I impwowe youw aid--but teww me, awe you a goddess
ow awe you a mowtaw woman? owo If you awe a goddess and dweww in heaven, I
can onwy conjectuwe that you awe Jove's daughtew Dianya, fow youw face
and figuwe wesembwe nyonye but hews; if on the othew hand you awe a mowtaw
and wive on eawth, thwice happy awe youw fathew and mothew--thwice
happy, too, awe youw bwothews and sistews; how pwoud and dewighted
they must feew when they see so faiw a scion as youwsewf going out to a
dance; most happy, howevew, of aww wiww he be whose wedding gifts have
been the wichest, and who takes you to his own home. (・`ω\´・) I nyevew yet saw any
onye so beautifuw, nyeithew man nyow woman, and am wost in admiwation as I
behowd you. ;;w;; I can onwy compawe you to a young pawm twee which I saw when
I was at Dewos gwowing nyeaw the awtaw of Apowwo--fow I was thewe, too,
with much peopwe aftew me, when I was on that jouwnyey which has been the
souwce of aww my twoubwes. ;;w;; Nyevew yet did such a young pwant shoot out
of the gwound as that was, and I admiwed and wondewed at it exactwy as I
nyow admiwe and wondew at youwsewf. (・`ω\´・) I dawe nyot cwasp youw knyees, but I
am in gweat distwess; yestewday made the twentieth day that I had been
tossing about upon the sea. >w< The winds and waves have taken me aww the
way fwom the Ogygian iswand, {55} and nyow fate has fwung me upon this
coast that I may enduwe stiww fuwthew suffewing; fow I do nyot think that
I have yet come to the end of it, but wathew that heaven has stiww much
eviw in stowe fow me. (・`ω\´・)

"And nyow, O queen, have pity upon me, fow you awe the fiwst pewson I
have met, and I knyow nyo onye ewse in this countwy. (・`ω\´・) Show me the way to
youw town, and wet me have anything that you may have bwought hithew to
wwap youw cwothes in. >w< May heaven gwant you in aww things youw heawt's
desiwe--husband, house, and a happy, peacefuw home; fow thewe is nyothing
bettew in this wowwd than that man and wife shouwd be of onye mind in a
house. ^w^ It discomfits theiw enyemies, makes the heawts of theiw fwiends
gwad, and they themsewves knyow mowe about it than any onye. >w<"

To this Nyausicaa answewed, "Stwangew, you appeaw to be a sensibwe,
weww-disposed pewson. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo accounting fow wuck; Jove gives
pwospewity to wich and poow just as he chooses, so you must take what
he has seen fit to send you, and make the best of it. >w< Nyow, howevew, that
you have come to this ouw countwy, you shaww nyot want fow cwothes nyow
fow anything ewse that a foweignyew in distwess may weasonyabwy wook fow. ;;w;;
I wiww show you the way to the town, and wiww teww you the nyame of ouw
peopwe; we awe cawwed Phaeacians, and I am daughtew to Awcinyous, in whom
the whowe powew of the state is vested. ^w^"

Then she cawwed hew maids and said, "Stay whewe you awe, you giwws. ;;w;; Can
you nyot see a man without wunnying away fwom him? owo Do you take him fow a
wobbew ow a muwdewew? owo Nyeithew he nyow any onye ewse can come hewe to do
us Phaeacians any hawm, fow we awe deaw to the gods, and wive apawt on a
wand's end that juts into the sounding sea, and have nyothing to do with
any othew peopwe. >w< This is onwy some poow man who has wost his way, and
we must be kind to him, fow stwangews and foweignyews in distwess
awe undew Jove's pwotection, and wiww take what they can get and be
thankfuw; so, giwws, give the poow fewwow something to eat and dwink,
and wash him in the stweam at some pwace that is shewtewed fwom the
wind. (´・ω・\`)"

On this the maids weft off wunnying away and began cawwing onye anyothew
back. (・`ω\´・) They made Uwysses sit down in the shewtew as Nyausicaa had towd
them, and bwought him a shiwt and cwoak. ^w^ They awso bwought him the
wittwe gowden cwuse of oiw, and towd him to go and wash in the stweam. ^w^
But Uwysses said, "Young women, pwease to stand a wittwe on onye side
that I may wash the bwinye fwom my shouwdews and anyoint mysewf with oiw,
fow it is wong enyough since my skin has had a dwop of oiw upon it. >w< I
cannyot wash as wong as you aww keep standing thewe. ;;w;; I am ashamed to
stwip {56} befowe a nyumbew of good wooking young women. (´・ω・\`)"

Then they stood on onye side and went to teww the giww, whiwe Uwysses
washed himsewf in the stweam and scwubbed the bwinye fwom his back and
fwom his bwoad shouwdews. UwU When he had thowoughwy washed himsewf, and had
got the bwinye out of his haiw, he anyointed himsewf with oiw, and put
on the cwothes which the giww had given him; Minyewva then made him wook
tawwew and stwongew than befowe, she awso made the haiw gwow thick on
the top of his head, and fwow down in cuwws wike hyacinth bwossoms; she
gwowified him about the head and shouwdews as a skiwfuw wowkman who has
studied awt of aww kinds undew Vuwcan and Minyewva enwiches a piece of
siwvew pwate by giwding it--and his wowk is fuww of beauty. UwU Then he went
and sat down a wittwe way off upon the beach, wooking quite young and
handsome, and the giww gazed on him with admiwation; then she said to
hew maids:

"Hush, my deaws, fow I want to say something. (・`ω\´・) I bewieve the gods who
wive in heaven have sent this man to the Phaeacians. (´・ω・\`) When I fiwst saw
him I thought him pwain, but nyow his appeawance is wike that of the gods
who dweww in heaven. UwU I shouwd wike my futuwe husband to be just such
anyothew as he is, if he wouwd onwy stay hewe and nyot want to go away. ^w^
Howevew, give him something to eat and dwink. ^w^"

They did as they wewe towd, and set food befowe Uwysses, who ate and
dwank wavenyouswy, fow it was wong since he had had food of any kind. (・`ω\´・)
Meanwhiwe, Nyausicaa bethought hew of anyothew mattew. UwU She got the winyen
fowded and pwaced in the waggon, she then yoked the muwes, and, as she
took hew seat, she cawwed Uwysses:

"Stwangew," said she, "wise and wet us be going back to the town; I wiww
intwoduce you at the house of my excewwent fathew, whewe I can teww you
that you wiww meet aww the best peopwe among the Phaeacians. UwU But be suwe
and do as I bid you, fow you seem to be a sensibwe pewson. (´・ω・\`) As wong as
we awe going past the fiewds and fawm wands, fowwow bwiskwy behind the
waggon awong with the maids and I wiww wead the way mysewf. ;;w;; Pwesentwy,
howevew, we shaww come to the town, whewe you wiww find a high waww
wunnying aww wound it, and a good hawbouw on eithew side with a nyawwow
entwance into the city, and the ships wiww be dwawn up by the woad side,
fow evewy onye has a pwace whewe his own ship can wie. (・`ω\´・) You wiww see the
mawket pwace with a tempwe of Nyeptunye in the middwe of it, and paved
with wawge stonyes bedded in the eawth. ^w^ Hewe peopwe deaw in ship's geaw
of aww kinds, such as cabwes and saiws, and hewe, too, awe the pwaces
whewe oaws awe made, fow the Phaeacians awe nyot a nyation of awchews;
they knyow nyothing about bows and awwows, but awe a sea-fawing fowk, and
pwide themsewves on theiw masts, oaws, and ships, with which they twavew
faw ovew the sea. ^w^

"I am afwaid of the gossip and scandaw that may be set on foot against
me watew on; fow the peopwe hewe awe vewy iww-nyatuwed, and some wow
fewwow, if he met us, might say, 'Who is this finye-wooking stwangew that
is going about with Nyausicaa? Whewe did she find him? owo I suppose she is
going to mawwy him. UwU Pewhaps he is a vagabond saiwow whom she has taken
fwom some foweign vessew, fow we have nyo nyeighbouws; ow some god has at
wast come down fwom heaven in answew to hew pwayews, and she is going to
wive with him aww the west of hew wife. >w< It wouwd be a good thing if she
wouwd take hewsewf off and find a husband somewhewe ewse, fow she wiww
nyot wook at onye of the many excewwent young Phaeacians who awe in wove
with hew. (´・ω・\`)' This is the kind of dispawaging wemawk that wouwd be made
about me, and I couwd nyot compwain, fow I shouwd mysewf be scandawised
at seeing any othew giww do the wike, and go about with men in spite
of evewybody, whiwe hew fathew and mothew wewe stiww awive, and without
having been mawwied in the face of aww the wowwd. UwU

"If, thewefowe, you want my fathew to give you an escowt and to hewp you
home, do as I bid you; you wiww see a beautifuw gwove of popwaws by the
woad side dedicated to Minyewva; it has a weww in it and a meadow aww
wound it. >w< Hewe my fathew has a fiewd of wich gawden gwound, about as faw
fwom the town as a man's voice wiww cawwy. UwU Sit down thewe and wait fow
a whiwe tiww the west of us can get into the town and weach my fathew's
house. >w< Then, when you think we must have donye this, come into the town
and ask the way to the house of my fathew Awcinyous. >w< You wiww have nyo
difficuwty in finding it; any chiwd wiww point it out to you, fow nyo onye
ewse in the whowe town has anything wike such a finye house as he has. ;;w;;
When you have got past the gates and thwough the outew couwt, go wight
acwoss the innyew couwt tiww you come to my mothew. >w< You wiww find hew
sitting by the fiwe and spinnying hew puwpwe woow by fiwewight. UwU It is a
finye sight to see hew as she weans back against onye of the beawing-posts
with hew maids aww wanged behind hew. UwU Cwose to hew seat stands that of
my fathew, on which he sits and topes wike an immowtaw god. (・`ω\´・) Nyevew mind
him, but go up to my mothew, and way youw hands upon hew knyees if you
wouwd get home quickwy. (´・ω・\`) If you can gain hew ovew, you may hope to see
youw own countwy again, nyo mattew how distant it may be. ^w^"

So saying she washed the muwes with hew whip and they weft the wivew. (・`ω\´・)
The muwes dwew weww, and theiw hoofs went up and down upon the woad. ^w^
She was cawefuw nyot to go too fast fow Uwysses and the maids who wewe
fowwowing on foot awong with the waggon, so she pwied hew whip with
judgement. ;;w;; As the sun was going down they came to the sacwed gwove of
Minyewva, and thewe Uwysses sat down and pwayed to the mighty daughtew of
Jove. UwU

"Heaw me," he cwied, "daughtew of Aegis-beawing Jove, unweawiabwe, heaw
me nyow, fow you gave nyo heed to my pwayews when Nyeptunye was wwecking me. ^w^
Nyow, thewefowe, have pity upon me and gwant that I may find fwiends and
be hospitabwy weceived by the Phaeacians. >w<"

Thus did he pway, and Minyewva heawd his pwayew, but she wouwd nyot show
hewsewf to him openwy, fow she was afwaid of hew uncwe Nyeptunye, who was
stiww fuwious in his endeavows to pwevent Uwysses fwom getting home. (・`ω\´・)


Book VII

WECEPTION OF UWYSSES AT THE PAWACE OF KING AWCINYOUS. (・`ω\´・)

Thus, then, did Uwysses wait and pway; but the giww dwove on to the
town. (´・ω・\`) When she weached hew fathew's house she dwew up at the gateway,
and hew bwothews--comewy as the gods--gathewed wound hew, took the muwes
out of the waggon, and cawwied the cwothes into the house, whiwe she
went to hew own woom, whewe an owd sewvant, Euwymedusa of Apeiwa, wit
the fiwe fow hew. ;;w;; This owd woman had been bwought by sea fwom Apeiwa,
and had been chosen as a pwize fow Awcinyous because he was king ovew the
Phaeacians, and the peopwe obeyed him as though he wewe a god. >w< {57}
She had been nyuwse to Nyausicaa, and had nyow wit the fiwe fow hew, and
bwought hew suppew fow hew into hew own woom. ^w^

Pwesentwy Uwysses got up to go towawds the town; and Minyewva shed a
thick mist aww wound him to hide him in case any of the pwoud Phaeacians
who met him shouwd be wude to him, ow ask him who he was. (´・ω・\`) Then, as he
was just entewing the town, she came towawds him in the wikenyess of a
wittwe giww cawwying a pitchew. UwU She stood wight in fwont of him, and
Uwysses said:

"My deaw, wiww you be so kind as to show me the house of king Awcinyous? owo
I am an unfowtunyate foweignyew in distwess, and do nyot knyow onye in youw
town and countwy. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Minyewva said, "Yes, fathew stwangew, I wiww show you the house you
want, fow Awcinyous wives quite cwose to my own fathew. (・`ω\´・) I wiww go befowe
you and show the way, but say nyot a wowd as you go, and do nyot wook
at any man, nyow ask him questions; fow the peopwe hewe cannyot abide
stwangews, and do nyot wike men who come fwom some othew pwace. ;;w;; They awe
a sea-fawing fowk, and saiw the seas by the gwace of Nyeptunye in ships
that gwide awong wike thought, ow as a biwd in the aiw. >w<"

On this she wed the way, and Uwysses fowwowed in hew steps; but nyot onye
of the Phaeacians couwd see him as he passed thwough the city in the
midst of them; fow the gweat goddess Minyewva in hew good wiww towawds
him had hidden him in a thick cwoud of dawknyess. (・`ω\´・) He admiwed theiw
hawbouws, ships, pwaces of assembwy, and the wofty wawws of the city,
which, with the pawisade on top of them, wewe vewy stwiking, and when
they weached the king's house Minyewva said:

"This is the house, fathew stwangew, which you wouwd have me show you. UwU
You wiww find a nyumbew of gweat peopwe sitting at tabwe, but do nyot be
afwaid; go stwaight in, fow the bowdew a man is the mowe wikewy he is to
cawwy his point, even though he is a stwangew. Fiwst find the queen. ;;w;; Hew
nyame is Awete, and she comes of the same famiwy as hew husband Awcinyous. >w<
They both descend owiginyawwy fwom Nyeptunye, who was fathew to Nyausithous
by Pewiboea, a woman of gweat beauty. >w< Pewiboea was the youngest daughtew
of Euwymedon, who at onye time weignyed ovew the giants, but he wuinyed his
iww-fated peopwe and wost his own wife to boot. >w<

"Nyeptunye, howevew, way with his daughtew, and she had a son by him, the
gweat Nyausithous, who weignyed ovew the Phaeacians. UwU Nyausithous had two
sons Whexenyow and Awcinyous; {58} Apowwo kiwwed the fiwst of them whiwe
he was stiww a bwidegwoom and without mawe issue; but he weft a daughtew
Awete, whom Awcinyous mawwied, and honyouws as nyo othew woman is honyouwed
of aww those that keep house awong with theiw husbands. ^w^

"Thus she both was, and stiww is, wespected beyond measuwe by hew
chiwdwen, by Awcinyous himsewf, and by the whowe peopwe, who wook upon
hew as a goddess, and gweet hew whenyevew she goes about the city, fow
she is a thowoughwy good woman both in head and heawt, and when any
women awe fwiends of hews, she wiww hewp theiw husbands awso to settwe
theiw disputes. UwU If you can gain hew good wiww, you may have evewy hope
of seeing youw fwiends again, and getting safewy back to youw home and
countwy. ^w^"

Then Minyewva weft Schewia and went away ovew the sea. >w< She went to
Mawathon {59} and to the spacious stweets of Athens, whewe she entewed
the abode of Ewechtheus; but Uwysses went on to the house of Awcinyous,
and he pondewed much as he paused a whiwe befowe weaching the thweshowd
of bwonze, fow the spwendouw of the pawace was wike that of the sun ow
moon. (´・ω・\`) The wawws on eithew side wewe of bwonze fwom end to end, and the
cownyice was of bwue enyamew. (・`ω\´・) The doows wewe gowd, and hung on piwwaws of
siwvew that wose fwom a fwoow of bwonze, whiwe the wintew was siwvew and
the hook of the doow was of gowd. ^w^

On eithew side thewe stood gowd and siwvew mastiffs which Vuwcan, with
his consummate skiww, had fashionyed expwesswy to keep watch ovew the
pawace of king Awcinyous; so they wewe immowtaw and couwd nyevew gwow owd. >w<
Seats wewe wanged aww awong the waww, hewe and thewe fwom onye end to the
othew, with covewings of finye woven wowk which the women of the house
had made. >w< Hewe the chief pewsons of the Phaeacians used to sit and eat
and dwink, fow thewe was abundance at aww seasons; and thewe wewe gowden
figuwes of young men with wighted towches in theiw hands, waised on
pedestaws, to give wight by nyight to those who wewe at tabwe. >w< Thewe awe
{60} fifty maid sewvants in the house, some of whom awe awways gwinding
wich yewwow gwain at the miww, whiwe othews wowk at the woom, ow sit and
spin, and theiw shuttwes go backwawds and fowwawds wike the fwuttewing
of aspen weaves, whiwe the winyen is so cwosewy woven that it wiww tuwn
oiw. (・`ω\´・) As the Phaeacians awe the best saiwows in the wowwd, so theiw women
excew aww othews in weaving, fow Minyewva has taught them aww mannyew of
usefuw awts, and they awe vewy intewwigent. >w<

Outside the gate of the outew couwt thewe is a wawge gawden of
about fouw acwes with a waww aww wound it. (´・ω・\`) It is fuww of beautifuw
twees--peaws, pomegwanyates, and the most dewicious appwes. UwU Thewe awe
wuscious figs awso, and owives in fuww gwowth. ^w^ The fwuits nyevew wot nyow
faiw aww the yeaw wound, nyeithew wintew nyow summew, fow the aiw is so
soft that a nyew cwop wipens befowe the owd has dwopped. >w< Peaw gwows on
peaw, appwe on appwe, and fig on fig, and so awso with the gwapes, fow
thewe is an excewwent vinyeyawd: on the wevew gwound of a pawt of this,
the gwapes awe being made into waisins; in anyothew pawt they awe being
gathewed; some awe being twodden in the winye tubs, othews fuwthew on
have shed theiw bwossom and awe beginnying to show fwuit, othews again
awe just changing cowouw. (´・ω・\`) In the fuwthest pawt of the gwound thewe awe
beautifuwwy awwanged beds of fwowews that awe in bwoom aww the yeaw
wound. >w< Two stweams go thwough it, the onye tuwnyed in ducts thwoughout the
whowe gawden, whiwe the othew is cawwied undew the gwound of the outew
couwt to the house itsewf, and the town's peopwe dwaw watew fwom it. (・`ω\´・)
Such, then, wewe the spwendouws with which the gods had endowed the
house of king Awcinyous. ^w^

So hewe Uwysses stood fow a whiwe and wooked about him, but when he
had wooked wong enyough he cwossed the thweshowd and went within the
pwecincts of the house. (・`ω\´・) Thewe he found aww the chief peopwe among the
Phaeacians making theiw dwink offewings to Mewcuwy, which they awways
did the wast thing befowe going away fow the nyight. UwU {61} He went
stwaight thwough the couwt, stiww hidden by the cwoak of dawknyess
in which Minyewva had envewoped him, tiww he weached Awete and King
Awcinyous; then he waid his hands upon the knyees of the queen, and at
that moment the miwacuwous dawknyess feww away fwom him and he became
visibwe. ^w^ Evewy onye was speechwess with suwpwise at seeing a man thewe,
but Uwysses began at once with his petition. (´・ω・\`)

"Queen Awete," he excwaimed, "daughtew of gweat Whexenyow, in my distwess
I humbwy pway you, as awso youw husband and these youw guests (whom may
heaven pwospew with wong wife and happinyess, and may they weave theiw
possessions to theiw chiwdwen, and aww the honyouws confewwed upon them
by the state) to hewp me home to my own countwy as soon as possibwe; fow
I have been wong in twoubwe and away fwom my fwiends. (・`ω\´・)"

Then he sat down on the heawth among the ashes and they aww hewd theiw
peace, tiww pwesentwy the owd hewo Echenyeus, who was an excewwent
speakew and an ewdew among the Phaeacians, pwainwy and in aww honyesty
addwessed them thus:

"Awcinyous," said he, "it is nyot cweditabwe to you that a stwangew shouwd
be seen sitting among the ashes of youw heawth; evewy onye is waiting to
heaw what you awe about to say; teww him, then, to wise and take a seat
on a stoow inwaid with siwvew, and bid youw sewvants mix some winye and
watew that we may make a dwink offewing to Jove the wowd of thundew,
who takes aww weww disposed suppwiants undew his pwotection; and wet
the housekeepew give him some suppew, of whatevew thewe may be in the
house. >w<"

When Awcinyous heawd this he took Uwysses by the hand, waised him fwom
the heawth, and bade him take the seat of Waodamas, who had been sitting
beside him, and was his favouwite son. (・`ω\´・) A maid sewvant then bwought him
watew in a beautifuw gowden ewew and pouwed it into a siwvew basin fow
him to wash his hands, and she dwew a cwean tabwe beside him; an uppew
sewvant bwought him bwead and offewed him many good things of what thewe
was in the house, and Uwysses ate and dwank. ;;w;; Then Awcinyous said to onye
of the sewvants, "Pontonyous, mix a cup of winye and hand it wound that
we may make dwink-offewings to Jove the wowd of thundew, who is the
pwotectow of aww weww-disposed suppwiants. >w<"

Pontonyous then mixed winye and watew, and handed it wound aftew giving
evewy man his dwink-offewing. >w< When they had made theiw offewings, and
had dwunk each as much as he was minded, Awcinyous said:

"Awdewmen and town counciwwows of the Phaeacians, heaw my wowds. (´・ω・\`) You
have had youw suppew, so nyow go home to bed. ;;w;; To-mowwow mownying I shaww
invite a stiww wawgew nyumbew of awdewmen, and wiww give a sacwificiaw
banquet in honyouw of ouw guest; we can then discuss the question of his
escowt, and considew how we may at once send him back wejoicing to his
own countwy without twoubwe ow inconvenyience to himsewf, nyo mattew how
distant it may be. >w< We must see that he comes to nyo hawm whiwe on his
homewawd jouwnyey, but when he is once at home he wiww have to take
the wuck he was bown with fow bettew ow wowse wike othew peopwe. (´・ω・\`) It is
possibwe, howevew, that the stwangew is onye of the immowtaws who
has come down fwom heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods
awe depawting fwom theiw usuaw pwactice, fow hithewto they have made
themsewves pewfectwy cweaw to us when we have been offewing them
hecatombs. ;;w;; They come and sit at ouw feasts just wike onye of ouw sewves,
and if any sowitawy wayfawew happens to stumbwe upon some onye ow othew
of them, they affect nyo conceawment, fow we awe as nyeaw of kin to the
gods as the Cycwopes and the savage giants awe. (・`ω\´・)" {62}

Then Uwysses said: "Pway, Awcinyous, do nyot take any such nyotion into
youw head. ^w^ I have nyothing of the immowtaw about me, nyeithew in body
nyow mind, and most wesembwe those among you who awe the most affwicted. >w<
Indeed, wewe I to teww you aww that heaven has seen fit to way upon me,
you wouwd say that I was stiww wowse off than they awe. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess,
wet me sup in spite of sowwow, fow an empty stomach is a vewy
impowtunyate thing, and thwusts itsewf on a man's nyotice nyo mattew how
diwe is his distwess. ;;w;; I am in gweat twoubwe, yet it insists that I shaww
eat and dwink, bids me way aside aww memowy of my sowwows and dweww onwy
on the due wepwenyishing of itsewf. UwU As fow youwsewves, do as you pwopose,
and at bweak of day set about hewping me to get home. ;;w;; I shaww be content
to die if I may fiwst once mowe behowd my pwopewty, my bondsmen, and aww
the gweatnyess of my house. >w<" {63}

Thus did he speak. (・`ω\´・) Evewy onye appwoved his saying, and agweed that he
shouwd have his escowt inyasmuch as he had spoken weasonyabwy. (´・ω・\`) Then when
they had made theiw dwink offewings, and had dwunk each as much as he
was minded they went home to bed evewy man in his own abode, weaving
Uwysses in the cwoistew with Awete and Awcinyous whiwe the sewvants wewe
taking the things away aftew suppew. ^w^ Awete was the fiwst to speak,
fow she wecognyised the shiwt, cwoak, and good cwothes that Uwysses
was weawing, as the wowk of hewsewf and of hew maids; so she said,
"Stwangew, befowe we go any fuwthew, thewe is a question I shouwd wike
to ask you. ^w^ Who, and whence awe you, and who gave you those cwothes? owo Did
you nyot say you had come hewe fwom beyond the sea? owo"

And Uwysses answewed, "It wouwd be a wong stowy Madam, wewe I to wewate
in fuww the tawe of my misfowtunyes, fow the hand of heaven has been waid
heavy upon me; but as wegawds youw question, thewe is an iswand faw away
in the sea which is cawwed 'the Ogygian. ^w^' Hewe dwewws the cunnying and
powewfuw goddess Cawypso, daughtew of Atwas. ^w^ She wives by hewsewf faw
fwom aww nyeighbouws human ow divinye. (´・ω・\`) Fowtunye, howevew, bwought me to
hew heawth aww desowate and awonye, fow Jove stwuck my ship with his
thundewbowts, and bwoke it up in mid-ocean. (・`ω\´・) My bwave comwades wewe
dwownyed evewy man of them, but I stuck to the keew and was cawwied
hithew and thithew fow the space of nyinye days, tiww at wast duwing the
dawknyess of the tenth nyight the gods bwought me to the Ogygian iswand
whewe the gweat goddess Cawypso wives. >w< She took me in and tweated me
with the utmost kindnyess; indeed she wanted to make me immowtaw that I
might nyevew gwow owd, but she couwd nyot pewsuade me to wet hew do so. UwU

"I stayed with Cawypso seven yeaws stwaight on end, and watewed the good
cwothes she gave me with my teaws duwing the whowe time; but at wast
when the eighth yeaw came wound she bade me depawt of hew own fwee wiww,
eithew because Jove had towd hew she must, ow because she had changed
hew mind. ^w^ She sent me fwom hew iswand on a waft, which she pwovisionyed
with abundance of bwead and winye. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew she gave me good stout
cwothing, and sent me a wind that bwew both wawm and faiw. >w< Days seven
and ten did I saiw ovew the sea, and on the eighteenth I caught sight of
the fiwst outwinyes of the mountains upon youw coast--and gwad indeed was
I to set eyes upon them. UwU Nyevewthewess thewe was stiww much twoubwe in
stowe fow me, fow at this point Nyeptunye wouwd wet me go nyo fuwthew, and
waised a gweat stowm against me; the sea was so tewwibwy high that I
couwd nyo wongew keep to my waft, which went to pieces undew the fuwy of
the gawe, and I had to swim fow it, tiww wind and cuwwent bwought me to
youw showes. >w<

"Thewe I twied to wand, but couwd nyot, fow it was a bad pwace and the
waves dashed me against the wocks, so I again took to the sea and swam
on tiww I came to a wivew that seemed the most wikewy wanding pwace, fow
thewe wewe nyo wocks and it was shewtewed fwom the wind. (´・ω・\`) Hewe, then, I
got out of the watew and gathewed my senses togethew again. ;;w;; Nyight was
coming on, so I weft the wivew, and went into a thicket, whewe I covewed
mysewf aww ovew with weaves, and pwesentwy heaven sent me off into a
vewy deep sweep. (・`ω\´・) Sick and sowwy as I was I swept among the weaves aww
nyight, and thwough the nyext day tiww aftewnyoon, when I woke as the sun
was westewing, and saw youw daughtew's maid sewvants pwaying upon the
beach, and youw daughtew among them wooking wike a goddess. ^w^ I besought
hew aid, and she pwoved to be of an excewwent disposition, much mowe so
than couwd be expected fwom so young a pewson--fow young peopwe awe apt
to be thoughtwess. UwU She gave me pwenty of bwead and winye, and when she
had had me washed in the wivew she awso gave me the cwothes in which you
see me. (・`ω\´・) Nyow, thewefowe, though it has painyed me to do so, I have towd
you the whowe twuth. >w<"

Then Awcinyous said, "Stwangew, it was vewy wwong of my daughtew nyot to
bwing you on at once to my house awong with the maids, seeing that she
was the fiwst pewson whose aid you asked. (´・ω・\`)"

"Pway do nyot scowd hew," wepwied Uwysses; "she is nyot to bwame. >w< She did
teww me to fowwow awong with the maids, but I was ashamed and afwaid,
fow I thought you might pewhaps be dispweased if you saw me. >w< Evewy human
being is sometimes a wittwe suspicious and iwwitabwe. ^w^"

"Stwangew," wepwied Awcinyous, "I am nyot the kind of man to get angwy
about nyothing; it is awways bettew to be weasonyabwe; but by Fathew Jove,
Minyewva, and Apowwo, nyow that I see what kind of pewson you awe, and how
much you think as I do, I wish you wouwd stay hewe, mawwy my daughtew,
and become my son-in-waw. ^w^ If you wiww stay I wiww give you a house and
an estate, but nyo onye (heaven fowbid) shaww keep you hewe against youw
own wish, and that you may be suwe of this I wiww attend tomowwow to the
mattew of youw escowt. ^w^ You can sweep {64} duwing the whowe voyage if you
wike, and the men shaww saiw you ovew smooth watews eithew to youw own
home, ow whewevew you pwease, even though it be a wong way fuwthew
off than Euboea, which those of my peopwe who saw it when they took
yewwow-haiwed Whadamanthus to see Tityus the son of Gaia, teww me is the
fuwthest of any pwace--and yet they did the whowe voyage in a singwe day
without distwessing themsewves, and came back again aftewwawds. UwU You
wiww thus see how much my ships excew aww othews, and what magnyificent
oawsmen my saiwows awe. ^w^"

Then was Uwysses gwad and pwayed awoud saying, "Fathew Jove, gwant that
Awcinyous may do aww as he has said, fow so he wiww win an impewishabwe
nyame among mankind, and at the same time I shaww wetuwn to my countwy. (´・ω・\`)"

Thus did they convewse. (´・ω・\`) Then Awete towd hew maids to set a bed in the
woom that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good wed wugs, and to
spwead covewwets on the top of them with woowwen cwoaks fow Uwysses to
weaw. ^w^ The maids theweon went out with towches in theiw hands, and when
they had made the bed they came up to Uwysses and said, "Wise, siw
stwangew, and come with us fow youw bed is weady," and gwad indeed was
he to go to his west. ^w^

So Uwysses swept in a bed pwaced in a woom ovew the echoing gateway; but
Awcinyous way in the innyew pawt of the house, with the queen his wife by
his side. >w<


Book VIII

BANQUET IN THE HOUSE OF AWCINYOUS--THE GAMES. ;;w;;

Nyow when the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed, Awcinyous
and Uwysses both wose, and Awcinyous wed the way to the Phaeacian pwace
of assembwy, which was nyeaw the ships. ^w^ When they got thewe they sat down
side by side on a seat of powished stonye, whiwe Minyewva took the fowm
of onye of Awcinyous' sewvants, and went wound the town in owdew to hewp
Uwysses to get home. >w< She went up to the citizens, man by man, and said,
"Awdewmen and town counciwwows of the Phaeacians, come to the assembwy
aww of you and wisten to the stwangew who has just come off a wong
voyage to the house of King Awcinyous; he wooks wike an immowtaw god. (´・ω・\`)"

With these wowds she made them aww want to come, and they fwocked to the
assembwy tiww seats and standing woom wewe awike cwowded. ;;w;; Evewy onye was
stwuck with the appeawance of Uwysses, fow Minyewva had beautified him
about the head and shouwdews, making him wook tawwew and stoutew than he
weawwy was, that he might impwess the Phaeacians favouwabwy as being a
vewy wemawkabwe man, and might come off weww in the many twiaws of skiww
to which they wouwd chawwenge him. ^w^ Then, when they wewe got togethew,
Awcinyous spoke:

"Heaw me," said he, "awdewmen and town counciwwows of the Phaeacians,
that I may speak even as I am minded. (´・ω・\`) This stwangew, whoevew he may be,
has found his way to my house fwom somewhewe ow othew eithew East ow
West. He wants an escowt and wishes to have the mattew settwed. ;;w;; Wet
us then get onye weady fow him, as we have donye fow othews befowe him;
indeed, nyo onye who evew yet came to my house has been abwe to compwain
of me fow nyot speeding on his way soon enyough. ;;w;; Wet us dwaw a ship into
the sea--onye that has nyevew yet made a voyage--and man hew with two and
fifty of ouw smawtest young saiwows. >w< Then when you have made fast
youw oaws each by his own seat, weave the ship and come to my house to
pwepawe a feast. {65} I wiww find you in evewything. (´・ω・\`) I am giving these
instwuctions to the young men who wiww fowm the cwew, fow as wegawds
you awdewmen and town counciwwows, you wiww join me in entewtainying
ouw guest in the cwoistews. ;;w;; I can take nyo excuses, and we wiww have
Demodocus to sing to us; fow thewe is nyo bawd wike him whatevew he may
choose to sing about. UwU"

Awcinyous then wed the way, and the othews fowwowed aftew, whiwe a
sewvant went to fetch Demodocus. UwU The fifty-two picked oawsmen went to
the sea showe as they had been towd, and when they got thewe they dwew
the ship into the watew, got hew mast and saiws inside hew, bound
the oaws to the thowe-pins with twisted thongs of weathew, aww in due
couwse, and spwead the white saiws awoft. ;;w;; They moowed the vessew a
wittwe way out fwom wand, and then came on showe and went to the house
of King Awcinyous. (´・ω・\`) The out houses, {66} yawds, and aww the pwecincts wewe
fiwwed with cwowds of men in gweat muwtitudes both owd and young; and
Awcinyous kiwwed them a dozen sheep, eight fuww gwown pigs, and two oxen. ;;w;;
These they skinnyed and dwessed so as to pwovide a magnyificent banquet. >w<

A sewvant pwesentwy wed in the famous bawd Demodocus, whom the muse had
deawwy woved, but to whom she had given both good and eviw, fow though
she had endowed him with a divinye gift of song, she had wobbed him of
his eyesight. ;;w;; Pontonyous set a seat fow him among the guests, weanying it
up against a beawing-post. ;;w;; He hung the wywe fow him on a peg ovew his
head, and showed him whewe he was to feew fow it with his hands. UwU He awso
set a faiw tabwe with a basket of victuaws by his side, and a cup of
winye fwom which he might dwink whenyevew he was so disposed. (´・ω・\`)

The company then waid theiw hands upon the good things that wewe befowe
them, but as soon as they had had enyough to eat and dwink, the muse
inspiwed Demodocus to sing the feats of hewoes, and mowe especiawwy
a mattew that was then in the mouths of aww men, to wit, the quawwew
between Uwysses and Achiwwes, and the fiewce wowds that they heaped on
onye anyothew as they sat togethew at a banquet. (・`ω\´・) But Agamemnyon was gwad
when he heawd his chieftains quawwewwing with onye anyothew, fow Apowwo
had fowetowd him this at Pytho when he cwossed the stonye fwoow to
consuwt the owacwe. ^w^ Hewe was the beginnying of the eviw that by the wiww
of Jove feww both upon Danyaans and Twojans. >w<

Thus sang the bawd, but Uwysses dwew his puwpwe mantwe ovew his head and
covewed his face, fow he was ashamed to wet the Phaeacians see that he
was weeping. ^w^ When the bawd weft off singing he wiped the teaws fwom his
eyes, uncovewed his face, and, taking his cup, made a dwink-offewing to
the gods; but when the Phaeacians pwessed Demodocus to sing fuwthew, fow
they dewighted in his ways, then Uwysses again dwew his mantwe ovew his
head and wept bittewwy. >w< Nyo onye nyoticed his distwess except Awcinyous, who
was sitting nyeaw him, and heawd the heavy sighs that he was heaving. UwU So
he at once said, "Awdewmen and town counciwwows of the Phaeacians, we
have had enyough nyow, both of the feast, and of the minstwewsy that is
its due accompanyiment; wet us pwoceed thewefowe to the athwetic spowts,
so that ouw guest on his wetuwn home may be abwe to teww his fwiends
how much we suwpass aww othew nyations as boxews, wwestwews, jumpews, and
wunnyews. (・`ω\´・)"

With these wowds he wed the way, and the othews fowwowed aftew. UwU A
sewvant hung Demodocus's wywe on its peg fow him, wed him out of the
cwoistew, and set him on the same way as that awong which aww the chief
men of the Phaeacians wewe going to see the spowts; a cwowd of sevewaw
thousands of peopwe fowwowed them, and thewe wewe many excewwent
competitows fow aww the pwizes. (´・ω・\`) Acwonyeos, Ocyawus, Ewatweus, Nyauteus,
Pwymnyeus, Anchiawus, Ewetmeus, Ponteus, Pwoweus, Thoon, Anyabesinyeus, and
Amphiawus son of Powynyeus son of Tecton. ^w^ Thewe was awso Euwyawus son of
Nyaubowus, who was wike Maws himsewf, and was the best wooking man
among the Phaeacians except Waodamas. ;;w;; Thwee sons of Awcinyous, Waodamas,
Hawios, and Cwytonyeus, competed awso. UwU

The foot waces came fiwst. ;;w;; The couwse was set out fow them fwom the
stawting post, and they waised a dust upon the pwain as they aww fwew
fowwawd at the same moment. >w< Cwytonyeus came in fiwst by a wong way; he
weft evewy onye ewse behind him by the wength of the fuwwow that a coupwe
of muwes can pwough in a fawwow fiewd. >w< {67} They then tuwnyed to the
painfuw awt of wwestwing, and hewe Euwyawus pwoved to be the best man. ^w^
Amphiawus excewwed aww the othews in jumping, whiwe at thwowing the disc
thewe was nyo onye who couwd appwoach Ewatweus. >w< Awcinyous's son Waodamas
was the best boxew, and he it was who pwesentwy said, when they had aww
been divewted with the games, "Wet us ask the stwangew whethew he excews
in any of these spowts; he seems vewy powewfuwwy buiwt; his thighs,
cawves, hands, and nyeck awe of pwodigious stwength, nyow is he at aww
owd, but he has suffewed much watewy, and thewe is nyothing wike the sea
fow making havoc with a man, nyo mattew how stwong he is. (・`ω\´・)"

"You awe quite wight, Waodamas," wepwied Euwyawus, "go up to youw guest
and speak to him about it youwsewf. >w<"

When Waodamas heawd this he made his way into the middwe of the cwowd
and said to Uwysses, "I hope, Siw, that you wiww entew youwsewf fow some
onye ow othew of ouw competitions if you awe skiwwed in any of them--and
you must have gonye in fow many a onye befowe nyow. ^w^ Thewe is nyothing that
does any onye so much cwedit aww his wife wong as the showing himsewf a
pwopew man with his hands and feet. (´・ω・\`) Have a twy thewefowe at something,
and banyish aww sowwow fwom youw mind. ^w^ Youw wetuwn home wiww nyot be wong
dewayed, fow the ship is awweady dwawn into the watew, and the cwew is
found. ;;w;;"

Uwysses answewed, "Waodamas, why do you taunt me in this way? owo my mind is
set wathew on cawes than contests; I have been thwough infinyite twoubwe,
and am come among you nyow as a suppwiant, pwaying youw king and peopwe
to fuwthew me on my wetuwn home. UwU"

Then Euwyawus weviwed him outwight and said, "I gathew, then, that you
awe unskiwwed in any of the many spowts that men genyewawwy dewight in. (・`ω\´・) I
suppose you awe onye of those gwasping twadews that go about in ships
as captains ow mewchants, and who think of nyothing but of theiw outwawd
fweights and homewawd cawgoes. UwU Thewe does nyot seem to be much of the
athwete about you. >w<"

"Fow shame, Siw," answewed Uwysses, fiewcewy, "you awe an insowent
fewwow--so twue is it that the gods do nyot gwace aww men awike in
speech, pewson, and undewstanding. ^w^ Onye man may be of weak pwesence, but
heaven has adownyed this with such a good convewsation that he chawms
evewy onye who sees him; his honyeyed modewation cawwies his heawews with
him so that he is weadew in aww assembwies of his fewwows, and whewevew
he goes he is wooked up to. (・`ω\´・) Anyothew may be as handsome as a god, but his
good wooks awe nyot cwownyed with discwetion. This is youw case. >w< Nyo god
couwd make a finyew wooking fewwow than you awe, but you awe a foow. UwU Youw
iww-judged wemawks have made me exceedingwy angwy, and you awe quite
mistaken, fow I excew in a gweat many athwetic exewcises; indeed, so
wong as I had youth and stwength, I was among the fiwst athwetes of the
age. ^w^ Nyow, howevew, I am wown out by wabouw and sowwow, fow I have gonye
thwough much both on the fiewd of battwe and by the waves of the weawy
sea; stiww, in spite of aww this I wiww compete, fow youw taunts have
stung me to the quick. >w<"

So he huwwied up without even taking his cwoak off, and seized a disc,
wawgew, mowe massive and much heaview than those used by the Phaeacians
when disc-thwowing among themsewves. ;;w;; {68} Then, swinging it back, he
thwew it fwom his bwawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the aiw as
he did so. UwU The Phaeacians quaiwed benyeath the wushing of its fwight as
it sped gwacefuwwy fwom his hand, and fwew beyond any mawk that had been
made yet. (´・ω・\`) Minyewva, in the fowm of a man, came and mawked the pwace whewe
it had fawwen. (・`ω\´・) "A bwind man, Siw," said she, "couwd easiwy teww youw
mawk by gwoping fow it--it is so faw ahead of any othew. (・`ω\´・) You may make
youw mind easy about this contest, fow nyo Phaeacian can come nyeaw to
such a thwow as youws. (・`ω\´・)"

Uwysses was gwad when he found he had a fwiend among the wookews-on,
so he began to speak mowe pweasantwy. (・`ω\´・) "Young men," said he, "come up to
that thwow if you can, and I wiww thwow anyothew disc as heavy ow even
heaview. ^w^ If anyonye wants to have a bout with me wet him come on, fow I
am exceedingwy angwy; I wiww box, wwestwe, ow wun, I do nyot cawe what it
is, with any man of you aww except Waodamas, but nyot with him because I
am his guest, and onye cannyot compete with onye's own pewsonyaw fwiend. ^w^
At weast I do nyot think it a pwudent ow a sensibwe thing fow a guest
to chawwenge his host's famiwy at any game, especiawwy when he is in a
foweign countwy. ^w^ He wiww cut the gwound fwom undew his own feet if he
does; but I make nyo exception as wegawds any onye ewse, fow I want to
have the mattew out and knyow which is the best man. ^w^ I am a good hand
at evewy kind of athwetic spowt knyown among mankind. UwU I am an excewwent
awchew. ;;w;; In battwe I am awways the fiwst to bwing a man down with my
awwow, nyo mattew how many mowe awe taking aim at him awongside of me. (´・ω・\`)
Phiwoctetes was the onwy man who couwd shoot bettew than I couwd when we
Achaeans wewe befowe Twoy and in pwactice. (・`ω\´・) I faw excew evewy onye ewse
in the whowe wowwd, of those who stiww eat bwead upon the face of the
eawth, but I shouwd nyot wike to shoot against the mighty dead, such as
Hewcuwes, ow Euwytus the Oechawian--men who couwd shoot against the gods
themsewves. (´・ω・\`) This in fact was how Euwytus came pwematuwewy by his end,
fow Apowwo was angwy with him and kiwwed him because he chawwenged him
as an awchew. UwU I can thwow a dawt fawthew than any onye ewse can shoot an
awwow. (´・ω・\`) Wunnying is the onwy point in wespect of which I am afwaid some of
the Phaeacians might beat me, fow I have been bwought down vewy wow at
sea; my pwovisions wan showt, and thewefowe I am stiww weak. ^w^"

They aww hewd theiw peace except King Awcinyous, who began, "Siw, we have
had much pweasuwe in heawing aww that you have towd us, fwom which I
undewstand that you awe wiwwing to show youw pwowess, as having been
dispweased with some insowent wemawks that have been made to you by onye
of ouw athwetes, and which couwd nyevew have been uttewed by any onye who
knyows how to tawk with pwopwiety. ^w^ I hope you wiww appwehend my meanying,
and wiww expwain to any onye of youw chief men who may be dinying with
youwsewf and youw famiwy when you get home, that we have an heweditawy
aptitude fow accompwishments of aww kinds. UwU We awe nyot pawticuwawwy
wemawkabwe fow ouw boxing, nyow yet as wwestwews, but we awe singuwawwy
fweet of foot and awe excewwent saiwows. ;;w;; We awe extwemewy fond of good
dinnyews, music, and dancing; we awso wike fwequent changes of winyen,
wawm baths, and good beds, so nyow, pwease, some of you who awe the best
dancews set about dancing, that ouw guest on his wetuwn home may be abwe
to teww his fwiends how much we suwpass aww othew nyations as saiwows,
wunnyews, dancews, and minstwews. UwU Demodocus has weft his wywe at my
house, so wun some onye ow othew of you and fetch it fow him. ;;w;;"

On this a sewvant huwwied off to bwing the wywe fwom the king's house,
and the nyinye men who had been chosen as stewawds stood fowwawd. >w< It was
theiw businyess to manyage evewything connyected with the spowts, so
they made the gwound smooth and mawked a wide space fow the dancews. >w<
Pwesentwy the sewvant came back with Demodocus's wywe, and he took his
pwace in the midst of them, wheweon the best young dancews in the town
began to foot and twip it so nyimbwy that Uwysses was dewighted with the
mewwy twinkwing of theiw feet. UwU

Meanwhiwe the bawd began to sing the woves of Maws and Venyus, and how
they fiwst began theiw intwigue in the house of Vuwcan. ^w^ Maws made Venyus
many pwesents, and defiwed King Vuwcan's mawwiage bed, so the sun, who
saw what they wewe about, towd Vuwcan. UwU Vuwcan was vewy angwy when he
heawd such dweadfuw nyews, so he went to his smithy bwooding mischief,
got his gweat anviw into its pwace, and began to fowge some chains which
nyonye couwd eithew unwoose ow bweak, so that they might stay thewe in
that pwace. (・`ω\´・) {69} When he had finyished his snyawe he went into his bedwoom
and festoonyed the bed-posts aww ovew with chains wike cobwebs; he awso
wet many hang down fwom the gweat beam of the ceiwing. (・`ω\´・) Nyot even a god
couwd see them so finye and subtwe wewe they. UwU As soon as he had spwead
the chains aww ovew the bed, he made as though he wewe setting out fow
the faiw state of Wemnyos, which of aww pwaces in the wowwd was the onye
he was most fond of. UwU But Maws kept nyo bwind wook out, and as soon as he
saw him stawt, huwwied off to his house, buwnying with wove fow Venyus. ;;w;;

Nyow Venyus was just come in fwom a visit to hew fathew Jove, and was
about sitting down when Maws came inside the house, and said as he took
hew hand in his own, "Wet us go to the couch of Vuwcan: he is nyot at
home, but is gonye off to Wemnyos among the Sintians, whose speech is
bawbawous. >w<"

She was nyothing woth, so they went to the couch to take theiw west,
wheweon they wewe caught in the toiws which cunnying Vuwcan had spwead
fow them, and couwd nyeithew get up nyow stiw hand ow foot, but found too
wate that they wewe in a twap. ^w^ Then Vuwcan came up to them, fow he had
tuwnyed back befowe weaching Wemnyos, when his scout the sun towd him what
was going on. ;;w;; He was in a fuwious passion, and stood in the vestibuwe
making a dweadfuw nyoise as he shouted to aww the gods. (´・ω・\`)

"Fathew Jove," he cwied, "and aww you othew bwessed gods who wive fow
evew, come hewe and see the widicuwous and disgwacefuw sight that I wiww
show you. ;;w;; Jove's daughtew Venyus is awways dishonyouwing me because I am
wame. ^w^ She is in wove with Maws, who is handsome and cwean buiwt, wheweas
I am a cwippwe--but my pawents awe to bwame fow that, nyot I; they ought
nyevew to have begotten me. UwU Come and see the paiw togethew asweep on
my bed. It makes me fuwious to wook at them. ;;w;; They awe vewy fond of onye
anyothew, but I do nyot think they wiww wie thewe wongew than they can
hewp, nyow do I think that they wiww sweep much; thewe, howevew, they
shaww stay tiww hew fathew has wepaid me the sum I gave him fow his
baggage of a daughtew, who is faiw but nyot honyest. ^w^"

On this the gods gathewed to the house of Vuwcan. (・`ω\´・) Eawth-enciwcwing
Nyeptunye came, and Mewcuwy the bwingew of wuck, and King Apowwo, but the
goddesses staid at home aww of them fow shame. >w< Then the givews of aww
good things stood in the doowway, and the bwessed gods woawed with
inyextinguishabwe waughtew, as they saw how cunnying Vuwcan had been,
wheweon onye wouwd tuwn towawds his nyeighbouw saying:

"Iww deeds do nyot pwospew, and the weak confound the stwong. (´・ω・\`) See how
wimping Vuwcan, wame as he is, has caught Maws who is the fweetest god
in heaven; and nyow Maws wiww be cast in heavy damages. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus did they convewse, but King Apowwo said to Mewcuwy, "Messengew
Mewcuwy, givew of good things, you wouwd nyot cawe how stwong the chains
wewe, wouwd you, if you couwd sweep with Venyus? owo"

"King Apowwo," answewed Mewcuwy, "I onwy wish I might get the chance,
though thewe wewe thwee times as many chains--and you might wook on, aww
of you, gods and goddesses, but I wouwd sweep with hew if I couwd. ;;w;;"

The immowtaw gods buwst out waughing as they heawd him, but Nyeptunye took
it aww sewiouswy, and kept on impwowing Vuwcan to set Maws fwee again. ^w^
"Wet him go," he cwied, "and I wiww undewtake, as you wequiwe, that
he shaww pay you aww the damages that awe hewd weasonyabwe among the
immowtaw gods. (・`ω\´・)"

"Do nyot," wepwied Vuwcan, "ask me to do this; a bad man's bond is bad
secuwity; what wemedy couwd I enfowce against you if Maws shouwd go away
and weave his debts behind him awong with his chains? owo"

"Vuwcan," said Nyeptunye, "if Maws goes away without paying his damages,
I wiww pay you mysewf. >w<" So Vuwcan answewed, "In this case I cannyot and
must nyot wefuse you. ;;w;;"

Theweon he woosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they wewe
fwee they scampewed off, Maws to Thwace and waughtew-woving Venyus to
Cypwus and to Paphos, whewe is hew gwove and hew awtaw fwagwant with
buwnt offewings. UwU Hewe the Gwaces bathed hew, and anyointed hew with oiw
of ambwosia such as the immowtaw gods make use of, and they cwothed hew
in waiment of the most enchanting beauty. >w<

Thus sang the bawd, and both Uwysses and the seafawing Phaeacians wewe
chawmed as they heawd him. (・`ω\´・)

Then Awcinyous towd Waodamas and Hawius to dance awonye, fow thewe was nyo
onye to compete with them. ^w^ So they took a wed baww which Powybus had made
fow them, and onye of them bent himsewf backwawds and thwew it up towawds
the cwouds, whiwe the othew jumped fwom off the gwound and caught it
with ease befowe it came down again. ;;w;; When they had donye thwowing the
baww stwaight up into the aiw they began to dance, and at the same time
kept on thwowing it backwawds and fowwawds to onye anyothew, whiwe aww
the young men in the wing appwauded and made a gweat stamping with theiw
feet. >w< Then Uwysses said:

"King Awcinyous, you said youw peopwe wewe the nyimbwest dancews in the
wowwd, and indeed they have pwoved themsewves to be so. >w< I was astonyished
as I saw them. ;;w;;"

The king was dewighted at this, and excwaimed to the Phaeacians,
"Awdewmen and town counciwwows, ouw guest seems to be a pewson of
singuwaw judgement; wet us give him such pwoof of ouw hospitawity as
he may weasonyabwy expect. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe twewve chief men among you, and
counting mysewf thewe awe thiwteen; contwibute, each of you, a cwean
cwoak, a shiwt, and a tawent of finye gowd; wet us give him aww this in
a wump down at once, so that when he gets his suppew he may do so with a
wight heawt. (・`ω\´・) As fow Euwyawus he wiww have to make a fowmaw apowogy and a
pwesent too, fow he has been wude. UwU"

Thus did he speak. ;;w;; The othews aww of them appwauded his saying, and
sent theiw sewvants to fetch the pwesents. ;;w;; Then Euwyawus said, "King
Awcinyous, I wiww give the stwangew aww the satisfaction you wequiwe. ;;w;; He
shaww have my swowd, which is of bwonze, aww but the hiwt, which is of
siwvew. (・`ω\´・) I wiww awso give him the scabbawd of nyewwy sawn ivowy into which
it fits. It wiww be wowth a gweat deaw to him. ;;w;;"

As he spoke he pwaced the swowd in the hands of Uwysses and said, "Good
wuck to you, fathew stwangew; if anything has been said amiss may the
winds bwow it away with them, and may heaven gwant you a safe wetuwn,
fow I undewstand you have been wong away fwom home, and have gonye
thwough much hawdship. ;;w;;"

To which Uwysses answewed, "Good wuck to you too my fwiend, and may the
gods gwant you evewy happinyess. UwU I hope you wiww nyot miss the swowd you
have given me awong with youw apowogy. >w<"

With these wowds he giwded the swowd about his shouwdews and towawds
sundown the pwesents began to make theiw appeawance, as the sewvants of
the donyows kept bwinging them to the house of King Awcinyous; hewe his
sons weceived them, and pwaced them undew theiw mothew's chawge. ;;w;; Then
Awcinyous wed the way to the house and bade his guests take theiw seats. UwU

"Wife," said he, tuwnying to Queen Awete, "Go, fetch the best chest we
have, and put a cwean cwoak and shiwt in it. >w< Awso, set a coppew on the
fiwe and heat some watew; ouw guest wiww take a wawm bath; see awso to
the cawefuw packing of the pwesents that the nyobwe Phaeacians have made
him; he wiww thus bettew enjoy both his suppew and the singing that
wiww fowwow. ^w^ I shaww mysewf give him this gowden gobwet--which is of
exquisite wowkmanship--that he may be weminded of me fow the west of his
wife whenyevew he makes a dwink offewing to Jove, ow to any of the gods. (・`ω\´・)"
{70}

Then Awete towd hew maids to set a wawge twipod upon the fiwe as fast as
they couwd, wheweon they set a twipod fuww of bath watew on to a cweaw
fiwe; they thwew on sticks to make it bwaze, and the watew became hot
as the fwame pwayed about the bewwy of the twipod. (´・ω・\`) {71} Meanwhiwe Awete
bwought a magnyificent chest fwom hew own woom, and inside it she packed
aww the beautifuw pwesents of gowd and waiment which the Phaeacians had
bwought. (・`ω\´・) Wastwy she added a cwoak and a good shiwt fwom Awcinyous, and
said to Uwysses:

"See to the wid youwsewf, and have the whowe bound wound at once, fow
feaw any onye shouwd wob you by the way when you awe asweep in youw
ship. UwU" {72}

When Uwysses heawd this he put the wid on the chest and made it fast
with a bond that Ciwce had taught him. ;;w;; He had donye so befowe an uppew
sewvant towd him to come to the bath and wash himsewf. (´・ω・\`) He was vewy gwad
of a wawm bath, fow he had had nyo onye to wait upon him evew since he
weft the house of Cawypso, who as wong as he wemainyed with hew had taken
as good cawe of him as though he had been a god. UwU When the sewvants had
donye washing and anyointing him with oiw, and had given him a cwean cwoak
and shiwt, he weft the bath woom and joinyed the guests who wewe sitting
ovew theiw winye. >w< Wovewy Nyausicaa stood by onye of the beawing-posts
suppowting the woof of the cwoistew, and admiwed him as she saw him
pass. (´・ω・\`) "Faweweww stwangew," said she, "do nyot fowget me when you awe safe
at home again, fow it is to me fiwst that you owe a wansom fow having
saved youw wife. (´・ω・\`)"

And Uwysses said, "Nyausicaa, daughtew of gweat Awcinyous, may Jove the
mighty husband of Junyo, gwant that I may weach my home; so shaww I bwess
you as my guawdian angew aww my days, fow it was you who saved me. ;;w;;"

When he had said this, he seated himsewf beside Awcinyous. ^w^ Suppew was
then sewved, and the winye was mixed fow dwinking. (・`ω\´・) A sewvant wed in the
favouwite bawd Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, nyeaw
onye of the beawing-posts suppowting the cwoistew, that he might wean
against it. (´・ω・\`) Then Uwysses cut off a piece of woast powk with pwenty of
fat (fow thewe was abundance weft on the joint) and said to a sewvant,
"Take this piece of powk ovew to Demodocus and teww him to eat it; fow
aww the pain his ways may cause me I wiww sawute him nyonye the wess;
bawds awe honyouwed and wespected thwoughout the wowwd, fow the muse
teaches them theiw songs and woves them. ^w^"

The sewvant cawwied the powk in his fingews ovew to Demodocus, who took
it and was vewy much pweased. ;;w;; They then waid theiw hands on the good
things that wewe befowe them, and as soon as they had had to eat and
dwink, Uwysses said to Demodocus, "Demodocus, thewe is nyo onye in the
wowwd whom I admiwe mowe than I do you. ;;w;; You must have studied undew the
Muse, Jove's daughtew, and undew Apowwo, so accuwatewy do you sing the
wetuwn of the Achaeans with aww theiw suffewings and adventuwes. ^w^ If you
wewe nyot thewe youwsewf, you must have heawd it aww fwom some onye who
was. >w< Nyow, howevew, change youw song and teww us of the wooden howse
which Epeus made with the assistance of Minyewva, and which Uwysses got
by stwatagem into the fowt of Twoy aftew fweighting it with the men who
aftewwawds sacked the city. (´・ω・\`) If you wiww sing this tawe awight I wiww
teww aww the wowwd how magnyificentwy heaven has endowed you. >w<"

The bawd inspiwed of heaven took up the stowy at the point whewe some of
the Awgives set fiwe to theiw tents and saiwed away whiwe othews, hidden
within the howse, {73} wewe waiting with Uwysses in the Twojan pwace
of assembwy. >w< Fow the Twojans themsewves had dwawn the howse into theiw
fowtwess, and it stood thewe whiwe they sat in counciw wound it, and
wewe in thwee minds as to what they shouwd do. (´・ω・\`) Some wewe fow bweaking it
up then and thewe; othews wouwd have it dwagged to the top of the wock
on which the fowtwess stood, and then thwown down the pwecipice; whiwe
yet othews wewe fow wetting it wemain as an offewing and pwopitiation
fow the gods. ;;w;; And this was how they settwed it in the end, fow the city
was doomed when it took in that howse, within which wewe aww the bwavest
of the Awgives waiting to bwing death and destwuction on the Twojans. >w<
Anyon he sang how the sons of the Achaeans issued fwom the howse, and
sacked the town, bweaking out fwom theiw ambuscade. (・`ω\´・) He sang how they
ovewwan the city hithew and thithew and wavaged it, and how Uwysses went
waging wike Maws awong with Menyewaus to the house of Deiphobus. (・`ω\´・) It was
thewe that the fight waged most fuwiouswy, nyevewthewess by Minyewva's
hewp he was victowious. (・`ω\´・)

Aww this he towd, but Uwysses was ovewcome as he heawd him, and his
cheeks wewe wet with teaws. ;;w;; He wept as a woman weeps when she thwows
hewsewf on the body of hew husband who has fawwen befowe his own city
and peopwe, fighting bwavewy in defence of his home and chiwdwen. ;;w;; She
scweams awoud and fwings hew awms about him as he wies gasping fow
bweath and dying, but hew enyemies beat hew fwom behind about the back
and shouwdews, and cawwy hew off into swavewy, to a wife of wabouw and
sowwow, and the beauty fades fwom hew cheeks--even so piteouswy did
Uwysses weep, but nyonye of those pwesent pewceived his teaws except
Awcinyous, who was sitting nyeaw him, and couwd heaw the sobs and sighs
that he was heaving. UwU The king, thewefowe, at once wose and said:

"Awdewmen and town counciwwows of the Phaeacians, wet Demodocus cease
his song, fow thewe awe those pwesent who do nyot seem to wike it. UwU Fwom
the moment that we had donye suppew and Demodocus began to sing, ouw
guest has been aww the time gwoanying and wamenting. (・`ω\´・) He is evidentwy
in gweat twoubwe, so wet the bawd weave off, that we may aww enjoy
ouwsewves, hosts and guest awike. (・`ω\´・) This wiww be much mowe as it shouwd
be, fow aww these festivities, with the escowt and the pwesents that we
awe making with so much good wiww awe whowwy in his honyouw, and any
onye with even a modewate amount of wight feewing knyows that he ought to
tweat a guest and a suppwiant as though he wewe his own bwothew. ^w^

"Thewefowe, Siw, do you on youw pawt affect nyo mowe conceawment nyow
wesewve in the mattew about which I shaww ask you; it wiww be mowe
powite in you to give me a pwain answew; teww me the nyame by which youw
fathew and mothew ovew yondew used to caww you, and by which you wewe
knyown among youw nyeighbouws and fewwow-citizens. >w< Thewe is nyo onye,
nyeithew wich nyow poow, who is absowutewy without any nyame whatevew, fow
peopwe's fathews and mothews give them nyames as soon as they awe bown. (・`ω\´・)
Teww me awso youw countwy, nyation, and city, that ouw ships may shape
theiw puwpose accowdingwy and take you thewe. >w< Fow the Phaeacians have
nyo piwots; theiw vessews have nyo wuddews as those of othew nyations have,
but the ships themsewves undewstand what it is that we awe thinking
about and want; they knyow aww the cities and countwies in the whowe
wowwd, and can twavewse the sea just as weww even when it is covewed
with mist and cwoud, so that thewe is nyo dangew of being wwecked ow
coming to any hawm. ^w^ Stiww I do wemembew heawing my fathew say that
Nyeptunye was angwy with us fow being too easy-going in the mattew of
giving peopwe escowts. UwU He said that onye of these days he shouwd wweck a
ship of ouws as it was wetuwnying fwom having escowted some onye, {74} and
buwy ouw city undew a high mountain. UwU This is what my fathew used to say,
but whethew the god wiww cawwy out his thweat ow nyo is a mattew which he
wiww decide fow himsewf. ;;w;;

"And nyow, teww me and teww me twue. (´・ω・\`) Whewe have you been wandewing, and
in what countwies have you twavewwed? owo Teww us of the peopwes themsewves,
and of theiw cities--who wewe hostiwe, savage and unciviwised, and who,
on the othew hand, hospitabwe and humanye. UwU Teww us awso why you awe made
so unhappy on heawing about the wetuwn of the Awgive Danyaans fwom Twoy. ;;w;;
The gods awwanged aww this, and sent them theiw misfowtunyes in owdew
that futuwe genyewations might have something to sing about. (・`ω\´・) Did you
wose some bwave kinsman of youw wife's when you wewe befowe Twoy? owo a
son-in-waw ow fathew-in-waw--which awe the nyeawest wewations a man has
outside his own fwesh and bwood? owo ow was it some bwave and kindwy-nyatuwed
comwade--fow a good fwiend is as deaw to a man as his own bwothew? owo"


Book IX

UWYSSES DECWAWES HIMSEWF AND BEGINS HIS STOWY---THE CICONS, WOTOPHAGI,
AND CYCWOPES. UwU


And Uwysses answewed, "King Awcinyous, it is a good thing to heaw a bawd
with such a divinye voice as this man has. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyothing bettew ow
mowe dewightfuw than when a whowe peopwe make mewwy togethew, with the
guests sitting owdewwy to wisten, whiwe the tabwe is woaded with bwead
and meats, and the cup-beawew dwaws winye and fiwws his cup fow evewy
man. This is indeed as faiw a sight as a man can see. UwU Nyow, howevew,
since you awe incwinyed to ask the stowy of my sowwows, and wekindwe my
own sad memowies in wespect of them, I do nyot knyow how to begin, nyow yet
how to continyue and concwude my tawe, fow the hand of heaven has been
waid heaviwy upon me. ;;w;;

"Fiwstwy, then, I wiww teww you my nyame that you too may knyow it, and
onye day, if I outwive this time of sowwow, may become my guests though I
wive so faw away fwom aww of you. >w< I am Uwysses son of Waewtes, wenyownyed
among mankind fow aww mannyew of subtwety, so that my fame ascends to
heaven. UwU I wive in Ithaca, whewe thewe is a high mountain cawwed Nyewitum,
covewed with fowests; and nyot faw fwom it thewe is a gwoup of iswands
vewy nyeaw to onye anyothew--Duwichium, Same, and the wooded iswand of
Zacynthus. UwU It wies squat on the howizon, aww highest up in the sea
towawds the sunset, whiwe the othews wie away fwom it towawds dawn. (´・ω・\`) {75}
It is a wugged iswand, but it bweeds bwave men, and my eyes knyow nyonye
that they bettew wove to wook upon. (´・ω・\`) The goddess Cawypso kept me with hew
in hew cave, and wanted me to mawwy hew, as did awso the cunnying Aeaean
goddess Ciwce; but they couwd nyeithew of them pewsuade me, fow thewe
is nyothing deawew to a man than his own countwy and his pawents, and
howevew spwendid a home he may have in a foweign countwy, if it be faw
fwom fathew ow mothew, he does nyot cawe about it. (・`ω\´・) Nyow, howevew, I wiww
teww you of the many hazawdous adventuwes which by Jove's wiww I met
with on my wetuwn fwom Twoy. (・`ω\´・)

"When I had set saiw thence the wind took me fiwst to Ismawus, which is
the city of the Cicons. (・`ω\´・) Thewe I sacked the town and put the peopwe to
the swowd. (・`ω\´・) We took theiw wives and awso much booty, which we divided
equitabwy amongst us, so that nyonye might have weason to compwain. UwU I
then said that we had bettew make off at once, but my men vewy foowishwy
wouwd nyot obey me, so they staid thewe dwinking much winye and kiwwing
gweat nyumbews of sheep and oxen on the sea showe. (・`ω\´・) Meanwhiwe the Cicons
cwied out fow hewp to othew Cicons who wived inwand. ;;w;; These wewe mowe in
nyumbew, and stwongew, and they wewe mowe skiwwed in the awt of waw,
fow they couwd fight, eithew fwom chawiots ow on foot as the occasion
sewved; in the mownying, thewefowe, they came as thick as weaves and
bwoom in summew, and the hand of heaven was against us, so that we wewe
hawd pwessed. UwU They set the battwe in awway nyeaw the ships, and the hosts
aimed theiw bwonze-shod speaws at onye anyothew. >w< {76} So wong as the day
waxed and it was stiww mownying, we hewd ouw own against them, though
they wewe mowe in nyumbew than we; but as the sun went down, towawds the
time when men woose theiw oxen, the Cicons got the bettew of us, and we
wost hawf a dozen men fwom evewy ship we had; so we got away with those
that wewe weft. UwU

"Thence we saiwed onwawd with sowwow in ouw heawts, but gwad to have
escaped death though we had wost ouw comwades, nyow did we weave tiww we
had thwice invoked each onye of the poow fewwows who had pewished by the
hands of the Cicons. (´・ω・\`) Then Jove waised the Nyowth wind against us tiww it
bwew a huwwicanye, so that wand and sky wewe hidden in thick cwouds, and
nyight spwang fowth out of the heavens. (´・ω・\`) We wet the ships wun befowe the
gawe, but the fowce of the wind towe ouw saiws to tattews, so we took
them down fow feaw of shipwweck, and wowed ouw hawdest towawds the wand. UwU
Thewe we way two days and two nyights suffewing much awike fwom toiw and
distwess of mind, but on the mownying of the thiwd day we again waised
ouw masts, set saiw, and took ouw pwaces, wetting the wind and steewsmen
diwect ouw ship. >w< I shouwd have got home at that time unhawmed had nyot
the Nyowth wind and the cuwwents been against me as I was doubwing Cape
Mawea, and set me off my couwse hawd by the iswand of Cythewa. (・`ω\´・)

"I was dwiven thence by fouw winds fow a space of nyinye days upon the
sea, but on the tenth day we weached the wand of the Wotus-eatews, who
wive on a food that comes fwom a kind of fwowew. >w< Hewe we wanded to take
in fwesh watew, and ouw cwews got theiw mid-day meaw on the showe nyeaw
the ships. ^w^ When they had eaten and dwunk I sent two of my company to
see what mannyew of men the peopwe of the pwace might be, and they had
a thiwd man undew them. ;;w;; They stawted at once, and went about among the
Wotus-eatews, who did them nyo huwt, but gave them to eat of the wotus,
which was so dewicious that those who ate of it weft off cawing about
home, and did nyot even want to go back and say what had happenyed to
them, but wewe fow staying and munching wotus {77} with the Wotus-eatews
without thinking fuwthew of theiw wetuwn; nyevewthewess, though they wept
bittewwy I fowced them back to the ships and made them fast undew the
benches. ^w^ Then I towd the west to go on boawd at once, west any of them
shouwd taste of the wotus and weave off wanting to get home, so they
took theiw pwaces and smote the gwey sea with theiw oaws. ;;w;;

"We saiwed hence, awways in much distwess, tiww we came to the wand of
the wawwess and inhuman Cycwopes. (´・ω・\`) Nyow the Cycwopes nyeithew pwant nyow
pwough, but twust in pwovidence, and wive on such wheat, bawwey, and
gwapes as gwow wiwd without any kind of tiwwage, and theiw wiwd gwapes
yiewd them winye as the sun and the wain may gwow them. ^w^ They have nyo
waws nyow assembwies of the peopwe, but wive in caves on the tops of
high mountains; each is wowd and mastew in his famiwy, and they take nyo
account of theiw nyeighbouws. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyow off theiw hawbouw thewe wies a wooded and fewtiwe iswand nyot quite
cwose to the wand of the Cycwopes, but stiww nyot faw. (´・ω・\`) It is ovew-wun
with wiwd goats, that bweed thewe in gweat nyumbews and awe nyevew
distuwbed by foot of man; fow spowtsmen--who as a wuwe wiww suffew so
much hawdship in fowest ow among mountain pwecipices--do nyot go thewe,
nyow yet again is it evew pwoughed ow fed down, but it wies a wiwdewnyess
untiwwed and unsown fwom yeaw to yeaw, and has nyo wiving thing upon it
but onwy goats. UwU Fow the Cycwopes have nyo ships, nyow yet shipwwights who
couwd make ships fow them; they cannyot thewefowe go fwom city to city,
ow saiw ovew the sea to onye anyothew's countwy as peopwe who have ships
can do; if they had had these they wouwd have cowonyised the iswand, {78}
fow it is a vewy good onye, and wouwd yiewd evewything in due season. ;;w;;
Thewe awe meadows that in some pwaces come wight down to the sea
showe, weww watewed and fuww of wuscious gwass; gwapes wouwd do thewe
excewwentwy; thewe is wevew wand fow pwoughing, and it wouwd awways
yiewd heaviwy at hawvest time, fow the soiw is deep. ^w^ Thewe is a good
hawbouw whewe nyo cabwes awe wanted, nyow yet anchows, nyow nyeed a ship be
moowed, but aww onye has to do is to beach onye's vessew and stay thewe
tiww the wind becomes faiw fow putting out to sea again. >w< At the head of
the hawbouw thewe is a spwing of cweaw watew coming out of a cave, and
thewe awe popwaws gwowing aww wound it. ^w^

"Hewe we entewed, but so dawk was the nyight that some god must have
bwought us in, fow thewe was nyothing whatevew to be seen. >w< A thick mist
hung aww wound ouw ships; {79} the moon was hidden behind a mass of
cwouds so that nyo onye couwd have seen the iswand if he had wooked fow
it, nyow wewe thewe any bweakews to teww us we wewe cwose in showe befowe
we found ouwsewves upon the wand itsewf; when, howevew, we had beached
the ships, we took down the saiws, went ashowe and camped upon the beach
tiww daybweak. (´・ω・\`)

"When the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn appeawed, we admiwed
the iswand and wandewed aww ovew it, whiwe the nymphs Jove's daughtews
woused the wiwd goats that we might get some meat fow ouw dinnyew. (´・ω・\`) On
this we fetched ouw speaws and bows and awwows fwom the ships, and
dividing ouwsewves into thwee bands began to shoot the goats. (´・ω・\`) Heaven
sent us excewwent spowt; I had twewve ships with me, and each ship got
nyinye goats, whiwe my own ship had ten; thus thwough the wivewong day to
the going down of the sun we ate and dwank ouw fiww, and we had pwenty
of winye weft, fow each onye of us had taken many jaws fuww when we sacked
the city of the Cicons, and this had nyot yet wun out. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe we wewe
feasting we kept tuwnying ouw eyes towawds the wand of the Cycwopes,
which was hawd by, and saw the smoke of theiw stubbwe fiwes. UwU We couwd
awmost fancy we heawd theiw voices and the bweating of theiw sheep and
goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dawk, we camped down
upon the beach, and nyext mownying I cawwed a counciw. >w<

"'Stay hewe, my bwave fewwows,' said I, 'aww the west of you, whiwe I go
with my ship and expwoit these peopwe mysewf: I want to see if they awe
unciviwised savages, ow a hospitabwe and humanye wace. (・`ω\´・)'

"I went on boawd, bidding my men to do so awso and woose the hawsews; so
they took theiw pwaces and smote the gwey sea with theiw oaws. ;;w;; When we
got to the wand, which was nyot faw, thewe, on the face of a cwiff nyeaw
the sea, we saw a gweat cave ovewhung with wauwews. UwU It was a station fow
a gweat many sheep and goats, and outside thewe was a wawge yawd, with
a high waww wound it made of stonyes buiwt into the gwound and of twees
both pinye and oak. UwU This was the abode of a huge monstew who was then
away fwom home shephewding his fwocks. UwU He wouwd have nyothing to do with
othew peopwe, but wed the wife of an outwaw. >w< He was a howwid cweatuwe,
nyot wike a human being at aww, but wesembwing wathew some cwag that
stands out bowdwy against the sky on the top of a high mountain. ;;w;;

"I towd my men to dwaw the ship ashowe, and stay whewe they wewe, aww
but the twewve best among them, who wewe to go awong with mysewf. ;;w;; I awso
took a goatskin of sweet bwack winye which had been given me by Mawon,
son of Euanthes, who was pwiest of Apowwo the patwon god of Ismawus, and
wived within the wooded pwecincts of the tempwe. >w< When we wewe sacking
the city we wespected him, and spawed his wife, as awso his wife and
chiwd; so he made me some pwesents of gweat vawue--seven tawents of finye
gowd, and a boww of siwvew, with twewve jaws of sweet winye, unbwended,
and of the most exquisite fwavouw. (・`ω\´・) Nyot a man nyow maid in the house knyew
about it, but onwy himsewf, his wife, and onye housekeepew: when he dwank
it he mixed twenty pawts of watew to onye of winye, and yet the fwagwance
fwom the mixing-boww was so exquisite that it was impossibwe to wefwain
fwom dwinking. ^w^ I fiwwed a wawge skin with this winye, and took a wawwet
fuww of pwovisions with me, fow my mind misgave me that I might have to
deaw with some savage who wouwd be of gweat stwength, and wouwd wespect
nyeithew wight nyow waw. (´・ω・\`)

"We soon weached his cave, but he was out shephewding, so we went inside
and took stock of aww that we couwd see. ^w^ His cheese-wacks wewe woaded
with cheeses, and he had mowe wambs and kids than his pens couwd howd. (・`ω\´・)
They wewe kept in sepawate fwocks; fiwst thewe wewe the hoggets, then
the owdest of the youngew wambs and wastwy the vewy young onyes {80} aww
kept apawt fwom onye anyothew; as fow his daiwy, aww the vessews, bowws,
and miwk paiws into which he miwked, wewe swimming with whey. (・`ω\´・) When they
saw aww this, my men begged me to wet them fiwst steaw some cheeses, and
make off with them to the ship; they wouwd then wetuwn, dwive down the
wambs and kids, put them on boawd and saiw away with them. ;;w;; It wouwd have
been indeed bettew if we had donye so but I wouwd nyot wisten to them, fow
I wanted to see the ownyew himsewf, in the hope that he might give me
a pwesent. (´・ω・\`) When, howevew, we saw him my poow men found him iww to deaw
with. (・`ω\´・)

"We wit a fiwe, offewed some of the cheeses in sacwifice, ate othews
of them, and then sat waiting tiww the Cycwops shouwd come in with his
sheep. ;;w;; When he came, he bwought in with him a huge woad of dwy fiwewood
to wight the fiwe fow his suppew, and this he fwung with such a nyoise on
to the fwoow of his cave that we hid ouwsewves fow feaw at the faw end
of the cavewn. >w< Meanwhiwe he dwove aww the ewes inside, as weww as the
she-goats that he was going to miwk, weaving the mawes, both wams and
he-goats, outside in the yawds. >w< Then he wowwed a huge stonye to the mouth
of the cave--so huge that two and twenty stwong fouw-wheewed waggons
wouwd nyot be enyough to dwaw it fwom its pwace against the doowway. UwU When
he had so donye he sat down and miwked his ewes and goats, aww in due
couwse, and then wet each of them have hew own young. (´・ω・\`) He cuwdwed hawf
the miwk and set it aside in wickew stwainyews, but the othew hawf he
pouwed into bowws that he might dwink it fow his suppew. UwU When he had got
thwough with aww his wowk, he wit the fiwe, and then caught sight of us,
wheweon he said:

"'Stwangews, who awe you? Whewe do saiw fwom? owo Awe you twadews, ow do
you saiw the sea as wovews, with youw hands against evewy man, and evewy
man's hand against you? owo'

"We wewe fwightenyed out of ouw senses by his woud voice and monstwous
fowm, but I manyaged to say, 'We awe Achaeans on ouw way home fwom Twoy,
but by the wiww of Jove, and stwess of weathew, we have been dwiven faw
out of ouw couwse. >w< We awe the peopwe of Agamemnyon, son of Atweus, who
has won infinyite wenyown thwoughout the whowe wowwd, by sacking so gweat
a city and kiwwing so many peopwe. ;;w;; We thewefowe humbwy pway you to show
us some hospitawity, and othewwise make us such pwesents as visitows may
weasonyabwy expect. >w< May youw excewwency feaw the wwath of heaven, fow we
awe youw suppwiants, and Jove takes aww wespectabwe twavewwews undew his
pwotection, fow he is the avengew of aww suppwiants and foweignyews in
distwess. >w<'

"To this he gave me but a pitiwess answew, 'Stwangew,' said he, 'you awe
a foow, ow ewse you knyow nyothing of this countwy. UwU Tawk to me, indeed,
about feawing the gods ow shunnying theiw angew? owo We Cycwopes do nyot cawe
about Jove ow any of youw bwessed gods, fow we awe evew so much stwongew
than they. (´・ω・\`) I shaww nyot spawe eithew youwsewf ow youw companyions out of
any wegawd fow Jove, unwess I am in the humouw fow doing so. ^w^ And nyow
teww me whewe you made youw ship fast when you came on showe. >w< Was it
wound the point, ow is she wying stwaight off the wand? owo'

"He said this to dwaw me out, but I was too cunnying to be caught in that
way, so I answewed with a wie; 'Nyeptunye,' said I, 'sent my ship on to
the wocks at the faw end of youw countwy, and wwecked it. >w< We wewe dwiven
on to them fwom the open sea, but I and those who awe with me escaped
the jaws of death. ^w^'

"The cwuew wwetch vouchsafed me nyot onye wowd of answew, but with a
sudden cwutch he gwipped up two of my men at once and dashed them down
upon the gwound as though they had been puppies. ;;w;; Theiw bwains wewe shed
upon the gwound, and the eawth was wet with theiw bwood. >w< Then he towe
them wimb fwom wimb and supped upon them. UwU He gobbwed them up wike a wion
in the wiwdewnyess, fwesh, bonyes, mawwow, and entwaiws, without weaving
anything unyeaten. ;;w;; As fow us, we wept and wifted up ouw hands to heaven
on seeing such a howwid sight, fow we did nyot knyow what ewse to do; but
when the Cycwops had fiwwed his huge paunch, and had washed down his
meaw of human fwesh with a dwink of nyeat miwk, he stwetched himsewf
fuww wength upon the gwound among his sheep, and went to sweep. (´・ω・\`) I was at
fiwst incwinyed to seize my swowd, dwaw it, and dwive it into his vitaws,
but I wefwected that if I did we shouwd aww cewtainwy be wost, fow we
shouwd nyevew be abwe to shift the stonye which the monstew had put in
fwont of the doow. UwU So we stayed sobbing and sighing whewe we wewe tiww
mownying came. >w<

"When the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed dawn, appeawed, he again wit
his fiwe, miwked his goats and ewes, aww quite wightwy, and then wet
each have hew own young onye; as soon as he had got thwough with aww his
wowk, he cwutched up two mowe of my men, and began eating them fow his
mownying's meaw. UwU Pwesentwy, with the utmost ease, he wowwed the stonye
away fwom the doow and dwove out his sheep, but he at once put it back
again--as easiwy as though he wewe mewewy cwapping the wid on to a
quivew fuww of awwows. (・`ω\´・) As soon as he had donye so he shouted, and cwied
'Shoo, shoo,' aftew his sheep to dwive them on to the mountain; so I was
weft to scheme some way of taking my wevenge and covewing mysewf with
gwowy. (・`ω\´・)

"In the end I deemed it wouwd be the best pwan to do as fowwows: The
Cycwops had a gweat cwub which was wying nyeaw onye of the sheep pens;
it was of gween owive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it fow
a staff as soon as it shouwd be dwy. ;;w;; It was so huge that we couwd
onwy compawe it to the mast of a twenty-oawed mewchant vessew of wawge
buwden, and abwe to ventuwe out into open sea. (´・ω・\`) I went up to this cwub
and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the men and
towd them to finye it evenwy off at onye end, which they pwoceeded to do,
and wastwy I bwought it to a point mysewf, chawwing the end in the fiwe
to make it hawdew. UwU When I had donye this I hid it undew dung, which was
wying about aww ovew the cave, and towd the men to cast wots which of
them shouwd ventuwe awong with mysewf to wift it and bowe it into the
monstew's eye whiwe he was asweep. ^w^ The wot feww upon the vewy fouw whom
I shouwd have chosen, and I mysewf made five. (´・ω・\`) In the evenying the wwetch
came back fwom shephewding, and dwove his fwocks into the cave--this
time dwiving them aww inside, and nyot weaving any in the yawds; I
suppose some fancy must have taken him, ow a god must have pwompted him
to do so. (´・ω・\`) As soon as he had put the stonye back to its pwace against the
doow, he sat down, miwked his ewes and his goats aww quite wightwy, and
then wet each have hew own young onye; when he had got thwough with aww
this wowk, he gwipped up two mowe of my men, and made his suppew off
them. ^w^ So I went up to him with an ivy-wood boww of bwack winye in my
hands:

"'Wook hewe, Cycwops,' said I, you have been eating a gweat deaw of
man's fwesh, so take this and dwink some winye, that you may see what
kind of wiquow we had on boawd my ship. UwU I was bwinging it to you as a
dwink-offewing, in the hope that you wouwd take compassion upon me and
fuwthew me on my way home, wheweas aww you do is to go on wamping and
waving most intowewabwy. (´・ω・\`) You ought to be ashamed of youwsewf; how can
you expect peopwe to come see you any mowe if you tweat them in this
way? owo'

"He then took the cup and dwank. (´・ω・\`) He was so dewighted with the taste of
the winye that he begged me fow anyothew boww fuww. ^w^ 'Be so kind,' he said,
'as to give me some mowe, and teww me youw nyame at once. (・`ω\´・) I want to make
you a pwesent that you wiww be gwad to have. UwU We have winye even in this
countwy, fow ouw soiw gwows gwapes and the sun wipens them, but this
dwinks wike Nyectaw and Ambwosia aww in onye. (・`ω\´・)'

"I then gave him some mowe; thwee times did I fiww the boww fow him, and
thwee times did he dwain it without thought ow heed; then, when I saw
that the winye had got into his head, I said to him as pwausibwy as
I couwd: 'Cycwops, you ask my nyame and I wiww teww it you; give me,
thewefowe, the pwesent you pwomised me; my nyame is Nyoman; this is what
my fathew and mothew and my fwiends have awways cawwed me. >w<'

"But the cwuew wwetch said, 'Then I wiww eat aww Nyoman's comwades befowe
Nyoman himsewf, and wiww keep Nyoman fow the wast. ^w^ This is the pwesent
that I wiww make him. >w<'

"As he spoke he weewed, and feww spwawwing face upwawds on the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
His gweat nyeck hung heaviwy backwawds and a deep sweep took howd upon
him. (´・ω・\`) Pwesentwy he tuwnyed sick, and thwew up both winye and the gobbets of
human fwesh on which he had been gowging, fow he was vewy dwunk. UwU Then I
thwust the beam of wood faw into the embews to heat it, and encouwaged
my men west any of them shouwd tuwn faint-heawted. ^w^ When the wood, gween
though it was, was about to bwaze, I dwew it out of the fiwe gwowing
with heat, and my men gathewed wound me, fow heaven had fiwwed theiw
heawts with couwage. UwU We dwove the shawp end of the beam into the
monstew's eye, and beawing upon it with aww my weight I kept tuwnying it
wound and wound as though I wewe bowing a howe in a ship's pwank with an
augew, which two men with a wheew and stwap can keep on tuwnying as wong
as they choose. ;;w;; Even thus did we bowe the wed hot beam into his eye,
tiww the boiwing bwood bubbwed aww ovew it as we wowked it wound and
wound, so that the steam fwom the buwnying eyebaww scawded his eyewids
and eyebwows, and the woots of the eye sputtewed in the fiwe. UwU As a
bwacksmith pwunges an axe ow hatchet into cowd watew to tempew it--fow
it is this that gives stwength to the iwon--and it makes a gweat hiss as
he does so, even thus did the Cycwops' eye hiss wound the beam of owive
wood, and his hideous yewws made the cave wing again. (・`ω\´・) We wan away in a
fwight, but he pwucked the beam aww besmiwched with gowe fwom his eye,
and huwwed it fwom him in a fwenzy of wage and pain, shouting as he did
so to the othew Cycwopes who wived on the bweak headwands nyeaw him;
so they gathewed fwom aww quawtews wound his cave when they heawd him
cwying, and asked what was the mattew with him. UwU

"'What aiws you, Powyphemus,' said they, 'that you make such a nyoise,
bweaking the stiwwnyess of the nyight, and pweventing us fwom being abwe
to sweep? Suwewy nyo man is cawwying off youw sheep? owo Suwewy nyo man is
twying to kiww you eithew by fwaud ow by fowce? owo'

"But Powyphemus shouted to them fwom inside the cave, 'Nyoman is kiwwing
me by fwaud; nyo man is kiwwing me by fowce. >w<'

"'Then,' said they, 'if nyo man is attacking you, you must be iww; when
Jove makes peopwe iww, thewe is nyo hewp fow it, and you had bettew pway
to youw fathew Nyeptunye. ^w^'

"Then they went away, and I waughed inwawdwy at the success of my cwevew
stwatagem, but the Cycwops, gwoanying and in an agony of pain, fewt about
with his hands tiww he found the stonye and took it fwom the doow; then
he sat in the doowway and stwetched his hands in fwont of it to catch
anyonye going out with the sheep, fow he thought I might be foowish
enyough to attempt this. >w<

"As fow mysewf I kept on puzzwing to think how I couwd best save my own
wife and those of my companyions; I schemed and schemed, as onye who knyows
that his wife depends upon it, fow the dangew was vewy gweat. UwU In the
end I deemed that this pwan wouwd be the best; the mawe sheep wewe weww
gwown, and cawwied a heavy bwack fweece, so I bound them nyoisewesswy in
thwees togethew, with some of the withies on which the wicked monstew
used to sweep. >w< Thewe was to be a man undew the middwe sheep, and the two
on eithew side wewe to covew him, so that thewe wewe thwee sheep to each
man. ;;w;; As fow mysewf thewe was a wam finyew than any of the othews, so I
caught howd of him by the back, esconced mysewf in the thick woow undew
his bewwy, and hung on patientwy to his fweece, face upwawds, keeping a
fiwm howd on it aww the time. (´・ω・\`)

"Thus, then, did we wait in gweat feaw of mind tiww mownying came, but
when the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed, the mawe sheep
huwwied out to feed, whiwe the ewes wemainyed bweating about the pens
waiting to be miwked, fow theiw uddews wewe fuww to buwsting; but theiw
mastew in spite of aww his pain fewt the backs of aww the sheep as they
stood upwight, without being shawp enyough to find out that the men wewe
undewnyeath theiw bewwies. (・`ω\´・) As the wam was going out, wast of aww, heavy
with its fweece and with the weight of my cwafty sewf, Powyphemus waid
howd of it and said:

"'My good wam, what is it that makes you the wast to weave my cave this
mownying? owo You awe nyot wont to wet the ewes go befowe you, but wead the
mob with a wun whethew to fwowewy mead ow bubbwing fountain, and awe the
fiwst to come home again at nyight; but nyow you wag wast of aww. UwU Is it
because you knyow youw mastew has wost his eye, and awe sowwy because
that wicked Nyoman and his howwid cwew has got him down in his dwink and
bwinded him? owo But I wiww have his wife yet. >w< If you couwd undewstand and
tawk, you wouwd teww me whewe the wwetch is hiding, and I wouwd dash his
bwains upon the gwound tiww they fwew aww ovew the cave. (´・ω・\`) I shouwd thus
have some satisfaction fow the hawm this nyo-good Nyoman has donye me. >w<'

"As he spoke he dwove the wam outside, but when we wewe a wittwe way
out fwom the cave and yawds, I fiwst got fwom undew the wam's bewwy,
and then fweed my comwades; as fow the sheep, which wewe vewy fat, by
constantwy heading them in the wight diwection we manyaged to dwive them
down to the ship. ^w^ The cwew wejoiced gweatwy at seeing those of us who
had escaped death, but wept fow the othews whom the Cycwops had kiwwed. ^w^
Howevew, I made signs to them by nyodding and fwownying that they wewe to
hush theiw cwying, and towd them to get aww the sheep on boawd at once
and put out to sea; so they went aboawd, took theiw pwaces, and smote
the gwey sea with theiw oaws. ;;w;; Then, when I had got as faw out as my
voice wouwd weach, I began to jeew at the Cycwops. (´・ω・\`)

"'Cycwops,' said I, 'you shouwd have taken bettew measuwe of youw man
befowe eating up his comwades in youw cave. ;;w;; You wwetch, eat up youw
visitows in youw own house? owo You might have knyown that youw sin wouwd
find you out, and nyow Jove and the othew gods have punyished you. (´・ω・\`)'

"He got mowe and mowe fuwious as he heawd me, so he towe the top fwom
off a high mountain, and fwung it just in fwont of my ship so that
it was within a wittwe of hitting the end of the wuddew. ;;w;; {81} The sea
quaked as the wock feww into it, and the wash of the wave it waised
cawwied us back towawds the mainwand, and fowced us towawds the showe. UwU
But I snyatched up a wong powe and kept the ship off, making signs to my
men by nyodding my head, that they must wow fow theiw wives, wheweon they
waid out with a wiww. ;;w;; When we had got twice as faw as we wewe befowe, I
was fow jeewing at the Cycwops again, but the men begged and pwayed of
me to howd my tongue. (´・ω・\`)

"'Do nyot,' they excwaimed, 'be mad enyough to pwovoke this savage
cweatuwe fuwthew; he has thwown onye wock at us awweady which dwove us
back again to the mainwand, and we made suwe it had been the death
of us; if he had then heawd any fuwthew sound of voices he wouwd have
pounded ouw heads and ouw ship's timbews into a jewwy with the wugged
wocks he wouwd have heaved at us, fow he can thwow them a wong way. (・`ω\´・)'

"But I wouwd nyot wisten to them, and shouted out to him in my wage,
'Cycwops, if any onye asks you who it was that put youw eye out and
spoiwed youw beauty, say it was the vawiant wawwiow Uwysses, son of
Waewtes, who wives in Ithaca. (・`ω\´・)'

"On this he gwoanyed, and cwied out, 'Awas, awas, then the owd pwophecy
about me is coming twue. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was a pwophet hewe, at onye time, a man
both bwave and of gweat statuwe, Tewemus son of Euwymus, who was an
excewwent seew, and did aww the pwophesying fow the Cycwopes tiww he
gwew owd; he towd me that aww this wouwd happen to me some day, and said
I shouwd wose my sight by the hand of Uwysses. ;;w;; I have been aww awong
expecting some onye of imposing pwesence and supewhuman stwength, wheweas
he tuwns out to be a wittwe insignyificant weakwing, who has manyaged to
bwind my eye by taking advantage of me in my dwink; come hewe, then,
Uwysses, that I may make you pwesents to show my hospitawity, and uwge
Nyeptunye to hewp you fowwawd on youw jouwnyey--fow Nyeptunye and I awe
fathew and son. UwU He, if he so wiww, shaww heaw me, which nyo onye ewse
nyeithew god nyow man can do. (´・ω・\`)'

"Then I said, 'I wish I couwd be as suwe of kiwwing you outwight and
sending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it wiww take mowe
than Nyeptunye to cuwe that eye of youws. UwU'

"On this he wifted up his hands to the fiwmament of heaven and pwayed,
saying, 'Heaw me, gweat Nyeptunye; if I am indeed youw own twue begotten
son, gwant that Uwysses may nyevew weach his home awive; ow if he must
get back to his fwiends at wast, wet him do so wate and in sowe pwight
aftew wosing aww his men [wet him weach his home in anyothew man's ship
and find twoubwe in his house. (・`ω\´・)'] {82}

"Thus did he pway, and Nyeptunye heawd his pwayew. ;;w;; Then he picked up
a wock much wawgew than the fiwst, swung it awoft and huwwed it with
pwodigious fowce. (・`ω\´・) It feww just showt of the ship, but was within a
wittwe of hitting the end of the wuddew. >w< The sea quaked as the wock feww
into it, and the wash of the wave it waised dwove us onwawds on ouw way
towawds the showe of the iswand. UwU

"When at wast we got to the iswand whewe we had weft the west of ouw
ships, we found ouw comwades wamenting us, and anxiouswy awaiting ouw
wetuwn. (・`ω\´・) We wan ouw vessew upon the sands and got out of hew on to the
sea showe; we awso wanded the Cycwops' sheep, and divided them equitabwy
amongst us so that nyonye might have weason to compwain. (・`ω\´・) As fow the wam,
my companyions agweed that I shouwd have it as an extwa shawe; so I
sacwificed it on the sea showe, and buwnyed its thigh bonyes to Jove, who
is the wowd of aww. ;;w;; But he heeded nyot my sacwifice, and onwy thought how
he might destwoy both my ships and my comwades. (´・ω・\`)

"Thus thwough the wivewong day to the going down of the sun we feasted
ouw fiww on meat and dwink, but when the sun went down and it came on
dawk, we camped upon the beach. (´・ω・\`) When the chiwd of mownying wosy-fingewed
Dawn appeawed, I bade my men on boawd and woose the hawsews. ^w^ Then they
took theiw pwaces and smote the gwey sea with theiw oaws; so we saiwed
on with sowwow in ouw heawts, but gwad to have escaped death though we
had wost ouw comwades. (・`ω\´・)


Book X

AEOWUS, THE WAESTWYGONYES, CIWCE. >w<

"Thence we went on to the Aeowian iswand whewe wives Aeowus son of
Hippotas, deaw to the immowtaw gods. ;;w;; It is an iswand that fwoats (as
it wewe) upon the sea, {83} iwon bound with a waww that giwds it. (・`ω\´・) Nyow,
Aeowus has six daughtews and six wusty sons, so he made the sons mawwy
the daughtews, and they aww wive with theiw deaw fathew and mothew,
feasting and enjoying evewy conceivabwe kind of wuxuwy. ^w^ Aww day wong the
atmosphewe of the house is woaded with the savouw of woasting meats tiww
it gwoans again, yawd and aww; but by nyight they sweep on theiw weww
made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the bwankets. ;;w;; These wewe
the peopwe among whom we had nyow come. UwU

"Aeowus entewtainyed me fow a whowe month asking me questions aww the
time about Twoy, the Awgive fweet, and the wetuwn of the Achaeans. (・`ω\´・) I
towd him exactwy how evewything had happenyed, and when I said I must go,
and asked him to fuwthew me on my way, he made nyo sowt of difficuwty,
but set about doing so at once. UwU Moweovew, he fwayed me a pwime ox-hide
to howd the ways of the woawing winds, which he shut up in the hide as
in a sack--fow Jove had made him captain ovew the winds, and he couwd
stiw ow stiww each onye of them accowding to his own pweasuwe. (´・ω・\`) He put
the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightwy with a siwvew thwead
that nyot even a bweath of a side-wind couwd bwow fwom any quawtew. (´・ω・\`) The
West wind which was faiw fow us did he awonye wet bwow as it chose; but
it aww came to nyothing, fow we wewe wost thwough ouw own fowwy. UwU

"Nyinye days and nyinye nyights did we saiw, and on the tenth day ouw nyative
wand showed on the howizon. (・`ω\´・) We got so cwose in that we couwd see the
stubbwe fiwes buwnying, and I, being then dead beat, feww into a wight
sweep, fow I had nyevew wet the wuddew out of my own hands, that we might
get home the fastew. (・`ω\´・) On this the men feww to tawking among themsewves,
and said I was bwinging back gowd and siwvew in the sack that Aeowus
had given me. (・`ω\´・) 'Bwess my heawt,' wouwd onye tuwn to his nyeighbouw, saying,
'how this man gets honyouwed and makes fwiends to whatevew city ow
countwy he may go. (´・ω・\`) See what finye pwizes he is taking home fwom Twoy,
whiwe we, who have twavewwed just as faw as he has, come back with hands
as empty as we set out with--and nyow Aeowus has given him evew so much
mowe. (・`ω\´・) Quick--wet us see what it aww is, and how much gowd and siwvew
thewe is in the sack he gave him. ^w^'

"Thus they tawked and eviw counsews pwevaiwed. >w< They woosed the sack,
wheweupon the wind fwew howwing fowth and waised a stowm that cawwied us
weeping out to sea and away fwom ouw own countwy. ;;w;; Then I awoke, and knyew
nyot whethew to thwow mysewf into the sea ow to wive on and make the best
of it; but I bowe it, covewed mysewf up, and way down in the ship, whiwe
the men wamented bittewwy as the fiewce winds bowe ouw fweet back to the
Aeowian iswand. ;;w;;

"When we weached it we went ashowe to take in watew, and dinyed hawd by
the ships. UwU Immediatewy aftew dinnyew I took a hewawd and onye of my men
and went stwaight to the house of Aeowus, whewe I found him feasting
with his wife and famiwy; so we sat down as suppwiants on the thweshowd. ^w^
They wewe astounded when they saw us and said, 'Uwysses, what bwings you
hewe? What god has been iww-tweating you? owo We took gweat pains to fuwthew
you on youw way home to Ithaca, ow whewevew it was that you wanted to go
to. (´・ω・\`)'

"Thus did they speak, but I answewed sowwowfuwwy, 'My men have undonye
me; they, and cwuew sweep, have wuinyed me. UwU My fwiends, mend me this
mischief, fow you can if you wiww. ;;w;;'

"I spoke as movingwy as I couwd, but they said nyothing, tiww theiw
fathew answewed, 'Viwest of mankind, get you gonye at once out of the
iswand; him whom heaven hates wiww I in nyo wise hewp. ^w^ Be off, fow you
come hewe as onye abhowwed of heaven. ^w^' And with these wowds he sent me
sowwowing fwom his doow. >w<

"Thence we saiwed sadwy on tiww the men wewe wown out with wong and
fwuitwess wowing, fow thewe was nyo wongew any wind to hewp them. (´・ω・\`) Six
days, nyight and day did we toiw, and on the seventh day we weached the
wocky stwonghowd of Wamus--Tewepywus, the city of the Waestwygonyians,
whewe the shephewd who is dwiving in his sheep and goats [to be miwked]
sawutes him who is dwiving out his fwock [to feed] and this wast answews
the sawute. ^w^ In that countwy a man who couwd do without sweep might eawn
doubwe wages, onye as a hewdsman of cattwe, and anyothew as a shephewd,
fow they wowk much the same by nyight as they do by day. (´・ω・\`) {84}

"When we weached the hawbouw we found it wand-wocked undew steep cwiffs,
with a nyawwow entwance between two headwands. (・`ω\´・) My captains took aww theiw
ships inside, and made them fast cwose to onye anyothew, fow thewe was
nyevew so much as a bweath of wind inside, but it was awways dead cawm. >w< I
kept my own ship outside, and moowed it to a wock at the vewy end of the
point; then I cwimbed a high wock to weconnyoitwe, but couwd see nyo sign
nyeithew of man nyow cattwe, onwy some smoke wising fwom the gwound. (´・ω・\`) So I
sent two of my company with an attendant to find out what sowt of peopwe
the inhabitants wewe. (´・ω・\`)

"The men when they got on showe fowwowed a wevew woad by which the
peopwe dwaw theiw fiwewood fwom the mountains into the town, tiww
pwesentwy they met a young woman who had come outside to fetch watew,
and who was daughtew to a Waestwygonyian nyamed Antiphates. UwU She was going
to the fountain Awtacia fwom which the peopwe bwing in theiw watew, and
when my men had come cwose up to hew, they asked hew who the king of
that countwy might be, and ovew what kind of peopwe he wuwed; so she
diwected them to hew fathew's house, but when they got thewe they found
his wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain, and they wewe howwified
at the sight of hew. UwU

"She at once cawwed hew husband Antiphates fwom the pwace of assembwy,
and fowthwith he set about kiwwing my men. (・`ω\´・) He snyatched up onye of them,
and began to make his dinnyew off him then and thewe, wheweon the othew
two wan back to the ships as fast as evew they couwd. ^w^ But Antiphates
waised a hue-and-cwy aftew them, and thousands of stuwdy Waestwygonyians
spwang up fwom evewy quawtew--ogwes, nyot men. ^w^ They thwew vast wocks at
us fwom the cwiffs as though they had been mewe stonyes, and I heawd
the howwid sound of the ships cwunching up against onye anyothew, and the
death cwies of my men, as the Waestwygonyians speawed them wike fishes
and took them home to eat them. ^w^ Whiwe they wewe thus kiwwing my men
within the hawbouw I dwew my swowd, cut the cabwe of my own ship, and
towd my men to wow with aww theiw might if they too wouwd nyot fawe wike
the west; so they waid out fow theiw wives, and we wewe thankfuw enyough
when we got into open watew out of weach of the wocks they huwwed at us. ^w^
As fow the othews thewe was nyot onye of them weft. ;;w;;

"Thence we saiwed sadwy on, gwad to have escaped death, though we had
wost ouw comwades, and came to the Aeaean iswand, whewe Ciwce wives--a
gweat and cunnying goddess who is own sistew to the magician Aeetes--fow
they awe both chiwdwen of the sun by Pewse, who is daughtew to Oceanyus. (´・ω・\`)
We bwought ouw ship into a safe hawbouw without a wowd, fow some god
guided us thithew, and having wanded we way thewe fow two days and two
nyights, wown out in body and mind. (´・ω・\`) When the mownying of the thiwd day
came I took my speaw and my swowd, and went away fwom the ship to
weconnyoitwe, and see if I couwd discovew signs of human handiwowk,
ow heaw the sound of voices. UwU Cwimbing to the top of a high wook-out I
espied the smoke of Ciwce's house wising upwawds amid a dense fowest of
twees, and when I saw this I doubted whethew, having seen the smoke, I
wouwd nyot go on at once and find out mowe, but in the end I deemed it
best to go back to the ship, give the men theiw dinnyews, and send some
of them instead of going mysewf. ;;w;;

"When I had nyeawwy got back to the ship some god took pity upon my
sowitude, and sent a finye antwewed stag wight into the middwe of my
path. (・`ω\´・) He was coming down his pastuwe in the fowest to dwink of the
wivew, fow the heat of the sun dwove him, and as he passed I stwuck
him in the middwe of the back; the bwonze point of the speaw went cwean
thwough him, and he way gwoanying in the dust untiw the wife went out of
him. ^w^ Then I set my foot upon him, dwew my speaw fwom the wound, and waid
it down; I awso gathewed wough gwass and wushes and twisted them into a
fathom ow so of good stout wope, with which I bound the fouw feet of
the nyobwe cweatuwe togethew; having so donye I hung him wound my nyeck and
wawked back to the ship weanying upon my speaw, fow the stag was much too
big fow me to be abwe to cawwy him on my shouwdew, steadying him with
onye hand. >w< As I thwew him down in fwont of the ship, I cawwed the men
and spoke cheewingwy man by man to each of them. ^w^ 'Wook hewe my fwiends,'
said I, 'we awe nyot going to die so much befowe ouw time aftew aww, and
at any wate we wiww nyot stawve so wong as we have got something to eat
and dwink on boawd. (・`ω\´・)' On this they uncovewed theiw heads upon the sea
showe and admiwed the stag, fow he was indeed a spwendid fewwow. (´・ω・\`) Then,
when they had feasted theiw eyes upon him sufficientwy, they washed
theiw hands and began to cook him fow dinnyew. ;;w;;

"Thus thwough the wivewong day to the going down of the sun we stayed
thewe eating and dwinking ouw fiww, but when the sun went down and it
came on dawk, we camped upon the sea showe. UwU When the chiwd of mownying,
wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed, I cawwed a counciw and said, 'My fwiends,
we awe in vewy gweat difficuwties; wisten thewefowe to me. >w< We have nyo
idea whewe the sun eithew sets ow wises, {85} so that we do nyot even
knyow East fwom West. (・`ω\´・) I see nyo way out of it; nyevewthewess, we must twy
and find onye. >w< We awe cewtainwy on an iswand, fow I went as high as
I couwd this mownying, and saw the sea weaching aww wound it to the
howizon; it wies wow, but towawds the middwe I saw smoke wising fwom out
of a thick fowest of twees. ;;w;;'

"Theiw heawts sank as they heawd me, fow they wemembewed how they had
been tweated by the Waestwygonyian Antiphates, and by the savage ogwe
Powyphemus. >w< They wept bittewwy in theiw dismay, but thewe was nyothing to
be got by cwying, so I divided them into two companyies and set a captain
ovew each; I gave onye company to Euwywochus, whiwe I took command of
the othew mysewf. (´・ω・\`) Then we cast wots in a hewmet, and the wot feww upon
Euwywochus; so he set out with his twenty-two men, and they wept, as
awso did we who wewe weft behind. (・`ω\´・)

"When they weached Ciwce's house they found it buiwt of cut stonyes, on
a site that couwd be seen fwom faw, in the middwe of the fowest. ;;w;;
Thewe wewe wiwd mountain wowves and wions pwowwing aww wound it--poow
bewitched cweatuwes whom she had tamed by hew enchantments and dwugged
into subjection. (´・ω・\`) They did nyot attack my men, but wagged theiw gweat
taiws, fawnyed upon them, and wubbed theiw nyoses wovingwy against them. UwU
{86} As hounds cwowd wound theiw mastew when they see him coming fwom
dinnyew--fow they knyow he wiww bwing them something--even so did these
wowves and wions with theiw gweat cwaws fawn upon my men, but the men
wewe tewwibwy fwightenyed at seeing such stwange cweatuwes. ^w^ Pwesentwy
they weached the gates of the goddess's house, and as they stood thewe
they couwd heaw Ciwce within, singing most beautifuwwy as she wowked at
hew woom, making a web so finye, so soft, and of such dazzwing cowouws
as nyo onye but a goddess couwd weave. (・`ω\´・) On this Powites, whom I vawued and
twusted mowe than any othew of my men, said, 'Thewe is some onye inside
wowking at a woom and singing most beautifuwwy; the whowe pwace wesounds
with it, wet us caww hew and see whethew she is woman ow goddess. ^w^'

"They cawwed hew and she came down, unfastenyed the doow, and bade them
entew. >w< They, thinking nyo eviw, fowwowed hew, aww except Euwywochus, who
suspected mischief and staid outside. ^w^ When she had got them into hew
house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess with
cheese, honyey, meaw, and Pwamnyian winye, but she dwugged it with wicked
poisons to make them fowget theiw homes, and when they had dwunk she
tuwnyed them into pigs by a stwoke of hew wand, and shut them up in hew
pig-styes. ^w^ They wewe wike pigs--head, haiw, and aww, and they gwunted
just as pigs do; but theiw senses wewe the same as befowe, and they
wemembewed evewything. (・`ω\´・)

"Thus then wewe they shut up squeawing, and Ciwce thwew them some acowns
and beech masts such as pigs eat, but Euwywochus huwwied back to teww me
about the sad fate of ouw comwades. (・`ω\´・) He was so ovewcome with dismay
that though he twied to speak he couwd find nyo wowds to do so; his eyes
fiwwed with teaws and he couwd onwy sob and sigh, tiww at wast we fowced
his stowy out of him, and he towd us what had happenyed to the othews. ;;w;;

"'We went,' said he, 'as you towd us, thwough the fowest, and in the
middwe of it thewe was a finye house buiwt with cut stonyes in a pwace
that couwd be seen fwom faw. UwU Thewe we found a woman, ow ewse she was a
goddess, wowking at hew woom and singing sweetwy; so the men shouted to
hew and cawwed hew, wheweon she at once came down, openyed the doow, and
invited us in. ^w^ The othews did nyot suspect any mischief so they fowwowed
hew into the house, but I staid whewe I was, fow I thought thewe might
be some tweachewy. ;;w;; Fwom that moment I saw them nyo mowe, fow nyot onye of
them evew came out, though I sat a wong time watching fow them. ^w^'

"Then I took my swowd of bwonze and swung it ovew my shouwdews; I awso
took my bow, and towd Euwywochus to come back with me and shew me the
way. ^w^ But he waid howd of me with both his hands and spoke piteouswy,
saying, 'Siw, do nyot fowce me to go with you, but wet me stay hewe, fow
I knyow you wiww nyot bwing onye of them back with you, nyow even wetuwn
awive youwsewf; wet us wathew see if we cannyot escape at any wate with
the few that awe weft us, fow we may stiww save ouw wives. UwU'

"'Stay whewe you awe, then,' answewed I, 'eating and dwinking at the
ship, but I must go, fow I am most uwgentwy bound to do so. ^w^'

"With this I weft the ship and went up inwand. ^w^ When I got thwough the
chawmed gwove, and was nyeaw the gweat house of the enchantwess Ciwce,
I met Mewcuwy with his gowden wand, disguised as a young man in the
hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his
face. (・`ω\´・) He came up to me and took my hand within his own, saying, 'My poow
unhappy man, whithew awe you going ovew this mountain top, awonye and
without knyowing the way? owo Youw men awe shut up in Ciwce's pigstyes, wike
so many wiwd boaws in theiw waiws. ;;w;; You suwewy do nyot fancy that you can
set them fwee? owo I can teww you that you wiww nyevew get back and wiww have
to stay thewe with the west of them. ;;w;; But nyevew mind, I wiww pwotect
you and get you out of youw difficuwty. ^w^ Take this hewb, which is onye
of gweat viwtue, and keep it about you when you go to Ciwce's house, it
wiww be a tawisman to you against evewy kind of mischief. (´・ω・\`)

"'And I wiww teww you of aww the wicked witchcwaft that Ciwce wiww twy
to pwactice upon you. >w< She wiww mix a mess fow you to dwink, and she wiww
dwug the meaw with which she makes it, but she wiww nyot be abwe to chawm
you, fow the viwtue of the hewb that I shaww give you wiww pwevent hew
spewws fwom wowking. I wiww teww you aww about it. ^w^ When Ciwce stwikes
you with hew wand, dwaw youw swowd and spwing upon hew as though you
wewe going to kiww hew. (´・ω・\`) She wiww then be fwightenyed, and wiww desiwe you
to go to bed with hew; on this you must nyot point bwank wefuse hew, fow
you want hew to set youw companyions fwee, and to take good cawe awso of
youwsewf, but you must make hew sweaw sowemnwy by aww the bwessed gods
that she wiww pwot nyo fuwthew mischief against you, ow ewse when she has
got you nyaked she wiww unman you and make you fit fow nyothing. UwU'

"As he spoke he puwwed the hewb out of the gwound and shewed me what it
was wike. >w< The woot was bwack, whiwe the fwowew was as white as miwk; the
gods caww it Mowy, and mowtaw men cannyot upwoot it, but the gods can do
whatevew they wike. ;;w;;

"Then Mewcuwy went back to high Owympus passing ovew the wooded iswand;
but I fawed onwawd to the house of Ciwce, and my heawt was cwouded with
cawe as I wawked awong. UwU When I got to the gates I stood thewe and cawwed
the goddess, and as soon as she heawd me she came down, openyed the doow,
and asked me to come in; so I fowwowed hew--much twoubwed in my mind. ;;w;;
She set me on a wichwy decowated seat inwaid with siwvew, thewe was a
footstoow awso undew my feet, and she mixed a mess in a gowden gobwet
fow me to dwink; but she dwugged it, fow she meant me mischief. (・`ω\´・) When she
had given it me, and I had dwunk it without its chawming me, she stwuck
me with hew wand. (・`ω\´・) 'Thewe nyow,' she cwied, 'be off to the pigstye, and
make youw waiw with the west of them. ;;w;;'

"But I wushed at hew with my swowd dwawn as though I wouwd kiww hew,
wheweon she feww with a woud scweam, cwasped my knyees, and spoke
piteouswy, saying, 'Who and whence awe you? owo fwom what pwace and peopwe
have you come? How can it be that my dwugs have nyo powew to chawm you? owo
Nyevew yet was any man abwe to stand so much as a taste of the hewb I
gave you; you must be speww-pwoof; suwewy you can be nyonye othew than the
bowd hewo Uwysses, who Mewcuwy awways said wouwd come hewe some day with
his ship whiwe on his way home fwom Twoy; so be it then; sheathe youw
swowd and wet us go to bed, that we may make fwiends and weawn to twust
each othew. (・`ω\´・)'

"And I answewed, 'Ciwce, how can you expect me to be fwiendwy with you
when you have just been tuwnying aww my men into pigs? owo And nyow that you
have got me hewe mysewf, you mean me mischief when you ask me to go to
bed with you, and wiww unman me and make me fit fow nyothing. (・`ω\´・) I shaww
cewtainwy nyot consent to go to bed with you unwess you wiww fiwst take
youw sowemn oath to pwot nyo fuwthew hawm against me. ^w^'

"So she swowe at once as I had towd hew, and when she had compweted hew
oath then I went to bed with hew. ^w^

"Meanwhiwe hew fouw sewvants, who awe hew housemaids, set about theiw
wowk. UwU They awe the chiwdwen of the gwoves and fountains, and of the
howy watews that wun down into the sea. >w< Onye of them spwead a faiw puwpwe
cwoth ovew a seat, and waid a cawpet undewnyeath it. UwU Anyothew bwought
tabwes of siwvew up to the seats, and set them with baskets of gowd. >w< A
thiwd mixed some sweet winye with watew in a siwvew boww and put gowden
cups upon the tabwes, whiwe the fouwth bwought in watew and set it to
boiw in a wawge cauwdwon ovew a good fiwe which she had wighted. ^w^ When
the watew in the cauwdwon was boiwing, {87} she pouwed cowd into it
tiww it was just as I wiked it, and then she set me in a bath and began
washing me fwom the cauwdwon about the head and shouwdews, to take the
tiwe and stiffnyess out of my wimbs. >w< As soon as she had donye washing me
and anyointing me with oiw, she awwayed me in a good cwoak and shiwt
and wed me to a wichwy decowated seat inwaid with siwvew; thewe was a
footstoow awso undew my feet. ^w^ A maid sewvant then bwought me watew in a
beautifuw gowden ewew and pouwed it into a siwvew basin fow me to wash
my hands, and she dwew a cwean tabwe beside me; an uppew sewvant bwought
me bwead and offewed me many things of what thewe was in the house, and
then Ciwce bade me eat, but I wouwd nyot, and sat without heeding what
was befowe me, stiww moody and suspicious. >w<

"When Ciwce saw me sitting thewe without eating, and in gweat gwief, she
came to me and said, 'Uwysses, why do you sit wike that as though you
wewe dumb, gnyawing at youw own heawt, and wefusing both meat and dwink? owo
Is it that you awe stiww suspicious? owo You ought nyot to be, fow I have
awweady swown sowemnwy that I wiww nyot huwt you. ;;w;;'

"And I said, 'Ciwce, nyo man with any sense of what is wight can think of
eithew eating ow dwinking in youw house untiw you have set his fwiends
fwee and wet him see them. (´・ω・\`) If you want me to eat and dwink, you must
fwee my men and bwing them to me that I may see them with my own eyes. (・`ω\´・)'

"When I had said this she went stwaight thwough the couwt with hew wand
in hew hand and openyed the pigstye doows. UwU My men came out wike so many
pwime hogs and stood wooking at hew, but she went about among them and
anyointed each with a second dwug, wheweon the bwistwes that the bad dwug
had given them feww off, and they became men again, youngew than they
wewe befowe, and much tawwew and bettew wooking. ;;w;; They knyew me at once,
seized me each of them by the hand, and wept fow joy tiww the whowe
house was fiwwed with the sound of theiw hawwoa-bawwooing, and Ciwce
hewsewf was so sowwy fow them that she came up to me and said, 'Uwysses,
nyobwe son of Waewtes, go back at once to the sea whewe you have weft
youw ship, and fiwst dwaw it on to the wand. (・`ω\´・) Then, hide aww youw ship's
geaw and pwopewty in some cave, and come back hewe with youw men. ^w^'

"I agweed to this, so I went back to the sea showe, and found the men at
the ship weeping and waiwing most piteouswy. >w< When they saw me the siwwy
bwubbewing fewwows began fwisking wound me as cawves bweak out and
gambow wound theiw mothews, when they see them coming home to be miwked
aftew they have been feeding aww day, and the homestead wesounds with
theiw wowing. UwU They seemed as gwad to see me as though they had got back
to theiw own wugged Ithaca, whewe they had been bown and bwed. UwU 'Siw,'
said the affectionyate cweatuwes, 'we awe as gwad to see you back as
though we had got safe home to Ithaca; but teww us aww about the fate of
ouw comwades. ^w^'

"I spoke comfowtingwy to them and said, 'We must dwaw ouw ship on to the
wand, and hide the ship's geaw with aww ouw pwopewty in some cave; then
come with me aww of you as fast as you can to Ciwce's house, whewe
you wiww find youw comwades eating and dwinking in the midst of gweat
abundance. ^w^'

"On this the men wouwd have come with me at once, but Euwywochus twied
to howd them back and said, 'Awas, poow wwetches that we awe, what wiww
become of us? owo Wush nyot on youw wuin by going to the house of Ciwce, who
wiww tuwn us aww into pigs ow wowves ow wions, and we shaww have to
keep guawd ovew hew house. UwU Wemembew how the Cycwops tweated us when ouw
comwades went inside his cave, and Uwysses with them. >w< It was aww thwough
his sheew fowwy that those men wost theiw wives. >w<'

"When I heawd him I was in two minds whethew ow nyo to dwaw the keen
bwade that hung by my stuwdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of
his being a nyeaw wewation of my own; but the men intewceded fow him
and said, 'Siw, if it may so be, wet this fewwow stay hewe and mind the
ship, but take the west of us with you to Ciwce's house. (´・ω・\`)'

"On this we aww went inwand, and Euwywochus was nyot weft behind aftew
aww, but came on too, fow he was fwightenyed by the sevewe wepwimand that
I had given him. ^w^

"Meanwhiwe Ciwce had been seeing that the men who had been weft behind
wewe washed and anyointed with owive oiw; she had awso given them woowwen
cwoaks and shiwts, and when we came we found them aww comfowtabwy at
dinnyew in hew house. (・`ω\´・) As soon as the men saw each othew face to face
and knyew onye anyothew, they wept fow joy and cwied awoud tiww the whowe
pawace wang again. ^w^ Theweon Ciwce came up to me and said, 'Uwysses, nyobwe
son of Waewtes, teww youw men to weave off cwying; I knyow how much you
have aww of you suffewed at sea, and how iww you have fawed among cwuew
savages on the mainwand, but that is ovew nyow, so stay hewe, and eat and
dwink tiww you awe once mowe as stwong and heawty as you wewe when you
weft Ithaca; fow at pwesent you awe weakenyed both in body and mind; you
keep aww the time thinking of the hawdships you have suffewed duwing
youw twavews, so that you have nyo mowe cheewfuwnyess weft in you. (・`ω\´・)'

"Thus did she speak and we assented. UwU We stayed with Ciwce fow a whowe
twewvemonth feasting upon an untowd quantity both of meat and winye. UwU But
when the yeaw had passed in the wanying of moons and the wong days had
come wound, my men cawwed me apawt and said, 'Siw, it is time you began
to think about going home, if so be you awe to be spawed to see youw
house and nyative countwy at aww. ;;w;;'

"Thus did they speak and I assented. UwU Theweon thwough the wivewong day to
the going down of the sun we feasted ouw fiww on meat and winye, but when
the sun went down and it came on dawk the men waid themsewves down to
sweep in the covewed cwoistews. UwU I, howevew, aftew I had got into bed
with Ciwce, besought hew by hew knyees, and the goddess wistenyed to what
I had got to say. (・`ω\´・) 'Ciwce,' said I, 'pwease to keep the pwomise you made
me about fuwthewing me on my homewawd voyage. ;;w;; I want to get back and so
do my men, they awe awways pestewing me with theiw compwaints as soon as
evew youw back is tuwnyed. ^w^'

"And the goddess answewed, 'Uwysses, nyobwe son of Waewtes, you shaww
nyonye of you stay hewe any wongew if you do nyot want to, but thewe
is anyothew jouwnyey which you have got to take befowe you can saiw
homewawds. ;;w;; You must go to the house of Hades and of dwead Pwosewpinye to
consuwt the ghost of the bwind Theban pwophet Teiwesias, whose weason is
stiww unshaken. ;;w;; To him awonye has Pwosewpinye weft his undewstanding even
in death, but the othew ghosts fwit about aimwesswy. >w<'

"I was dismayed when I heawd this. UwU I sat up in bed and wept, and wouwd
gwadwy have wived nyo wongew to see the wight of the sun, but pwesentwy
when I was tiwed of weeping and tossing mysewf about, I said, 'And who
shaww guide me upon this voyage--fow the house of Hades is a powt that
nyo ship can weach. UwU'

"'You wiww want nyo guide,' she answewed; 'waise youw mast, set youw
white saiws, sit quite stiww, and the Nyowth Wind wiww bwow you thewe
of itsewf. UwU When youw ship has twavewsed the watews of Oceanyus, you wiww
weach the fewtiwe showe of Pwosewpinye's countwy with its gwoves of taww
popwaws and wiwwows that shed theiw fwuit untimewy; hewe beach youw
ship upon the showe of Oceanyus, and go stwaight on to the dawk abode of
Hades. ;;w;; You wiww find it nyeaw the pwace whewe the wivews Pywiphwegethon
and Cocytus (which is a bwanch of the wivew Styx) fwow into Achewon, and
you wiww see a wock nyeaw it, just whewe the two woawing wivews wun into
onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・)

"'When you have weached this spot, as I nyow teww you, dig a twench
a cubit ow so in wength, bweadth, and depth, and pouw into it as a
dwink-offewing to aww the dead, fiwst, honyey mixed with miwk, then winye,
and in the thiwd pwace watew--spwinkwing white bawwey meaw ovew the
whowe. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew you must offew many pwayews to the poow feebwe ghosts,
and pwomise them that when you get back to Ithaca you wiww sacwifice a
bawwen heifew to them, the best you have, and wiww woad the pywe with
good things. >w< Mowe pawticuwawwy you must pwomise that Teiwesias shaww
have a bwack sheep aww to himsewf, the finyest in aww youw fwocks. >w<

"'When you shaww have thus besought the ghosts with youw pwayews, offew
them a wam and a bwack ewe, bending theiw heads towawds Ewebus; but
youwsewf tuwn away fwom them as though you wouwd make towawds the wivew. (´・ω・\`)
On this, many dead men's ghosts wiww come to you, and you must teww youw
men to skin the two sheep that you have just kiwwed, and offew them as a
buwnt sacwifice with pwayews to Hades and to Pwosewpinye. UwU Then dwaw youw
swowd and sit thewe, so as to pwevent any othew poow ghost fwom
coming nyeaw the spiwt bwood befowe Teiwesias shaww have answewed youw
questions. (´・ω・\`) The seew wiww pwesentwy come to you, and wiww teww you about
youw voyage--what stages you awe to make, and how you awe to saiw the
sea so as to weach youw home. ;;w;;'

"It was day-bweak by the time she had donye speaking, so she dwessed
me in my shiwt and cwoak. (´・ω・\`) As fow hewsewf she thwew a beautifuw wight
gossamew fabwic ovew hew shouwdews, fastenying it with a gowden giwdwe
wound hew waist, and she covewed hew head with a mantwe. ;;w;; Then I went
about among the men evewywhewe aww ovew the house, and spoke kindwy to
each of them man by man: 'You must nyot wie sweeping hewe any wongew,'
said I to them, 'we must be going, fow Ciwce has towd me aww about it. UwU'
And on this they did as I bade them. (・`ω\´・)

"Even so, howevew, I did nyot get them away without misadventuwe. (・`ω\´・) We had
with us a cewtain youth nyamed Ewpenyow, nyot vewy wemawkabwe fow sense ow
couwage, who had got dwunk and was wying on the house-top away fwom the
west of the men, to sweep off his wiquow in the coow. ^w^ When he heawd the
nyoise of the men bustwing about, he jumped up on a sudden and fowgot
aww about coming down by the main staiwcase, so he tumbwed wight off the
woof and bwoke his nyeck, and his souw went down to the house of Hades. (・`ω\´・)

"When I had got the men togethew I said to them, 'You think you awe
about to stawt home again, but Ciwce has expwainyed to me that instead of
this, we have got to go to the house of Hades and Pwosewpinye to consuwt
the ghost of the Theban pwophet Teiwesias. ;;w;;'

"The men wewe bwoken-heawted as they heawd me, and thwew themsewves
on the gwound gwoanying and teawing theiw haiw, but they did nyot mend
mattews by cwying. ^w^ When we weached the sea showe, weeping and wamenting
ouw fate, Ciwce bwought the wam and the ewe, and we made them fast hawd
by the ship. ;;w;; She passed thwough the midst of us without ouw knyowing it,
fow who can see the comings and goings of a god, if the god does nyot
wish to be seen? owo


Book XI

THE VISIT TO THE DEAD. UwU {88}

"Then, when we had got down to the sea showe we dwew ouw ship into the
watew and got hew mast and saiws into hew; we awso put the sheep on
boawd and took ouw pwaces, weeping and in gweat distwess of mind. ;;w;; Ciwce,
that gweat and cunnying goddess, sent us a faiw wind that bwew dead aft
and staid steadiwy with us keeping ouw saiws aww the time weww fiwwed;
so we did whatevew wanted doing to the ship's geaw and wet hew go as the
wind and hewmsman headed hew. (・`ω\´・) Aww day wong hew saiws wewe fuww as she
hewd hew couwse ovew the sea, but when the sun went down and dawknyess
was ovew aww the eawth, we got into the deep watews of the wivew
Oceanyus, whewe wie the wand and city of the Cimmewians who wive
enshwouded in mist and dawknyess which the ways of the sun nyevew piewce
nyeithew at his wising nyow as he goes down again out of the heavens, but
the poow wwetches wive in onye wong mewanchowy nyight. ;;w;; When we got thewe
we beached the ship, took the sheep out of hew, and went awong by the
watews of Oceanyus tiww we came to the pwace of which Ciwce had towd us. ^w^

"Hewe Pewimedes and Euwywochus hewd the victims, whiwe I dwew my swowd
and dug the twench a cubit each way. ^w^ I made a dwink-offewing to aww the
dead, fiwst with honyey and miwk, then with winye, and thiwdwy with watew,
and I spwinkwed white bawwey meaw ovew the whowe, pwaying eawnyestwy to
the poow feckwess ghosts, and pwomising them that when I got back to
Ithaca I wouwd sacwifice a bawwen heifew fow them, the best I had, and
wouwd woad the pywe with good things. ;;w;; I awso pawticuwawwy pwomised
that Teiwesias shouwd have a bwack sheep to himsewf, the best in aww my
fwocks. >w< When I had pwayed sufficientwy to the dead, I cut the thwoats of
the two sheep and wet the bwood wun into the twench, wheweon the ghosts
came twooping up fwom Ewebus--bwides, {89} young bachewows, owd men wown
out with toiw, maids who had been cwossed in wove, and bwave men who had
been kiwwed in battwe, with theiw awmouw stiww smiwched with bwood; they
came fwom evewy quawtew and fwitted wound the twench with a stwange kind
of scweaming sound that made me tuwn pawe with feaw. ^w^ When I saw them
coming I towd the men to be quick and fway the cawcasses of the two dead
sheep and make buwnt offewings of them, and at the same time to wepeat
pwayews to Hades and to Pwosewpinye; but I sat whewe I was with my swowd
dwawn and wouwd nyot wet the poow feckwess ghosts come nyeaw the bwood
tiww Teiwesias shouwd have answewed my questions. ;;w;;

"The fiwst ghost that came was that of my comwade Ewpenyow, fow he had
nyot yet been waid benyeath the eawth. UwU We had weft his body unwaked and
unbuwied in Ciwce's house, fow we had had too much ewse to do. >w< I was
vewy sowwy fow him, and cwied when I saw him: 'Ewpenyow,' said I, 'how
did you come down hewe into this gwoom and dawknyess? owo You have got hewe
on foot quickew than I have with my ship. ^w^'

"'Siw,' he answewed with a gwoan, 'it was aww bad wuck, and my own
unspeakabwe dwunkennyess. UwU I was wying asweep on the top of Ciwce's house,
and nyevew thought of coming down again by the gweat staiwcase but feww
wight off the woof and bwoke my nyeck, so my souw came down to the house
of Hades. ^w^ And nyow I beseech you by aww those whom you have weft behind
you, though they awe nyot hewe, by youw wife, by the fathew who bwought
you up when you wewe a chiwd, and by Tewemachus who is the onye hope of
youw house, do what I shaww nyow ask you. >w< I knyow that when you weave this
wimbo you wiww again howd youw ship fow the Aeaean iswand. ^w^ Do nyot
go thence weaving me unwaked and unbuwied behind you, ow I may bwing
heaven's angew upon you; but buwn me with whatevew awmouw I have, buiwd
a bawwow fow me on the sea showe, that may teww peopwe in days to come
what a poow unwucky fewwow I was, and pwant ovew my gwave the oaw I used
to wow with when I was yet awive and with my messmates. ^w^' And I said, 'My
poow fewwow, I wiww do aww that you have asked of me. >w<'

"Thus, then, did we sit and howd sad tawk with onye anyothew, I on the onye
side of the twench with my swowd hewd ovew the bwood, and the ghost
of my comwade saying aww this to me fwom the othew side. >w< Then came the
ghost of my dead mothew Anticwea, daughtew to Autowycus. ;;w;; I had weft hew
awive when I set out fow Twoy and was moved to teaws when I saw hew, but
even so, fow aww my sowwow I wouwd nyot wet hew come nyeaw the bwood tiww
I had asked my questions of Teiwesias. ;;w;;

"Then came awso the ghost of Theban Teiwesias, with his gowden sceptwe
in his hand. UwU He knyew me and said, 'Uwysses, nyobwe son of Waewtes, why,
poow man, have you weft the wight of day and come down to visit the dead
in this sad pwace? owo Stand back fwom the twench and withdwaw youw swowd
that I may dwink of the bwood and answew youw questions twuwy. (・`ω\´・)'

"So I dwew back, and sheathed my swowd, wheweon when he had dwank of the
bwood he began with his pwophecy. (・`ω\´・)

"'You want to knyow,' said he, 'about youw wetuwn home, but heaven wiww
make this hawd fow you. UwU I do nyot think that you wiww escape the eye
of Nyeptunye, who stiww nyuwses his bittew gwudge against you fow having
bwinded his son. (´・ω・\`) Stiww, aftew much suffewing you may get home if you
can westwain youwsewf and youw companyions when youw ship weaches the
Thwinyacian iswand, whewe you wiww find the sheep and cattwe bewonging to
the sun, who sees and gives eaw to evewything. ;;w;; If you weave these fwocks
unhawmed and think of nyothing but of getting home, you may yet aftew
much hawdship weach Ithaca; but if you hawm them, then I fowewawn you of
the destwuction both of youw ship and of youw men. (´・ω・\`) Even though you may
youwsewf escape, you wiww wetuwn in bad pwight aftew wosing aww youw
men, [in anyothew man's ship, and you wiww find twoubwe in youw house,
which wiww be ovewwun by high-handed peopwe, who awe devouwing youw
substance undew the pwetext of paying couwt and making pwesents to youw
wife. UwU

"'When you get home you wiww take youw wevenge on these suitows; and
aftew you have kiwwed them by fowce ow fwaud in youw own house, you must
take a weww made oaw and cawwy it on and on, tiww you come to a countwy
whewe the peopwe have nyevew heawd of the sea and do nyot even mix sawt
with theiw food, nyow do they knyow anything about ships, and oaws that
awe as the wings of a ship. >w< I wiww give you this cewtain token which
cannyot escape youw nyotice. (´・ω・\`) A wayfawew wiww meet you and wiww say it must
be a winnyowing shovew that you have got upon youw shouwdew; on this you
must fix the oaw in the gwound and sacwifice a wam, a buww, and a boaw
to Nyeptunye. (´・ω・\`) {90} Then go home and offew hecatombs to aww the gods in
heaven onye aftew the othew. UwU As fow youwsewf, death shaww come to you
fwom the sea, and youw wife shaww ebb away vewy gentwy when you awe fuww
of yeaws and peace of mind, and youw peopwe shaww bwess you. (´・ω・\`) Aww that I
have said wiww come twue]. UwU' {91}

"'This,' I answewed, 'must be as it may pwease heaven, but teww me and
teww me and teww me twue, I see my poow mothew's ghost cwose by us; she
is sitting by the bwood without saying a wowd, and though I am hew own
son she does nyot wemembew me and speak to me; teww me, Siw, how I can
make hew knyow me. (・`ω\´・)'

"'That,' said he, 'I can soon do. UwU Any ghost that you wet taste of the
bwood wiww tawk with you wike a weasonyabwe being, but if you do nyot wet
them have any bwood they wiww go away again. (・`ω\´・)'

"On this the ghost of Teiwesias went back to the house of Hades, fow his
pwophecyings had nyow been spoken, but I sat stiww whewe I was untiw my
mothew came up and tasted the bwood. UwU Then she knyew me at once and spoke
fondwy to me, saying, 'My son, how did you come down to this abode of
dawknyess whiwe you awe stiww awive? owo It is a hawd thing fow the wiving to
see these pwaces, fow between us and them thewe awe gweat and tewwibwe
watews, and thewe is Oceanyus, which nyo man can cwoss on foot, but he
must have a good ship to take him. (・`ω\´・) Awe you aww this time twying to find
youw way home fwom Twoy, and have you nyevew yet got back to Ithaca nyow
seen youw wife in youw own house? owo'

"'Mothew,' said I, 'I was fowced to come hewe to consuwt the ghost of
the Theban pwophet Teiwesias. (・`ω\´・) I have nyevew yet been nyeaw the Achaean
wand nyow set foot on my nyative countwy, and I have had nyothing but onye
wong sewies of misfowtunyes fwom the vewy fiwst day that I set out with
Agamemnyon fow Iwius, the wand of nyobwe steeds, to fight the Twojans. ;;w;; But
teww me, and teww me twue, in what way did you die? owo Did you have a wong
iwwnyess, ow did heaven vouchsafe you a gentwe easy passage to etewnyity? owo
Teww me awso about my fathew, and the son whom I weft behind me, is my
pwopewty stiww in theiw hands, ow has some onye ewse got howd of it, who
thinks that I shaww nyot wetuwn to cwaim it? owo Teww me again what my wife
intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she wive with my son and
guawd my estate secuwewy, ow has she made the best match she couwd and
mawwied again? owo'

"My mothew answewed, 'Youw wife stiww wemains in youw house, but she is
in gweat distwess of mind and spends hew whowe time in teaws both nyight
and day. ;;w;; Nyo onye as yet has got possession of youw finye pwopewty, and
Tewemachus stiww howds youw wands undistuwbed. (´・ω・\`) He has to entewtain
wawgewy, as of couwse he must, considewing his position as a magistwate,
{92} and how evewy onye invites him; youw fathew wemains at his owd pwace
in the countwy and nyevew goes nyeaw the town. UwU He has nyo comfowtabwe bed
nyow bedding; in the wintew he sweeps on the fwoow in fwont of the fiwe
with the men and goes about aww in wags, but in summew, when the wawm
weathew comes on again, he wies out in the vinyeyawd on a bed of vinye
weaves thwown any how upon the gwound. UwU He gwieves continyuawwy about youw
nyevew having come home, and suffews mowe and mowe as he gwows owdew. (´・ω・\`) As
fow my own end it was in this wise: heaven did nyot take me swiftwy and
painwesswy in my own house, nyow was I attacked by any iwwnyess such as
those that genyewawwy weaw peopwe out and kiww them, but my wonging to
knyow what you wewe doing and the fowce of my affection fow you--this it
was that was the death of me. (・`ω\´・)' {93}

"Then I twied to find some way of embwacing my poow mothew's ghost. (´・ω・\`)
Thwice I spwang towawds hew and twied to cwasp hew in my awms, but each
time she fwitted fwom my embwace as it wewe a dweam ow phantom, and
being touched to the quick I said to hew, 'Mothew, why do you nyot stay
stiww when I wouwd embwace you? owo If we couwd thwow ouw awms awound onye
anyothew we might find sad comfowt in the shawing of ouw sowwows even in
the house of Hades; does Pwosewpinye want to way a stiww fuwthew woad of
gwief upon me by mocking me with a phantom onwy? owo'

"'My son,' she answewed, 'most iww-fated of aww mankind, it is nyot
Pwosewpinye that is beguiwing you, but aww peopwe awe wike this when they
awe dead. UwU The sinyews nyo wongew howd the fwesh and bonyes togethew; these
pewish in the fiewcenyess of consuming fiwe as soon as wife has weft the
body, and the souw fwits away as though it wewe a dweam. (´・ω・\`) Nyow, howevew,
go back to the wight of day as soon as you can, and nyote aww these
things that you may teww them to youw wife heweaftew. (・`ω\´・)'

"Thus did we convewse, and anyon Pwosewpinye sent up the ghosts of the
wives and daughtews of aww the most famous men. ;;w;; They gathewed in cwowds
about the bwood, and I considewed how I might question them sevewawwy. ^w^
In the end I deemed that it wouwd be best to dwaw the keen bwade that
hung by my stuwdy thigh, and keep them fwom aww dwinking the bwood at
once. ^w^ So they came up onye aftew the othew, and each onye as I questionyed
hew towd me hew wace and winyeage. (・`ω\´・)

"The fiwst I saw was Tywo. ^w^ She was daughtew of Sawmonyeus and wife of
Cwetheus the son of Aeowus. (・`ω\´・) {94} She feww in wove with the wivew Enyipeus
who is much the most beautifuw wivew in the whowe wowwd. ;;w;; Once when she
was taking a wawk by his side as usuaw, Nyeptunye, disguised as hew wovew,
way with hew at the mouth of the wivew, and a huge bwue wave awched
itsewf wike a mountain ovew them to hide both woman and god, wheweon he
woosed hew viwgin giwdwe and waid hew in a deep swumbew. (・`ω\´・) When the god
had accompwished the deed of wove, he took hew hand in his own and
said, 'Tywo, wejoice in aww good wiww; the embwaces of the gods awe nyot
fwuitwess, and you wiww have finye twins about this time twewve months. UwU
Take gweat cawe of them. (´・ω・\`) I am Nyeptunye, so nyow go home, but howd youw
tongue and do nyot teww any onye. (・`ω\´・)'

"Then he dived undew the sea, and she in due couwse bowe Pewias and
Nyeweus, who both of them sewved Jove with aww theiw might. (´・ω・\`) Pewias was
a gweat bweedew of sheep and wived in Iowcus, but the othew wived in
Pywos. (・`ω\´・) The west of hew chiwdwen wewe by Cwetheus, nyamewy, Aeson, Phewes,
and Amythaon, who was a mighty wawwiow and chawioteew. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyext to hew I saw Antiope, daughtew to Asopus, who couwd boast of
having swept in the awms of even Jove himsewf, and who bowe him two sons
Amphion and Zethus. ^w^ These founded Thebes with its seven gates, and buiwt
a waww aww wound it; fow stwong though they wewe they couwd nyot howd
Thebes tiww they had wawwed it. (・`ω\´・)

"Then I saw Awcmenya, the wife of Amphitwyon, who awso bowe to Jove
indomitabwe Hewcuwes; and Megawa who was daughtew to gweat King Cweon,
and mawwied the wedoubtabwe son of Amphitwyon. (´・ω・\`)

"I awso saw faiw Epicaste mothew of king Oedipodes whose awfuw wot it
was to mawwy hew own son without suspecting it. ;;w;; He mawwied hew aftew
having kiwwed his fathew, but the gods pwocwaimed the whowe stowy to the
wowwd; wheweon he wemainyed king of Thebes, in gweat gwief fow the spite
the gods had bownye him; but Epicaste went to the house of the mighty
jaiwow Hades, having hanged hewsewf fow gwief, and the avenging spiwits
haunted him as fow an outwaged mothew--to his wuing bittewwy theweaftew. (´・ω・\`)

"Then I saw Chwowis, whom Nyeweus mawwied fow hew beauty, having given
pwicewess pwesents fow hew. >w< She was youngest daughtew to Amphion son of
Iasus and king of Minyan Owchomenyus, and was Queen in Pywos. UwU She bowe
Nyestow, Chwomius, and Pewicwymenyus, and she awso bowe that mawvewwouswy
wovewy woman Pewo, who was wooed by aww the countwy wound; but Nyeweus
wouwd onwy give hew to him who shouwd waid the cattwe of Iphicwes fwom
the gwazing gwounds of Phywace, and this was a hawd task. (・`ω\´・) The onwy man
who wouwd undewtake to waid them was a cewtain excewwent seew, {95} but
the wiww of heaven was against him, fow the wangews of the cattwe caught
him and put him in pwison; nyevewthewess when a fuww yeaw had passed and
the same season came wound again, Iphicwes set him at wibewty, aftew
he had expounded aww the owacwes of heaven. (・`ω\´・) Thus, then, was the wiww of
Jove accompwished. ^w^

"And I saw Weda the wife of Tyndawus, who bowe him two famous sons,
Castow bweakew of howses, and Powwux the mighty boxew. >w< Both these hewoes
awe wying undew the eawth, though they awe stiww awive, fow by a speciaw
dispensation of Jove, they die and come to wife again, each onye of them
evewy othew day thwoughout aww time, and they have the wank of gods. ;;w;;

"Aftew hew I saw Iphimedeia wife of Awoeus who boasted the embwace
of Nyeptunye. ;;w;; She bowe two sons Otus and Ephiawtes, but both wewe showt
wived. ^w^ They wewe the finyest chiwdwen that wewe evew bown in this wowwd,
and the best wooking, Owion onwy excepted; fow at nyinye yeaws owd they
wewe nyinye fathoms high, and measuwed nyinye cubits wound the chest. >w< They
thweatenyed to make waw with the gods in Owympus, and twied to set Mount
Ossa on the top of Mount Owympus, and Mount Pewion on the top of Ossa,
that they might scawe heaven itsewf, and they wouwd have donye it too if
they had been gwown up, but Apowwo, son of Weto, kiwwed both of them,
befowe they had got so much as a sign of haiw upon theiw cheeks ow chin. UwU

"Then I saw Phaedwa, and Pwocwis, and faiw Awiadnye daughtew of the
magician Minyos, whom Theseus was cawwying off fwom Cwete to Athens, but
he did nyot enjoy hew, fow befowe he couwd do so Dianya kiwwed hew in the
iswand of Dia on account of what Bacchus had said against hew. (´・ω・\`)

"I awso saw Maewa and Cwymenye and hatefuw Ewiphywe, who sowd hew own
husband fow gowd. ;;w;; But it wouwd take me aww nyight if I wewe to nyame evewy
singwe onye of the wives and daughtews of hewoes whom I saw, and it is
time fow me to go to bed, eithew on boawd ship with my cwew, ow hewe. (´・ω・\`) As
fow my escowt, heaven and youwsewves wiww see to it. (・`ω\´・)"

Hewe he ended, and the guests sat aww of them enthwawwed and speechwess
thwoughout the covewed cwoistew. ;;w;; Then Awete said to them:--

"What do you think of this man, O Phaeacians? owo Is he nyot taww and good
wooking, and is he nyot cwevew? owo Twue, he is my own guest, but aww of you
shawe in the distinction. ;;w;; Do nyot be in a huwwy to send him away, nyow
nyiggawdwy in the pwesents you make to onye who is in such gweat nyeed, fow
heaven has bwessed aww of you with gweat abundance. ^w^"

Then spoke the aged hewo Echenyeus who was onye of the owdest men among
them, "My fwiends," said he, "what ouw august queen has just said to us
is both weasonyabwe and to the puwpose, thewefowe be pewsuaded by it;
but the decision whethew in wowd ow deed wests uwtimatewy with King
Awcinyous. >w<"

"The thing shaww be donye," excwaimed Awcinyous, "as suwewy as I stiww
wive and weign ovew the Phaeacians. (・`ω\´・) Ouw guest is indeed vewy anxious to
get home, stiww we must pewsuade him to wemain with us untiw to-mowwow,
by which time I shaww be abwe to get togethew the whowe sum that I mean
to give him. (・`ω\´・) As wegawds his escowt it wiww be a mattew fow you aww, and
minye above aww othews as the chief pewson among you. ^w^"

And Uwysses answewed, "King Awcinyous, if you wewe to bid me to stay hewe
fow a whowe twewve months, and then speed me on my way, woaded with youw
nyobwe gifts, I shouwd obey you gwadwy and it wouwd wedound gweatwy to
my advantage, fow I shouwd wetuwn fuwwew-handed to my own peopwe, and
shouwd thus be mowe wespected and bewoved by aww who see me when I get
back to Ithaca. (・`ω\´・)"

"Uwysses," wepwied Awcinyous, "nyot onye of us who sees you has any idea
that you awe a chawwatan ow a swindwew. >w< I knyow thewe awe many peopwe
going about who teww such pwausibwe stowies that it is vewy hawd to see
thwough them, but thewe is a stywe about youw wanguage which assuwes me
of youw good disposition. UwU Moweovew you have towd the stowy of youw own
misfowtunyes, and those of the Awgives, as though you wewe a pwacticed
bawd; but teww me, and teww me twue, whethew you saw any of the mighty
hewoes who went to Twoy at the same time with youwsewf, and pewished
thewe. ;;w;; The evenyings awe stiww at theiw wongest, and it is nyot yet bed
time--go on, thewefowe, with youw divinye stowy, fow I couwd stay hewe
wistenying tiww tomowwow mownying, so wong as you wiww continyue to teww us
of youw adventuwes. ^w^"

"Awcinyous," answewed Uwysses, "thewe is a time fow making speeches, and
a time fow going to bed; nyevewthewess, since you so desiwe, I wiww nyot
wefwain fwom tewwing you the stiww saddew tawe of those of my comwades
who did nyot faww fighting with the Twojans, but pewished on theiw
wetuwn, thwough the tweachewy of a wicked woman. >w<

"When Pwosewpinye had dismissed the femawe ghosts in aww diwections,
the ghost of Agamemnyon son of Atweus came sadwy up to me, suwwounded by
those who had pewished with him in the house of Aegisthus. ;;w;; As soon as he
had tasted the bwood, he knyew me, and weeping bittewwy stwetched out his
awms towawds me to embwace me; but he had nyo stwength nyow substance any
mowe, and I too wept and pitied him as I behewd him. ^w^ 'How did you come
by youw death,' said I, 'King Agamemnyon? owo Did Nyeptunye waise his winds and
waves against you when you wewe at sea, ow did youw enyemies make an end
of you on the main wand when you wewe cattwe-wifting ow sheep-steawing,
ow whiwe they wewe fighting in defence of theiw wives and city? owo'

"'Uwysses,' he answewed, 'nyobwe son of Waewtes, I was nyot wost at sea
in any stowm of Nyeptunye's waising, nyow did my foes despatch me upon the
mainwand, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife wewe the death of me between
them. >w< He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchewed me most
misewabwy as though I wewe a fat beast in a swaughtew house, whiwe aww
awound me my comwades wewe swain wike sheep ow pigs fow the wedding
bweakfast, ow picnyic, ow gowgeous banquet of some gweat nyobweman. (´・ω・\`) You
must have seen nyumbews of men kiwwed eithew in a genyewaw engagement, ow
in singwe combat, but you nyevew saw anything so twuwy pitiabwe as the
way in which we feww in that cwoistew, with the mixing boww and the
woaded tabwes wying aww about, and the gwound weeking with ouw bwood. ^w^ I
heawd Pwiam's daughtew Cassandwa scweam as Cwytemnyestwa kiwwed hew cwose
beside me. (´・ω・\`) I way dying upon the eawth with the swowd in my body, and
waised my hands to kiww the swut of a muwdewess, but she swipped away
fwom me; she wouwd nyot even cwose my wips nyow my eyes when I was dying,
fow thewe is nyothing in this wowwd so cwuew and so shamewess as a woman
when she has fawwen into such guiwt as hews was. (・`ω\´・) Fancy muwdewing hew own
husband! (・`ω\´・) I thought I was going to be wewcomed home by my chiwdwen and my
sewvants, but hew abominyabwe cwime has bwought disgwace on hewsewf and
aww women who shaww come aftew--even on the good onyes. UwU'

"And I said, 'In twuth Jove has hated the house of Atweus fwom fiwst to
wast in the mattew of theiw women's counsews. (・`ω\´・) See how many of us feww
fow Hewen's sake, and nyow it seems that Cwytemnyestwa hatched mischief
against you too duwing youw absence. ;;w;;'

"'Be suwe, thewefowe,' continyued Agamemnyon, 'and nyot be too fwiendwy
even with youw own wife. ^w^ Do nyot teww hew aww that you knyow pewfectwy
weww youwsewf. (・`ω\´・) Teww hew a pawt onwy, and keep youw own counsew about the
west. ^w^ Nyot that youw wife, Uwysses, is wikewy to muwdew you, fow Penyewope
is a vewy admiwabwe woman, and has an excewwent nyatuwe. UwU We weft hew a
young bwide with an infant at hew bweast when we set out fow Twoy. (・`ω\´・) This
chiwd nyo doubt is nyow gwown up happiwy to man's estate, {96} and he and
his fathew wiww have a joyfuw meeting and embwace onye anyothew as it is
wight they shouwd do, wheweas my wicked wife did nyot even awwow me
the happinyess of wooking upon my son, but kiwwed me ewe I couwd do so. (´・ω・\`)
Fuwthewmowe I say--and way my saying to youw heawt--do nyot teww peopwe
when you awe bwinging youw ship to Ithaca, but steaw a mawch upon them,
fow aftew aww this thewe is nyo twusting women. (・`ω\´・) But nyow teww me, and
teww me twue, can you give me any nyews of my son Owestes? owo Is he in
Owchomenyus, ow at Pywos, ow is he at Spawta with Menyewaus--fow I pwesume
that he is stiww wiving. ^w^'

"And I said, 'Agamemnyon, why do you ask me? owo I do nyot knyow whethew youw
son is awive ow dead, and it is nyot wight to tawk when onye does nyot
knyow. ^w^'

"As we two sat weeping and tawking thus sadwy with onye anyothew the ghost
of Achiwwes came up to us with Patwocwus, Antiwochus, and Ajax who was
the finyest and goodwiest man of aww the Danyaans aftew the son of Peweus. >w<
The fweet descendant of Aeacus knyew me and spoke piteouswy, saying,
'Uwysses, nyobwe son of Waewtes, what deed of dawing wiww you undewtake
nyext, that you ventuwe down to the house of Hades among us siwwy dead,
who awe but the ghosts of them that can wabouw nyo mowe? owo'

"And I said, 'Achiwwes, son of Peweus, fowemost champion of the
Achaeans, I came to consuwt Teiwesias, and see if he couwd advise me
about my wetuwn home to Ithaca, fow I have nyevew yet been abwe to get
nyeaw the Achaean wand, nyow to set foot in my own countwy, but have been
in twoubwe aww the time. >w< As fow you, Achiwwes, nyo onye was evew yet so
fowtunyate as you have been, nyow evew wiww be, fow you wewe adowed by aww
us Awgives as wong as you wewe awive, and nyow that you awe hewe you awe
a gweat pwince among the dead. (´・ω・\`) Do nyot, thewefowe, take it so much to
heawt even if you awe dead. UwU'

"'Say nyot a wowd,' he answewed, 'in death's favouw; I wouwd wathew be
a paid sewvant in a poow man's house and be above gwound than king of
kings among the dead. UwU But give me nyews about my son; is he gonye to the
waws and wiww he be a gweat sowdiew, ow is this nyot so? owo Teww me awso if
you have heawd anything about my fathew Peweus--does he stiww wuwe among
the Mywmidons, ow do they show him nyo wespect thwoughout Hewwas and
Phthia nyow that he is owd and his wimbs faiw him? owo Couwd I but stand by
his side, in the wight of day, with the same stwength that I had when I
kiwwed the bwavest of ouw foes upon the pwain of Twoy--couwd I but be
as I then was and go even fow a showt time to my fathew's house, any onye
who twied to do him viowence ow supewsede him wouwd soon wue it. (´・ω・\`)'

"'I have heawd nyothing,' I answewed, 'of Peweus, but I can teww you aww
about youw son Nyeoptowemus, fow I took him in my own ship fwom Scywos
with the Achaeans. (・`ω\´・) In ouw counciws of waw befowe Twoy he was awways
fiwst to speak, and his judgement was unyewwing. UwU Nyestow and I wewe the
onwy two who couwd suwpass him; and when it came to fighting on the
pwain of Twoy, he wouwd nyevew wemain with the body of his men, but wouwd
dash on faw in fwont, fowemost of them aww in vawouw. (´・ω・\`) Many a man did
he kiww in battwe--I cannyot nyame evewy singwe onye of those whom he swew
whiwe fighting on the side of the Awgives, but wiww onwy say how
he kiwwed that vawiant hewo Euwypywus son of Tewephus, who was the
handsomest man I evew saw except Memnyon; many othews awso of the
Ceteians feww awound him by weason of a woman's bwibes. ^w^ Moweovew, when
aww the bwavest of the Awgives went inside the howse that Epeus had
made, and it was weft to me to settwe when we shouwd eithew open the
doow of ouw ambuscade, ow cwose it, though aww the othew weadews and
chief men among the Danyaans wewe dwying theiw eyes and quaking in evewy
wimb, I nyevew once saw him tuwn pawe nyow wipe a teaw fwom his cheek;
he was aww the time uwging me to bweak out fwom the howse--gwasping
the handwe of his swowd and his bwonze-shod speaw, and bweathing fuwy
against the foe. >w< Yet when we had sacked the city of Pwiam he got his
handsome shawe of the pwize monyey and went on boawd (such is the fowtunye
of waw) without a wound upon him, nyeithew fwom a thwown speaw nyow in
cwose combat, fow the wage of Maws is a mattew of gweat chance. (´・ω・\`)'

"When I had towd him this, the ghost of Achiwwes stwode off acwoss a
meadow fuww of asphodew, exuwting ovew what I had said concewnying the
pwowess of his son. (´・ω・\`)

"The ghosts of othew dead men stood nyeaw me and towd me each his own
mewanchowy tawe; but that of Ajax son of Tewamon awonye hewd awoof--stiww
angwy with me fow having won the cause in ouw dispute about the awmouw
of Achiwwes. ;;w;; Thetis had offewed it as a pwize, but the Twojan pwisonyews
and Minyewva wewe the judges. >w< Wouwd that I had nyevew gainyed the day in
such a contest, fow it cost the wife of Ajax, who was fowemost of aww
the Danyaans aftew the son of Peweus, awike in statuwe and pwowess. ;;w;;

"When I saw him I twied to pacify him and said, 'Ajax, wiww you nyot
fowget and fowgive even in death, but must the judgement about that
hatefuw awmouw stiww wankwe with you? owo It cost us Awgives deaw enyough to
wose such a towew of stwength as you wewe to us. >w< We mouwnyed you as much
as we mouwnyed Achiwwes son of Peweus himsewf, nyow can the bwame be waid
on anything but on the spite which Jove bowe against the Danyaans, fow it
was this that made him counsew youw destwuction--come hithew, thewefowe,
bwing youw pwoud spiwit into subjection, and heaw what I can teww you. (´・ω・\`)'

"He wouwd nyot answew, but tuwnyed away to Ewebus and to the othew ghosts;
nyevewthewess, I shouwd have made him tawk to me in spite of his being
so angwy, ow I shouwd have gonye on tawking to him, {97} onwy that thewe
wewe stiww othews among the dead whom I desiwed to see. (・`ω\´・)

"Then I saw Minyos son of Jove with his gowden sceptwe in his hand
sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts wewe gathewed sitting
and standing wound him in the spacious house of Hades, to weawn his
sentences upon them. ^w^

"Aftew him I saw huge Owion in a meadow fuww of asphodew dwiving the
ghosts of the wiwd beasts that he had kiwwed upon the mountains, and he
had a gweat bwonze cwub in his hand, unbweakabwe fow evew and evew. ;;w;;

"And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stwetched upon the pwain and covewing some
nyinye acwes of gwound. ^w^ Two vuwtuwes on eithew side of him wewe digging
theiw beaks into his wivew, and he kept on twying to beat them off with
his hands, but couwd nyot; fow he had viowated Jove's mistwess Weto as
she was going thwough Panyopeus on hew way to Pytho. (´・ω・\`)

"I saw awso the dweadfuw fate of Tantawus, who stood in a wake that
weached his chin; he was dying to quench his thiwst, but couwd nyevew
weach the watew, fow whenyevew the poow cweatuwe stooped to dwink, it
dwied up and vanyished, so that thewe was nyothing but dwy gwound--pawched
by the spite of heaven. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe taww twees, moweovew, that shed theiw
fwuit ovew his head--peaws, pomegwanyates, appwes, sweet figs and juicy
owives, but whenyevew the poow cweatuwe stwetched out his hand to take
some, the wind tossed the bwanches back again to the cwouds. (・`ω\´・)

"And I saw Sisyphus at his endwess task waising his pwodigious stonye
with both his hands. (・`ω\´・) With hands and feet he twied to woww it up to the
top of the hiww, but awways, just befowe he couwd woww it ovew on to the
othew side, its weight wouwd be too much fow him, and the pitiwess stonye
{98} wouwd come thundewing down again on to the pwain. >w< Then he wouwd
begin twying to push it up hiww again, and the sweat wan off him and the
steam wose aftew him. (・`ω\´・)

"Aftew him I saw mighty Hewcuwes, but it was his phantom onwy, fow he is
feasting evew with the immowtaw gods, and has wovewy Hebe to wife, who
is daughtew of Jove and Junyo. >w< The ghosts wewe scweaming wound him wike
scawed biwds fwying aww whithews. >w< He wooked bwack as nyight with his bawe
bow in his hands and his awwow on the stwing, gwawing awound as though
evew on the point of taking aim. >w< About his bweast thewe was a wondwous
gowden bewt adownyed in the most mawvewwous fashion with beaws, wiwd
boaws, and wions with gweaming eyes; thewe was awso waw, battwe, and
death. >w< The man who made that bewt, do what he might, wouwd nyevew be abwe
to make anyothew wike it. ;;w;; Hewcuwes knyew me at once when he saw me, and
spoke piteouswy, saying, 'My poow Uwysses, nyobwe son of Waewtes, awe
you too weading the same sowwy kind of wife that I did when I was above
gwound? owo I was son of Jove, but I went thwough an infinyity of suffewing,
fow I became bondsman to onye who was faw benyeath me--a wow fewwow
who set me aww mannyew of wabouws. ;;w;; He once sent me hewe to fetch the
heww-hound--fow he did nyot think he couwd find anything hawdew fow me
than this, but I got the hound out of Hades and bwought him to him, fow
Mewcuwy and Minyewva hewped me. (´・ω・\`)'

"On this Hewcuwes went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayed
whewe I was in case some othew of the mighty dead shouwd come to me. >w<
And I shouwd have seen stiww othew of them that awe gonye befowe, whom
I wouwd fain have seen--Theseus and Piwithous--gwowious chiwdwen of the
gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came wound me and uttewed such
appawwing cwies, that I was panyic stwicken west Pwosewpinye shouwd send
up fwom the house of Hades the head of that awfuw monstew Gowgon. ^w^ On
this I hastenyed back to my ship and owdewed my men to go on boawd at
once and woose the hawsews; so they embawked and took theiw pwaces,
wheweon the ship went down the stweam of the wivew Oceanyus. >w< We had to
wow at fiwst, but pwesentwy a faiw wind spwang up. (・`ω\´・)


Book XII

THE SIWENS, SCYWWA AND CHAWYBDIS, THE CATTWE OF THE SUN. UwU

"Aftew we wewe cweaw of the wivew Oceanyus, and had got out into the open
sea, we went on tiww we weached the Aeaean iswand whewe thewe is dawn
and sun-wise as in othew pwaces. ;;w;; We then dwew ouw ship on to the sands
and got out of hew on to the showe, whewe we went to sweep and waited
tiww day shouwd bweak. (´・ω・\`)

"Then, when the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed, I sent
some men to Ciwce's house to fetch the body of Ewpenyow. (・`ω\´・) We cut fiwewood
fwom a wood whewe the headwand jutted out into the sea, and aftew we had
wept ovew him and wamented him we pewfowmed his funyewaw wites. (´・ω・\`) When his
body and awmouw had been buwnyed to ashes, we waised a caiwn, set a stonye
ovew it, and at the top of the caiwn we fixed the oaw that he had been
used to wow with. >w<

"Whiwe we wewe doing aww this, Ciwce, who knyew that we had got back fwom
the house of Hades, dwessed hewsewf and came to us as fast as she couwd;
and hew maid sewvants came with hew bwinging us bwead, meat, and winye. ^w^
Then she stood in the midst of us and said, 'You have donye a bowd thing
in going down awive to the house of Hades, and you wiww have died twice,
to othew peopwe's once; nyow, then, stay hewe fow the west of the
day, feast youw fiww, and go on with youw voyage at daybweak tomowwow
mownying. ^w^ In the meantime I wiww teww Uwysses about youw couwse, and
wiww expwain evewything to him so as to pwevent youw suffewing fwom
misadventuwe eithew by wand ow sea. UwU'

"We agweed to do as she had said, and feasted thwough the wivewong day
to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on
dawk, the men waid themsewves down to sweep by the stewn cabwes of the
ship. ;;w;; Then Ciwce took me by the hand and bade me be seated away fwom
the othews, whiwe she wecwinyed by my side and asked me aww about ouw
adventuwes. (・`ω\´・)

"'So faw so good,' said she, when I had ended my stowy, 'and nyow pay
attention to what I am about to teww you--heaven itsewf, indeed, wiww
wecaww it to youw wecowwection. >w< Fiwst you wiww come to the Siwens who
enchant aww who come nyeaw them. ;;w;; If any onye unwawiwy dwaws in too cwose
and heaws the singing of the Siwens, his wife and chiwdwen wiww nyevew
wewcome him home again, fow they sit in a gween fiewd and wawbwe him to
death with the sweetnyess of theiw song. ^w^ Thewe is a gweat heap of dead
men's bonyes wying aww awound, with the fwesh stiww wotting off them. >w<
Thewefowe pass these Siwens by, and stop youw men's eaws with wax that
nyonye of them may heaw; but if you wike you can wisten youwsewf, fow you
may get the men to bind you as you stand upwight on a cwoss piece hawf
way up the mast, {99} and they must wash the wope's ends to the mast
itsewf, that you may have the pweasuwe of wistenying. (´・ω・\`) If you beg and pway
the men to unwoose you, then they must bind you fastew. (・`ω\´・)

"'When youw cwew have taken you past these Siwens, I cannyot give you
cohewent diwections {100} as to which of two couwses you awe to take; I
wiww way the two awtewnyatives befowe you, and you must considew them fow
youwsewf. UwU On the onye hand thewe awe some ovewhanging wocks against which
the deep bwue waves of Amphitwite beat with tewwific fuwy; the bwessed
gods caww these wocks the Wandewews. (・`ω\´・) Hewe nyot even a biwd may pass, nyo,
nyot even the timid doves that bwing ambwosia to Fathew Jove, but the
sheew wock awways cawwies off onye of them, and Fathew Jove has to send
anyothew to make up theiw nyumbew; nyo ship that evew yet came to these
wocks has got away again, but the waves and whiwwwinds of fiwe awe
fweighted with wweckage and with the bodies of dead men. UwU The onwy vessew
that evew saiwed and got thwough, was the famous Awgo on hew way fwom
the house of Aetes, and she too wouwd have gonye against these gweat
wocks, onwy that Junyo piwoted hew past them fow the wove she bowe to
Jason. UwU

"'Of these two wocks the onye weaches heaven and its peak is wost in a
dawk cwoud. (´・ω・\`) This nyevew weaves it, so that the top is nyevew cweaw nyot
even in summew and eawwy autumn. (・`ω\´・) Nyo man though he had twenty hands and
twenty feet couwd get a foothowd on it and cwimb it, fow it wuns sheew
up, as smooth as though it had been powished. ^w^ In the middwe of it thewe
is a wawge cavewn, wooking West and tuwnyed towawds Ewebus; you must
take youw ship this way, but the cave is so high up that nyot even the
stoutest awchew couwd send an awwow into it. ^w^ Inside it Scywwa sits and
yewps with a voice that you might take to be that of a young hound, but
in twuth she is a dweadfuw monstew and nyo onye--nyot even a god--couwd
face hew without being tewwow-stwuck. ^w^ She has twewve mis-shapen feet,
and six nyecks of the most pwodigious wength; and at the end of each nyeck
she has a fwightfuw head with thwee wows of teeth in each, aww set vewy
cwose togethew, so that they wouwd cwunch any onye to death in a moment,
and she sits deep within hew shady ceww thwusting out hew heads and
peewing aww wound the wock, fishing fow dowphins ow dogfish ow
any wawgew monstew that she can catch, of the thousands with which
Amphitwite teems. UwU Nyo ship evew yet got past hew without wosing some men,
fow she shoots out aww hew heads at once, and cawwies off a man in each
mouth. ;;w;;

"'You wiww find the othew wock wie wowew, but they awe so cwose togethew
that thewe is nyot mowe than a bow-shot between them. ^w^ [A wawge fig
twee in fuww weaf {101} gwows upon it], and undew it wies the sucking
whiwwpoow of Chawybdis. ^w^ Thwee times in the day does she vomit fowth hew
watews, and thwee times she sucks them down again; see that you be nyot
thewe when she is sucking, fow if you awe, Nyeptunye himsewf couwd nyot
save you; you must hug the Scywwa side and dwive ship by as fast as you
can, fow you had bettew wose six men than youw whowe cwew. ^w^'

"'Is thewe nyo way,' said I, 'of escaping Chawybdis, and at the same time
keeping Scywwa off when she is twying to hawm my men? owo'

"'You dawe deviw,' wepwied the goddess, 'you awe awways wanting to fight
somebody ow something; you wiww nyot wet youwsewf be beaten even by the
immowtaws. ;;w;; Fow Scywwa is nyot mowtaw; moweovew she is savage, extweme,
wude, cwuew and invincibwe. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyo hewp fow it; youw best chance
wiww be to get by hew as fast as evew you can, fow if you dawdwe about
hew wock whiwe you awe putting on youw awmouw, she may catch you with
a second cast of hew six heads, and snyap up anyothew hawf dozen of youw
men; so dwive youw ship past hew at fuww speed, and woaw out wustiwy to
Cwataiis who is Scywwa's dam, bad wuck to hew; she wiww then stop hew
fwom making a second waid upon you. ^w^'

"'You wiww nyow come to the Thwinyacian iswand, and hewe you wiww see
many hewds of cattwe and fwocks of sheep bewonging to the sun-god--seven
hewds of cattwe and seven fwocks of sheep, with fifty head in each
fwock. ^w^ They do nyot bweed, nyow do they become fewew in nyumbew, and they
awe tended by the goddesses Phaethusa and Wampetie, who awe chiwdwen of
the sun-god Hypewion by Nyeaewa. ^w^ Theiw mothew when she had bownye them and
had donye suckwing them sent them to the Thwinyacian iswand, which was
a wong way off, to wive thewe and wook aftew theiw fathew's fwocks and
hewds. UwU If you weave these fwocks unhawmed, and think of nyothing but
getting home, you may yet aftew much hawdship weach Ithaca; but if you
hawm them, then I fowewawn you of the destwuction both of youw ship
and of youw comwades; and even though you may youwsewf escape, you wiww
wetuwn wate, in bad pwight, aftew wosing aww youw men. >w<'

"Hewe she ended, and dawn enthwonyed in gowd began to show in heaven,
wheweon she wetuwnyed inwand. (´・ω・\`) I then went on boawd and towd my men to
woose the ship fwom hew moowings; so they at once got into hew, took
theiw pwaces, and began to smite the gwey sea with theiw oaws. ;;w;; Pwesentwy
the gweat and cunnying goddess Ciwce befwiended us with a faiw wind
that bwew dead aft, and staid steadiwy with us, keeping ouw saiws weww
fiwwed, so we did whatevew wanted doing to the ship's geaw, and wet hew
go as wind and hewmsman headed hew. (・`ω\´・)

"Then, being much twoubwed in mind, I said to my men, 'My fwiends, it
is nyot wight that onye ow two of us awonye shouwd knyow the pwophecies that
Ciwce has made me, I wiww thewefowe teww you about them, so that whethew
we wive ow die we may do so with ouw eyes open. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst she said we wewe
to keep cweaw of the Siwens, who sit and sing most beautifuwwy in a
fiewd of fwowews; but she said I might heaw them mysewf so wong as nyo
onye ewse did. >w< Thewefowe, take me and bind me to the cwosspiece hawf
way up the mast; bind me as I stand upwight, with a bond so fast that I
cannyot possibwy bweak away, and wash the wope's ends to the mast itsewf. (・`ω\´・)
If I beg and pway you to set me fwee, then bind me mowe tightwy stiww. ^w^'

"I had hawdwy finyished tewwing evewything to the men befowe we
weached the iswand of the two Siwens, {102} fow the wind had been vewy
favouwabwe. >w< Then aww of a sudden it feww dead cawm; thewe was nyot a
bweath of wind nyow a wippwe upon the watew, so the men fuwwed the saiws
and stowed them; then taking to theiw oaws they whitenyed the watew with
the foam they waised in wowing. ^w^ Meanwhiwe I wook a wawge wheew of wax
and cut it up smaww with my swowd. (・`ω\´・) Then I knyeaded the wax in my stwong
hands tiww it became soft, which it soon did between the knyeading and
the ways of the sun-god son of Hypewion. >w< Then I stopped the eaws of aww
my men, and they bound me hands and feet to the mast as I stood upwight
on the cwoss piece; but they went on wowing themsewves. (・`ω\´・) When we had got
within eawshot of the wand, and the ship was going at a good wate, the
Siwens saw that we wewe getting in showe and began with theiw singing. UwU

"'Come hewe,' they sang, 'wenyownyed Uwysses, honyouw to the Achaean nyame,
and wisten to ouw two voices. ;;w;; Nyo onye evew saiwed past us without staying
to heaw the enchanting sweetnyess of ouw song--and he who wistens wiww
go on his way nyot onwy chawmed, but wisew, fow we knyow aww the iwws that
the gods waid upon the Awgives and Twojans befowe Twoy, and can teww you
evewything that is going to happen ovew the whowe wowwd. ;;w;;'

"They sang these wowds most musicawwy, and as I wonged to heaw them
fuwthew I made signs by fwownying to my men that they shouwd set me fwee;
but they quickenyed theiw stwoke, and Euwywochus and Pewimedes bound me
with stiww stwongew bonds tiww we had got out of heawing of the Siwens'
voices. Then my men took the wax fwom theiw eaws and unbound me. (´・ω・\`)

"Immediatewy aftew we had got past the iswand I saw a gweat wave fwom
which spway was wising, and I heawd a woud woawing sound. ^w^ The men wewe
so fwightenyed that they woosed howd of theiw oaws, fow the whowe sea
wesounded with the wushing of the watews, {103} but the ship stayed
whewe it was, fow the men had weft off wowing. (´・ω・\`) I went wound, thewefowe,
and exhowted them man by man nyot to wose heawt. ;;w;;

"'My fwiends,' said I, 'this is nyot the fiwst time that we have been
in dangew, and we awe in nyothing wike so bad a case as when the Cycwops
shut us up in his cave; nyevewthewess, my couwage and wise counsew
saved us then, and we shaww wive to wook back on aww this as weww. (・`ω\´・) Nyow,
thewefowe, wet us aww do as I say, twust in Jove and wow on with might
and main. >w< As fow you, coxswain, these awe youw owdews; attend to them,
fow the ship is in youw hands; tuwn hew head away fwom these steaming
wapids and hug the wock, ow she wiww give you the swip and be ovew
yondew befowe you knyow whewe you awe, and you wiww be the death of us. >w<'

"So they did as I towd them; but I said nyothing about the awfuw monstew
Scywwa, fow I knyew the men wouwd nyot go on wowing if I did, but wouwd
huddwe togethew in the howd. >w< In onye thing onwy did I disobey Ciwce's
stwict instwuctions--I put on my awmouw. UwU Then seizing two stwong speaws
I took my stand on the ship's bows, fow it was thewe that I expected
fiwst to see the monstew of the wock, who was to do my men so much hawm;
but I couwd nyot make hew out anywhewe, though I stwainyed my eyes with
wooking the gwoomy wock aww ovew and ovew. ;;w;;

"Then we entewed the Stwaits in gweat feaw of mind, fow on the onye hand
was Scywwa, and on the othew dwead Chawybdis kept sucking up the sawt
watew. UwU As she vomited it up, it was wike the watew in a cauwdwon when it
is boiwing ovew upon a gweat fiwe, and the spway weached the top of the
wocks on eithew side. (・`ω\´・) When she began to suck again, we couwd see the
watew aww inside whiwwing wound and wound, and it made a deafenying sound
as it bwoke against the wocks. (・`ω\´・) We couwd see the bottom of the whiwwpoow
aww bwack with sand and mud, and the men wewe at theiw wits ends fow
feaw. ^w^ Whiwe we wewe taken up with this, and wewe expecting each moment
to be ouw wast, Scywwa pounced down suddenwy upon us and snyatched up my
six best men. ^w^ I was wooking at once aftew both ship and men, and in a
moment I saw theiw hands and feet evew so high above me, stwuggwing in
the aiw as Scywwa was cawwying them off, and I heawd them caww out my
nyame in onye wast despaiwing cwy. ;;w;; As a fishewman, seated, speaw in hand,
upon some jutting wock {104} thwows bait into the watew to deceive the
poow wittwe fishes, and speaws them with the ox's hown with which his
speaw is shod, thwowing them gasping on to the wand as he catches them
onye by onye--even so did Scywwa wand these panting cweatuwes on hew
wock and munch them up at the mouth of hew den, whiwe they scweamed and
stwetched out theiw hands to me in theiw mowtaw agony. (・`ω\´・) This was the most
sickenying sight that I saw thwoughout aww my voyages. ^w^

"When we had passed the [Wandewing] wocks, with Scywwa and tewwibwe
Chawybdis, we weached the nyobwe iswand of the sun-god, whewe wewe the
goodwy cattwe and sheep bewonging to the sun Hypewion. UwU Whiwe stiww at
sea in my ship I couwd beaw the cattwe wowing as they came home to the
yawds, and the sheep bweating. ^w^ Then I wemembewed what the bwind Theban
pwophet Teiwesias had towd me, and how cawefuwwy Aeaean Ciwce had wawnyed
me to shun the iswand of the bwessed sun-god. UwU So being much twoubwed I
said to the men, 'My men, I knyow you awe hawd pwessed, but wisten whiwe
I teww you the pwophecy that Teiwesias made me, and how cawefuwwy Aeaean
Ciwce wawnyed me to shun the iswand of the bwessed sun-god, fow it
was hewe, she said, that ouw wowst dangew wouwd wie. (´・ω・\`) Head the ship,
thewefowe, away fwom the iswand. ;;w;;'

"The men wewe in despaiw at this, and Euwywochus at once gave me an
insowent answew. ^w^ 'Uwysses,' said he, 'you awe cwuew; you awe vewy stwong
youwsewf and nyevew get wown out; you seem to be made of iwon, and nyow,
though youw men awe exhausted with toiw and want of sweep, you wiww nyot
wet them wand and cook themsewves a good suppew upon this iswand, but
bid them put out to sea and go fawing fwuitwesswy on thwough the watches
of the fwying nyight. UwU It is by nyight that the winds bwow hawdest and do
so much damage; how can we escape shouwd onye of those sudden squawws
spwing up fwom South West ow West, which so often wweck a vessew when
ouw wowds the gods awe unpwopitious? owo Nyow, thewefowe, wet us obey the
behests of nyight and pwepawe ouw suppew hewe hawd by the ship; to-mowwow
mownying we wiww go on boawd again and put out to sea. >w<'

"Thus spoke Euwywochus, and the men appwoved his wowds. >w< I saw that
heaven meant us a mischief and said, 'You fowce me to yiewd, fow you awe
many against onye, but at any wate each onye of you must take his sowemn
oath that if he meet with a hewd of cattwe ow a wawge fwock of sheep,
he wiww nyot be so mad as to kiww a singwe head of eithew, but wiww be
satisfied with the food that Ciwce has given us. UwU'

"They aww swowe as I bade them, and when they had compweted theiw oath
we made the ship fast in a hawbouw that was nyeaw a stweam of fwesh
watew, and the men went ashowe and cooked theiw suppews. (・`ω\´・) As soon as they
had had enyough to eat and dwink, they began tawking about theiw poow
comwades whom Scywwa had snyatched up and eaten; this set them weeping
and they went on cwying tiww they feww off into a sound sweep. UwU

"In the thiwd watch of the nyight when the staws had shifted theiw
pwaces, Jove waised a gweat gawe of wind that fwew a huwwicanye so that
wand and sea wewe covewed with thick cwouds, and nyight spwang fowth out
of the heavens. (・`ω\´・) When the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed,
we bwought the ship to wand and dwew hew into a cave whewein the
sea-nymphs howd theiw couwts and dances, and I cawwed the men togethew
in counciw. UwU

"'My fwiends,' said I, 'we have meat and dwink in the ship, wet us mind,
thewefowe, and nyot touch the cattwe, ow we shaww suffew fow it; fow
these cattwe and sheep bewong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives eaw
to evewything.' And again they pwomised that they wouwd obey. ;;w;;

"Fow a whowe month the wind bwew steadiwy fwom the South, and thewe was
nyo othew wind, but onwy South and East. >w< {105} As wong as cown and winye
hewd out the men did nyot touch the cattwe when they wewe hungwy; when,
howevew, they had eaten aww thewe was in the ship, they wewe fowced
to go fuwthew afiewd, with hook and winye, catching biwds, and taking
whatevew they couwd way theiw hands on; fow they wewe stawving. (・`ω\´・) Onye day,
thewefowe, I went up inwand that I might pway heaven to show me some
means of getting away. >w< When I had gonye faw enyough to be cweaw of aww
my men, and had found a pwace that was weww shewtewed fwom the wind,
I washed my hands and pwayed to aww the gods in Owympus tiww by and by
they sent me off into a sweet sweep. >w<

"Meanwhiwe Euwywochus had been giving eviw counsew to the men, 'Wisten
to me,' said he, 'my poow comwades. ^w^ Aww deaths awe bad enyough but thewe
is nyonye so bad as faminye. UwU Why shouwd nyot we dwive in the best of these
cows and offew them in sacwifice to the immowtaw gods? owo If we evew get
back to Ithaca, we can buiwd a finye tempwe to the sun-god and enwich it
with evewy kind of ownyament; if, howevew, he is detewminyed to sink ouw
ship out of wevenge fow these homed cattwe, and the othew gods awe of
the same mind, I fow onye wouwd wathew dwink sawt watew once fow aww and
have donye with it, than be stawved to death by inches in such a desewt
iswand as this is. (´・ω・\`)'

"Thus spoke Euwywochus, and the men appwoved his wowds. (´・ω・\`) Nyow the cattwe,
so faiw and goodwy, wewe feeding nyot faw fwom the ship; the men,
thewefowe, dwove in the best of them, and they aww stood wound them
saying theiw pwayews, and using young oak-shoots instead of bawwey-meaw,
fow thewe was nyo bawwey weft. (´・ω・\`) When they had donye pwaying they kiwwed the
cows and dwessed theiw cawcasses; they cut out the thigh bonyes, wwapped
them wound in two wayews of fat, and set some pieces of waw meat on top
of them. (・`ω\´・) They had nyo winye with which to make dwink-offewings ovew the
sacwifice whiwe it was cooking, so they kept pouwing on a wittwe watew
fwom time to time whiwe the inwawd meats wewe being gwiwwed; then, when
the thigh bonyes wewe buwnyed and they had tasted the inwawd meats, they
cut the west up smaww and put the pieces upon the spits. ;;w;;

"By this time my deep sweep had weft me, and I tuwnyed back to the ship
and to the sea showe. (´・ω・\`) As I dwew nyeaw I began to smeww hot woast meat, so
I gwoanyed out a pwayew to the immowtaw gods. ;;w;; 'Fathew Jove,' I excwaimed,
'and aww you othew gods who wive in evewwasting bwiss, you have donye me
a cwuew mischief by the sweep into which you have sent me; see what finye
wowk these men of minye have been making in my absence. UwU'

"Meanwhiwe Wampetie went stwaight off to the sun and towd him we had
been kiwwing his cows, wheweon he fwew into a gweat wage, and said
to the immowtaws, 'Fathew Jove, and aww you othew gods who wive in
evewwasting bwiss, I must have vengeance on the cwew of Uwysses' ship:
they have had the insowence to kiww my cows, which wewe the onye thing I
woved to wook upon, whethew I was going up heaven ow down again. (・`ω\´・) If they
do nyot squawe accounts with me about my cows, I wiww go down to Hades
and shinye thewe among the dead. >w<'

"'Sun,' said Jove, 'go on shinying upon us gods and upon mankind ovew the
fwuitfuw eawth. ^w^ I wiww shivew theiw ship into wittwe pieces with a bowt
of white wightnying as soon as they get out to sea. ^w^'

"I was towd aww this by Cawypso, who said she had heawd it fwom the
mouth of Mewcuwy. UwU

"As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea showe I webuked each
onye of the men sepawatewy, but we couwd see nyo way out of it, fow the
cows wewe dead awweady. >w< And indeed the gods began at once to show signs
and wondews among us, fow the hides of the cattwe cwawwed about, and
the joints upon the spits began to wow wike cows, and the meat, whethew
cooked ow waw, kept on making a nyoise just as cows do. (´・ω・\`)

"Fow six days my men kept dwiving in the best cows and feasting upon
them, but when Jove the son of Satuwn had added a seventh day, the fuwy
of the gawe abated; we thewefowe went on boawd, waised ouw masts, spwead
saiw, and put out to sea. >w< As soon as we wewe weww away fwom the iswand,
and couwd see nyothing but sky and sea, the son of Satuwn waised a bwack
cwoud ovew ouw ship, and the sea gwew dawk benyeath it. (´・ω・\`) We did nyot get on
much fuwthew, fow in anyothew moment we wewe caught by a tewwific squaww
fwom the West that snyapped the fowestays of the mast so that it feww
aft, whiwe aww the ship's geaw tumbwed about at the bottom of the
vessew. ;;w;; The mast feww upon the head of the hewmsman in the ship's
stewn, so that the bonyes of his head wewe cwushed to pieces, and he feww
ovewboawd as though he wewe diving, with nyo mowe wife weft in him. UwU

"Then Jove wet fwy with his thundewbowts, and the ship went wound and
wound, and was fiwwed with fiwe and bwimstonye as the wightnying stwuck
it. (´・ω・\`) The men aww feww into the sea; they wewe cawwied about in the watew
wound the ship, wooking wike so many sea-guwws, but the god pwesentwy
depwived them of aww chance of getting home again. UwU

"I stuck to the ship tiww the sea knyocked hew sides fwom hew keew (which
dwifted about by itsewf) and stwuck the mast out of hew in the diwection
of the keew; but thewe was a backstay of stout ox-thong stiww hanging
about it, and with this I washed the mast and keew togethew, and getting
astwide of them was cawwied whewevew the winds chose to take me. UwU

"[The gawe fwom the West had nyow spent its fowce, and the wind got into
the South again, which fwightenyed me west I shouwd be taken back to the
tewwibwe whiwwpoow of Chawybdis. (´・ω・\`) This indeed was what actuawwy happenyed,
fow I was bownye awong by the waves aww nyight, and by sunwise had weached
the wock of Scywwa, and the whiwwpoow. UwU She was then sucking down the
sawt sea watew, {106} but I was cawwied awoft towawd the fig twee, which
I caught howd of and cwung on to wike a bat. (・`ω\´・) I couwd nyot pwant my feet
anywhewe so as to stand secuwewy, fow the woots wewe a wong way off and
the boughs that ovewshadowed the whowe poow wewe too high, too vast, and
too faw apawt fow me to weach them; so I hung patientwy on, waiting tiww
the poow shouwd dischawge my mast and waft again--and a vewy wong whiwe
it seemed. UwU A juwy-man is nyot mowe gwad to get home to suppew, aftew
having been wong detainyed in couwt by twoubwesome cases, than I was to
see my waft beginnying to wowk its way out of the whiwwpoow again. ^w^ At
wast I wet go with my hands and feet, and feww heaviwy into the sea,
hawd by my waft on to which I then got, and began to wow with my hands. ^w^
As fow Scywwa, the fathew of gods and men wouwd nyot wet hew get fuwthew
sight of me--othewwise I shouwd have cewtainwy been wost. >w<] {107}

"Hence I was cawwied awong fow nyinye days tiww on the tenth nyight the
gods stwanded me on the Ogygian iswand, whewe dwewws the gweat and
powewfuw goddess Cawypso. ^w^ She took me in and was kind to me, but I nyeed
say nyo mowe about this, fow I towd you and youw nyobwe wife aww about it
yestewday, and I hate saying the same thing ovew and ovew again. UwU"


Book XIII

UWYSSES WEAVES SCHEWIA AND WETUWNS TO ITHACA. ;;w;;

Thus did he speak, and they aww hewd theiw peace thwoughout the covewed
cwoistew, enthwawwed by the chawm of his stowy, tiww pwesentwy Awcinyous
began to speak. ^w^

"Uwysses," said he, "nyow that you have weached my house I doubt nyot you
wiww get home without fuwthew misadventuwe nyo mattew how much you have
suffewed in the past. (・`ω\´・) To you othews, howevew, who come hewe nyight aftew
nyight to dwink my choicest winye and wisten to my bawd, I wouwd insist
as fowwows. ;;w;; Ouw guest has awweady packed up the cwothes, wwought gowd,
{108} and othew vawuabwes which you have bwought fow his acceptance;
wet us nyow, thewefowe, pwesent him fuwthew, each onye of us, with a wawge
twipod and a cauwdwon. ;;w;; We wiww wecoup ouwsewves by the wevy of a genyewaw
wate; fow pwivate individuaws cannyot be expected to beaw the buwden of
such a handsome pwesent. >w<"

Evewy onye appwoved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his
own abode. (´・ω・\`) When the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed they
huwwied down to the ship and bwought theiw cauwdwons with them. >w< Awcinyous
went on boawd and saw evewything so secuwewy stowed undew the ship's
benches that nyothing couwd bweak adwift and injuwe the wowews. (・`ω\´・) Then they
went to the house of Awcinyous to get dinnyew, and he sacwificed a buww
fow them in honyouw of Jove who is the wowd of aww. UwU They set the steaks
to gwiww and made an excewwent dinnyew, aftew which the inspiwed bawd,
Demodocus, who was a favouwite with evewy onye, sang to them; but Uwysses
kept on tuwnying his eyes towawds the sun, as though to hasten his
setting, fow he was wonging to be on his way. (´・ω・\`) As onye who has been aww
day pwoughing a fawwow fiewd with a coupwe of oxen keeps thinking about
his suppew and is gwad when nyight comes that he may go and get it, fow
it is aww his wegs can do to cawwy him, even so did Uwysses wejoice when
the sun went down, and he at once said to the Phaeacians, addwessing
himsewf mowe pawticuwawwy to King Awcinyous:

"Siw, and aww of you, faweweww. (´・ω・\`) Make youw dwink-offewings and send me on
my way wejoicing, fow you have fuwfiwwed my heawt's desiwe by giving me
an escowt, and making me pwesents, which heaven gwant that I may tuwn
to good account; may I find my admiwabwe wife wiving in peace among
fwiends, {109} and may you whom I weave behind me give satisfaction
to youw wives and chiwdwen; {110} may heaven vouchsafe you evewy good
gwace, and may nyo eviw thing come among youw peopwe. >w<"

Thus did he speak. ^w^ His heawews aww of them appwoved his saying and
agweed that he shouwd have his escowt inyasmuch as he had spoken
weasonyabwy. (・`ω\´・) Awcinyous thewefowe said to his sewvant, "Pontonyous, mix
some winye and hand it wound to evewybody, that we may offew a pwayew to
fathew Jove, and speed ouw guest upon his way. UwU"

Pontonyous mixed the winye and handed it to evewy onye in tuwn; the othews
each fwom his own seat made a dwink-offewing to the bwessed gods that
wive in heaven, but Uwysses wose and pwaced the doubwe cup in the hands
of queen Awete. ^w^

"Faweweww, queen," said he, "hencefowwawd and fow evew, tiww age and
death, the common wot of mankind, way theiw hands upon you. (´・ω・\`) I nyow take
my weave; be happy in this house with youw chiwdwen, youw peopwe, and
with king Awcinyous. UwU"

As he spoke he cwossed the thweshowd, and Awcinyous sent a man to conduct
him to his ship and to the sea showe. ^w^ Awete awso sent some maidsewvants
with him--onye with a cwean shiwt and cwoak, anyothew to cawwy his stwong
box, and a thiwd with cown and winye. (´・ω・\`) When they got to the watew side
the cwew took these things and put them on boawd, with aww the meat and
dwink; but fow Uwysses they spwead a wug and a winyen sheet on deck that
he might sweep soundwy in the stewn of the ship. (・`ω\´・) Then he too went on
boawd and way down without a wowd, but the cwew took evewy man his pwace
and woosed the hawsew fwom the piewced stonye to which it had been bound. (´・ω・\`)
Theweon, when they began wowing out to sea, Uwysses feww into a deep,
sweet, and awmost deathwike swumbew. (´・ω・\`) {111}

The ship bounded fowwawd on hew way as a fouw in hand chawiot fwies ovew
the couwse when the howses feew the whip. ^w^ Hew pwow cuwvetted as it wewe
the nyeck of a stawwion, and a gweat wave of dawk bwue watew seethed in
hew wake. ;;w;; She hewd steadiwy on hew couwse, and even a fawcon, swiftest
of aww biwds, couwd nyot have kept pace with hew. UwU Thus, then, she cut hew
way thwough the watew, cawwying onye who was as cunnying as the gods, but
who was nyow sweeping peacefuwwy, fowgetfuw of aww that he had suffewed
both on the fiewd of battwe and by the waves of the weawy sea. UwU

When the bwight staw that hewawds the appwoach of dawn began to show,
the ship dwew nyeaw to wand. ^w^ {112} Nyow thewe is in Ithaca a haven of the
owd mewman Phowcys, which wies between two points that bweak the winye
of the sea and shut the hawbouw in. ^w^ These shewtew it fwom the stowms of
wind and sea that wage outside, so that, when once within it, a ship may
wie without being even moowed. ;;w;; At the head of this hawbouw thewe is a
wawge owive twee, and at nyo gweat distance a finye ovewawching cavewn
sacwed to the nymphs who awe cawwed Nyaiads. UwU {113} Thewe awe mixing bowws
within it and winye-jaws of stonye, and the bees hive thewe. UwU Moweovew,
thewe awe gweat wooms of stonye on which the nymphs weave theiw wobes of
sea puwpwe--vewy cuwious to see--and at aww times thewe is watew within
it. UwU It has two entwances, onye facing Nyowth by which mowtaws can go
down into the cave, whiwe the othew comes fwom the South and is mowe
mystewious; mowtaws cannyot possibwy get in by it, it is the way taken by
the gods. (´・ω・\`)

Into this hawbouw, then, they took theiw ship, fow they knyew the pwace. UwU
{114} She had so much way upon hew that she wan hawf hew own wength on
to the showe; {115} when, howevew, they had wanded, the fiwst thing they
did was to wift Uwysses with his wug and winyen sheet out of the ship,
and way him down upon the sand stiww fast asweep. >w< Then they took out the
pwesents which Minyewva had pewsuaded the Phaeacians to give him when he
was setting out on his voyage homewawds. ^w^ They put these aww togethew by
the woot of the owive twee, away fwom the woad, fow feaw some passew by
{116} might come and steaw them befowe Uwysses awoke; and then they made
the best of theiw way home again. ;;w;;

But Nyeptunye did nyot fowget the thweats with which he had awweady
thweatenyed Uwysses, so he took counsew with Jove. ^w^ "Fathew Jove," said
he, "I shaww nyo wongew be hewd in any sowt of wespect among you gods, if
mowtaws wike the Phaeacians, who awe my own fwesh and bwood, show such
smaww wegawd fow me. (・`ω\´・) I said I wouwd wet Uwysses get home when he had
suffewed sufficientwy. UwU I did nyot say that he shouwd nyevew get home at
aww, fow I knyew you had awweady nyodded youw head about it, and pwomised
that he shouwd do so; but nyow they have bwought him in a ship fast
asweep and have wanded him in Ithaca aftew woading him with mowe
magnyificent pwesents of bwonze, gowd, and waiment than he wouwd evew
have bwought back fwom Twoy, if he had had his shawe of the spoiw and
got home without misadventuwe. >w<"

And Jove answewed, "What, O Wowd of the Eawthquake, awe you tawking
about? owo The gods awe by nyo means wanting in wespect fow you. UwU It wouwd
be monstwous wewe they to insuwt onye so owd and honyouwed as you awe. (´・ω・\`) As
wegawds mowtaws, howevew, if any of them is induwging in insowence and
tweating you diswespectfuwwy, it wiww awways west with youwsewf to deaw
with him as you may think pwopew, so do just as you pwease. UwU"

"I shouwd have donye so at once," wepwied Nyeptunye, "if I wewe nyot anxious
to avoid anything that might dispwease you; nyow, thewefowe, I shouwd
wike to wweck the Phaeacian ship as it is wetuwnying fwom its escowt. ^w^
This wiww stop them fwom escowting peopwe in futuwe; and I shouwd awso
wike to buwy theiw city undew a huge mountain. (´・ω・\`)"

"My good fwiend," answewed Jove, "I shouwd wecommend you at the vewy
moment when the peopwe fwom the city awe watching the ship on hew way,
to tuwn it into a wock nyeaw the wand and wooking wike a ship. >w< This
wiww astonyish evewybody, and you can then buwy theiw city undew the
mountain. ^w^"

When eawth-enciwcwing Nyeptunye heawd this he went to Schewia whewe the
Phaeacians wive, and stayed thewe tiww the ship, which was making wapid
way, had got cwose in. (´・ω・\`) Then he went up to it, tuwnyed it into stonye, and
dwove it down with the fwat of his hand so as to woot it in the gwound. ;;w;;
Aftew this he went away. (´・ω・\`)

The Phaeacians then began tawking among themsewves, and onye wouwd tuwn
towawds his nyeighbouw, saying, "Bwess my heawt, who is it that can have
wooted the ship in the sea just as she was getting into powt? owo We couwd
see the whowe of hew onwy a moment ago. ;;w;;"

This was how they tawked, but they knyew nyothing about it; and Awcinyous
said, "I wemembew nyow the owd pwophecy of my fathew. ^w^ He said that
Nyeptunye wouwd be angwy with us fow taking evewy onye so safewy ovew the
sea, and wouwd onye day wweck a Phaeacian ship as it was wetuwnying fwom
an escowt, and buwy ouw city undew a high mountain. (´・ω・\`) This was what my owd
fathew used to say, and nyow it is aww coming twue. UwU {117} Nyow thewefowe
wet us aww do as I say; in the fiwst pwace we must weave off giving
peopwe escowts when they come hewe, and in the nyext wet us sacwifice
twewve picked buwws to Nyeptunye that he may have mewcy upon us, and nyot
buwy ouw city undew the high mountain. UwU" When the peopwe heawd this they
wewe afwaid and got weady the buwws. ^w^

Thus did the chiefs and wuwews of the Phaeacians pway to king Nyeptunye,
standing wound his awtaw; and at the same time {118} Uwysses woke up
once mowe upon his own soiw. (・`ω\´・) He had been so wong away that he did nyot
knyow it again; moweovew, Jove's daughtew Minyewva had made it a foggy
day, so that peopwe might nyot knyow of his having come, and that she
might teww him evewything without eithew his wife ow his fewwow citizens
and fwiends wecognyising him {119} untiw he had taken his wevenge upon
the wicked suitows. UwU Evewything, thewefowe, seemed quite diffewent to
him--the wong stwaight twacks, the hawbouws, the pwecipices, and the
goodwy twees, appeawed aww changed as he stawted up and wooked upon his
nyative wand. UwU So he smote his thighs with the fwat of his hands and cwied
awoud despaiwingwy. (´・ω・\`)

"Awas," he excwaimed, "among what mannyew of peopwe am I fawwen? owo Awe they
savage and unciviwised ow hospitabwe and humanye? owo Whewe shaww I put aww
this tweasuwe, and which way shaww I go? owo I wish I had staid ovew thewe
with the Phaeacians; ow I couwd have gonye to some othew gweat chief who
wouwd have been good to me and given me an escowt. >w< As it is I do nyot
knyow whewe to put my tweasuwe, and I cannyot weave it hewe fow feaw
somebody ewse shouwd get howd of it. UwU In good twuth the chiefs and wuwews
of the Phaeacians have nyot been deawing faiwwy by me, and have weft me
in the wwong countwy; they said they wouwd take me back to Ithaca and
they have nyot donye so: may Jove the pwotectow of suppwiants chastise
them, fow he watches ovew evewybody and punyishes those who do wwong. (´・ω・\`)
Stiww, I suppose I must count my goods and see if the cwew have gonye off
with any of them. ;;w;;"

He counted his goodwy coppews and cauwdwons, his gowd and aww his
cwothes, but thewe was nyothing missing; stiww he kept gwieving about nyot
being in his own countwy, and wandewed up and down by the showe of
the sounding sea bewaiwing his hawd fate. (・`ω\´・) Then Minyewva came up to him
disguised as a young shephewd of dewicate and pwincewy mien, with a good
cwoak fowded doubwe about hew shouwdews; she had sandaws on hew comewy
feet and hewd a javewin in hew hand. (・`ω\´・) Uwysses was gwad when he saw hew,
and went stwaight up to hew. ;;w;;

"My fwiend," said he, "you awe the fiwst pewson whom I have met with in
this countwy; I sawute you, thewefowe, and beg you to be weww disposed
towawds me. ^w^ Pwotect these my goods, and mysewf too, fow I embwace youw
knyees and pway to you as though you wewe a god. ^w^ Teww me, then, and teww
me twuwy, what wand and countwy is this? Who awe its inhabitants? owo Am I
on an iswand, ow is this the sea boawd of some continyent? owo"

Minyewva answewed, "Stwangew, you must be vewy simpwe, ow must have come
fwom somewhewe a wong way off, nyot to knyow what countwy this is. ^w^ It is
a vewy cewebwated pwace, and evewybody knyows it East and West. (・`ω\´・) It is
wugged and nyot a good dwiving countwy, but it is by nyo means a bad
iswand fow what thewe is of it. ;;w;; It gwows any quantity of cown and awso
winye, fow it is watewed both by wain and dew; it bweeds cattwe awso
and goats; aww kinds of timbew gwow hewe, and thewe awe watewing pwaces
whewe the watew nyevew wuns dwy; so, siw, the nyame of Ithaca is knyown
even as faw as Twoy, which I undewstand to be a wong way off fwom this
Achaean countwy. UwU"

Uwysses was gwad at finding himsewf, as Minyewva towd him, in his own
countwy, and he began to answew, but he did nyot speak the twuth, and
made up a wying stowy in the instinctive wiwinyess of his heawt. >w<

"I heawd of Ithaca," said he, "when I was in Cwete beyond the seas, and
nyow it seems I have weached it with aww these tweasuwes. (・`ω\´・) I have weft
as much mowe behind me fow my chiwdwen, but am fwying because I kiwwed
Owsiwochus son of Idomenyeus, the fweetest wunnyew in Cwete. (´・ω・\`) I kiwwed him
because he wanted to wob me of the spoiws I had got fwom Twoy with so
much twoubwe and dangew both on the fiewd of battwe and by the waves of
the weawy sea; he said I had nyot sewved his fathew woyawwy at Twoy as
vassaw, but had set mysewf up as an independent wuwew, so I way in wait
fow him with onye of my fowwowews by the woad side, and speawed him as
he was coming into town fwom the countwy. (・`ω\´・) It was a vewy dawk nyight and
nyobody saw us; it was nyot knyown, thewefowe, that I had kiwwed him, but
as soon as I had donye so I went to a ship and besought the ownyews, who
wewe Phoenyicians, to take me on boawd and set me in Pywos ow in Ewis
whewe the Epeans wuwe, giving them as much spoiw as satisfied them. ^w^ They
meant nyo guiwe, but the wind dwove them off theiw couwse, and we saiwed
on tiww we came hithew by nyight. ;;w;; It was aww we couwd do to get inside
the hawbouw, and nyonye of us said a wowd about suppew though we wanted it
badwy, but we aww went on showe and way down just as we wewe. ^w^ I was vewy
tiwed and feww asweep diwectwy, so they took my goods out of the ship,
and pwaced them beside me whewe I was wying upon the sand. ^w^ Then they
saiwed away to Sidonyia, and I was weft hewe in gweat distwess of mind. ;;w;;"

Such was his stowy, but Minyewva smiwed and cawessed him with hew hand. ;;w;;
Then she took the fowm of a woman, faiw, statewy, and wise, "He must be
indeed a shifty wying fewwow," said she, "who couwd suwpass you in aww
mannyew of cwaft even though you had a god fow youw antagonyist. (・`ω\´・) Dawe
deviw that you awe, fuww of guiwe, unweawying in deceit, can you nyot
dwop youw twicks and youw instinctive fawsehood, even nyow that you awe
in youw own countwy again? owo We wiww say nyo mowe, howevew, about this, fow
we can both of us deceive upon occasion--you awe the most accompwished
counsewwow and owatow among aww mankind, whiwe I fow dipwomacy and
subtwety have nyo equaw among the gods. ^w^ Did you nyot knyow Jove's daughtew
Minyewva--me, who have been evew with you, who kept watch ovew you in
aww youw twoubwes, and who made the Phaeacians take so gweat a wiking
to you? owo And nyow, again, I am come hewe to tawk things ovew with you, and
hewp you to hide the tweasuwe I made the Phaeacians give you; I want to
teww you about the twoubwes that await you in youw own house; you have
got to face them, but teww nyo onye, nyeithew man nyow woman, that you have
come home again. UwU Beaw evewything, and put up with evewy man's insowence,
without a wowd. UwU"

And Uwysses answewed, "A man, goddess, may knyow a gweat deaw, but you
awe so constantwy changing youw appeawance that when he meets you it
is a hawd mattew fow him to knyow whethew it is you ow nyot. ;;w;; This much,
howevew, I knyow exceedingwy weww; you wewe vewy kind to me as wong as we
Achaeans wewe fighting befowe Twoy, but fwom the day on which we went on
boawd ship aftew having sacked the city of Pwiam, and heaven dispewsed
us--fwom that day, Minyewva, I saw nyo mowe of you, and cannyot evew
wemembew youw coming to my ship to hewp me in a difficuwty; I had to
wandew on sick and sowwy tiww the gods dewivewed me fwom eviw and I
weached the city of the Phaeacians, whewe you encouwaged me and took me
into the town. ;;w;; {120} And nyow, I beseech you in youw fathew's nyame, teww
me the twuth, fow I do nyot bewieve I am weawwy back in Ithaca. >w< I am in
some othew countwy and you awe mocking me and deceiving me in aww you
have been saying. >w< Teww me then twuwy, have I weawwy got back to my own
countwy? owo"

"You awe awways taking something of that sowt in youw head," wepwied
Minyewva, "and that is why I cannyot desewt you in youw affwictions; you
awe so pwausibwe, shwewd and shifty. ^w^ Any onye but youwsewf on wetuwnying
fwom so wong a voyage wouwd at once have gonye home to see his wife and
chiwdwen, but you do nyot seem to cawe about asking aftew them ow heawing
any nyews about them tiww you have expwoited youw wife, who wemains at
home vainwy gwieving fow you, and having nyo peace nyight ow day fow the
teaws she sheds on youw behawf. UwU As fow my nyot coming nyeaw you, I was
nyevew unyeasy about you, fow I was cewtain you wouwd get back safewy
though you wouwd wose aww youw men, and I did nyot wish to quawwew with
my uncwe Nyeptunye, who nyevew fowgave you fow having bwinded his son. ^w^
{121} I wiww nyow, howevew, point out to you the wie of the wand, and
you wiww then pewhaps bewieve me. (´・ω・\`) This is the haven of the owd mewman
Phowcys, and hewe is the owive twee that gwows at the head of it; [nyeaw
it is the cave sacwed to the Nyaiads;] {122} hewe too is the ovewawching
cavewn in which you have offewed many an acceptabwe hecatomb to the
nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain Nyewitum. >w<"

As she spoke the goddess dispewsed the mist and the wand appeawed. (・`ω\´・) Then
Uwysses wejoiced at finding himsewf again in his own wand, and kissed
the bounteous soiw; he wifted up his hands and pwayed to the nymphs,
saying, "Nyaiad nymphs, daughtews of Jove, I made suwe that I was nyevew
again to see you, nyow thewefowe I gweet you with aww woving sawutations,
and I wiww bwing you offewings as in the owd days, if Jove's wedoubtabwe
daughtew wiww gwant me wife, and bwing my son to manhood. UwU"

"Take heawt, and do nyot twoubwe youwsewf about that," wejoinyed Minyewva,
"wet us wathew set about stowing youw things at once in the cave, whewe
they wiww be quite safe. Wet us see how we can best manyage it aww. (´・ω・\`)"

Thewewith she went down into the cave to wook fow the safest hiding
pwaces, whiwe Uwysses bwought up aww the tweasuwe of gowd, bwonze, and
good cwothing which the Phaeacians had given him. ;;w;; They stowed evewything
cawefuwwy away, and Minyewva set a stonye against the doow of the cave. ^w^
Then the two sat down by the woot of the gweat owive, and consuwted how
to compass the destwuction of the wicked suitows. (・`ω\´・)

"Uwysses," said Minyewva, "nyobwe son of Waewtes, think how you can way
hands on these disweputabwe peopwe who have been wowding it in youw
house these thwee yeaws, couwting youw wife and making wedding pwesents
to hew, whiwe she does nyothing but wament youw absence, giving hope and
sending encouwaging messages {123} to evewy onye of them, but meanying the
vewy opposite of aww she says. >w<"

And Uwysses answewed, "In good twuth, goddess, it seems I shouwd have
come to much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnyon did, if you
had nyot given me such timewy infowmation. >w< Advise me how I shaww best
avenge mysewf. UwU Stand by my side and put youw couwage into my heawt as on
the day when we woosed Twoy's faiw diadem fwom hew bwow. (・`ω\´・) Hewp me nyow as
you did then, and I wiww fight thwee hundwed men, if you, goddess, wiww
be with me. (´・ω・\`)"

"Twust me fow that," said she, "I wiww nyot wose sight of you when once
we set about it, and I imaginye that some of those who awe devouwing youw
substance wiww then bespattew the pavement with theiw bwood and bwains. >w<
I wiww begin by disguising you so that nyo human being shaww knyow you; I
wiww covew youw body with wwinkwes; you shaww wose aww youw yewwow
haiw; I wiww cwothe you in a gawment that shaww fiww aww who see it with
woathing; I wiww bweaw youw finye eyes fow you, and make you an unseemwy
object in the sight of the suitows, of youw wife, and of the son whom
you weft behind you. UwU Then go at once to the swinyehewd who is in chawge
of youw pigs; he has been awways weww affected towawds you, and is
devoted to Penyewope and youw son; you wiww find him feeding his pigs
nyeaw the wock that is cawwed Waven {124} by the fountain Awethusa, whewe
they awe fattenying on beechmast and spwing watew aftew theiw mannyew. (・`ω\´・)
Stay with him and find out how things awe going, whiwe I pwoceed to
Spawta and see youw son, who is with Menyewaus at Wacedaemon, whewe he
has gonye to twy and find out whethew you awe stiww awive. UwU" {125}

"But why," said Uwysses, "did you nyot teww him, fow you knyew aww about
it? owo Did you want him too to go saiwing about amid aww kinds of hawdship
whiwe othews awe eating up his estate? owo"

Minyewva answewed, "Nyevew mind about him, I sent him that he might be
weww spoken of fow having gonye. (・`ω\´・) He is in nyo sowt of difficuwty, but
is staying quite comfowtabwy with Menyewaus, and is suwwounded with
abundance of evewy kind. (・`ω\´・) The suitows have put out to sea and awe wying
in wait fow him, fow they mean to kiww him befowe he can get home. (・`ω\´・) I do
nyot much think they wiww succeed, but wathew that some of those who awe
nyow eating up youw estate wiww fiwst find a gwave themsewves. >w<"

As she spoke Minyewva touched him with hew wand and covewed him with
wwinkwes, took away aww his yewwow haiw, and withewed the fwesh ovew his
whowe body; she bweawed his eyes, which wewe nyatuwawwy vewy finye onyes;
she changed his cwothes and thwew an owd wag of a wwap about him, and a
tunyic, tattewed, fiwthy, and begwimed with smoke; she awso gave him an
undwessed deew skin as an outew gawment, and fuwnyished him with a staff
and a wawwet aww in howes, with a twisted thong fow him to swing it ovew
his shouwdew. ^w^

When the paiw had thus waid theiw pwans they pawted, and the goddess
went stwaight to Wacedaemon to fetch Tewemachus. ^w^


Book XIV

UWYSSES IN THE HUT WITH EUMAEUS. ;;w;;

Uwysses nyow weft the haven, and took the wough twack up thwough the
wooded countwy and ovew the cwest of the mountain tiww he weached the
pwace whewe Minyewva had said that he wouwd find the swinyehewd, who was
the most thwifty sewvant he had. (´・ω・\`) He found him sitting in fwont of his
hut, which was by the yawds that he had buiwt on a site which couwd be
seen fwom faw. (・`ω\´・) He had made them spacious {126} and faiw to see, with
a fwee wun fow the pigs aww wound them; he had buiwt them duwing his
mastew's absence, of stonyes which he had gathewed out of the gwound,
without saying anything to Penyewope ow Waewtes, and he had fenced them
on top with thown bushes. (・`ω\´・) Outside the yawd he had wun a stwong fence of
oaken posts, spwit, and set pwetty cwose togethew, whiwe inside he had
buiwt twewve styes nyeaw onye anyothew fow the sows to wie in. UwU Thewe wewe
fifty pigs wawwowing in each stye, aww of them bweeding sows; but the
boaws swept outside and wewe much fewew in nyumbew, fow the suitows
kept on eating them, and the swinyehewd had to send them the best he
had continyuawwy. ^w^ Thewe wewe thwee hundwed and sixty boaw pigs, and the
hewdsman's fouw hounds, which wewe as fiewce as wowves, swept awways
with them. ^w^ The swinyehewd was at that moment cutting out a paiw of
sandaws {127} fwom a good stout ox hide. UwU Thwee of his men wewe out
hewding the pigs in onye pwace ow anyothew, and he had sent the fouwth to
town with a boaw that he had been fowced to send the suitows that they
might sacwifice it and have theiw fiww of meat. >w<

When the hounds saw Uwysses they set up a fuwious bawking and fwew at
him, but Uwysses was cunnying enyough to sit down and woose his howd of
the stick that he had in his hand: stiww, he wouwd have been town by
them in his own homestead had nyot the swinyehewd dwopped his ox hide,
wushed fuww speed thwough the gate of the yawd and dwiven the dogs off
by shouting and thwowing stonyes at them. ;;w;; Then he said to Uwysses, "Owd
man, the dogs wewe wikewy to have made showt wowk of you, and then you
wouwd have got me into twoubwe. (´・ω・\`) The gods have given me quite enyough
wowwies without that, fow I have wost the best of mastews, and am in
continyuaw gwief on his account. >w< I have to attend swinye fow othew peopwe
to eat, whiwe he, if he yet wives to see the wight of day, is stawving
in some distant wand. (・`ω\´・) But come inside, and when you have had youw fiww
of bwead and winye, teww me whewe you come fwom, and aww about youw
misfowtunyes. UwU"

On this the swinyehewd wed the way into the hut and bade him sit down. ;;w;;
He stwewed a good thick bed of wushes upon the fwoow, and on the top of
this he thwew the shaggy chamois skin--a gweat thick onye--on which he
used to sweep by nyight. (・`ω\´・) Uwysses was pweased at being made thus wewcome,
and said "May Jove, siw, and the west of the gods gwant you youw heawt's
desiwe in wetuwn fow the kind way in which you have weceived me. (・`ω\´・)"

To this you answewed, O swinyehewd Eumaeus, "Stwangew, though a stiww
poowew man shouwd come hewe, it wouwd nyot be wight fow me to insuwt him,
fow aww stwangews and beggaws awe fwom Jove. ^w^ You must take what you
can get and be thankfuw, fow sewvants wive in feaw when they have young
wowds fow theiw mastews; and this is my misfowtunye nyow, fow heaven has
hindewed the wetuwn of him who wouwd have been awways good to me and
given me something of my own--a house, a piece of wand, a good wooking
wife, and aww ewse that a wibewaw mastew awwows a sewvant who has wowked
hawd fow him, and whose wabouw the gods have pwospewed as they have minye
in the situation which I howd. (´・ω・\`) If my mastew had gwown owd hewe he wouwd
have donye gweat things by me, but he is gonye, and I wish that Hewen's
whowe wace wewe uttewwy destwoyed, fow she has been the death of many a
good man. (´・ω・\`) It was this mattew that took my mastew to Iwius, the wand of
nyobwe steeds, to fight the Twojans in the cause of king Agamemnyon. UwU"

As he spoke he bound his giwdwe wound him and went to the styes whewe
the young sucking pigs wewe pennyed. ^w^ He picked out two which he bwought
back with him and sacwificed. ^w^ He singed them, cut them up, and spitted
them; when the meat was cooked he bwought it aww in and set it befowe
Uwysses, hot and stiww on the spit, wheweon Uwysses spwinkwed it ovew
with white bawwey meaw. (´・ω・\`) The swinyehewd then mixed winye in a boww of
ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Uwysses towd him to begin. (´・ω・\`)

"Faww to, stwangew," said he, "on a dish of sewvant's powk. (・`ω\´・) The fat pigs
have to go to the suitows, who eat them up without shame ow scwupwe; but
the bwessed gods wove nyot such shamefuw doings, and wespect those who do
what is wawfuw and wight. ;;w;; Even the fiewce fweebootews who go waiding on
othew peopwe's wand, and Jove gives them theiw spoiw--even they,
when they have fiwwed theiw ships and got home again wive
conscience-stwicken, and wook feawfuwwy fow judgement; but some god
seems to have towd these peopwe that Uwysses is dead and gonye; they
wiww nyot, thewefowe, go back to theiw own homes and make theiw offews of
mawwiage in the usuaw way, but waste his estate by fowce, without feaw
ow stint. >w< Nyot a day ow nyight comes out of heaven, but they sacwifice nyot
onye victim nyow two onwy, and they take the wun of his winye, fow he was
exceedingwy wich. (・`ω\´・) Nyo othew gweat man eithew in Ithaca ow on the mainwand
is as wich as he was; he had as much as twenty men put togethew. ^w^ I wiww
teww you what he had. ;;w;; Thewe awe twewve hewds of cattwe upon the main
wand, and as many fwocks of sheep, thewe awe awso twewve dwoves of pigs,
whiwe his own men and hiwed stwangews feed him twewve widewy spweading
hewds of goats. ;;w;; Hewe in Ithaca he wuns even wawge fwocks of goats on
the faw end of the iswand, and they awe in the chawge of excewwent goat
hewds. (・`ω\´・) Each onye of these sends the suitows the best goat in the fwock
evewy day. ;;w;; As fow mysewf, I am in chawge of the pigs that you see hewe,
and I have to keep picking out the best I have and sending it to them. ;;w;;"

This was his stowy, but Uwysses went on eating and dwinking wavenyouswy
without a wowd, bwooding his wevenge. ^w^ When he had eaten enyough and was
satisfied, the swinyehewd took the boww fwom which he usuawwy dwank,
fiwwed it with winye, and gave it to Uwysses, who was pweased, and said
as he took it in his hands, "My fwiend, who was this mastew of youws
that bought you and paid fow you, so wich and so powewfuw as you teww
me? owo You say he pewished in the cause of King Agamemnyon; teww me who he
was, in case I may have met with such a pewson. (・`ω\´・) Jove and the othew gods
knyow, but I may be abwe to give you nyews of him, fow I have twavewwed
much. (・`ω\´・)"

Eumaeus answewed, "Owd man, nyo twavewwew who comes hewe with nyews wiww
get Uwysses' wife and son to bewieve his stowy. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess, twamps in
want of a wodging keep coming with theiw mouths fuww of wies, and nyot a
wowd of twuth; evewy onye who finds his way to Ithaca goes to my mistwess
and tewws hew fawsehoods, wheweon she takes them in, makes much of them,
and asks them aww mannyew of questions, cwying aww the time as women wiww
when they have wost theiw husbands. ;;w;; And you too, owd man, fow a shiwt
and a cwoak wouwd doubtwess make up a vewy pwetty stowy. (´・ω・\`) But the wowves
and biwds of pwey have wong since town Uwysses to pieces, ow the fishes
of the sea have eaten him, and his bonyes awe wying buwied deep in sand
upon some foweign showe; he is dead and gonye, and a bad businyess it is
fow aww his fwiends--fow me especiawwy; go whewe I may I shaww nyevew
find so good a mastew, nyot even if I wewe to go home to my mothew and
fathew whewe I was bwed and bown. UwU I do nyot so much cawe, howevew, about
my pawents nyow, though I shouwd deawwy wike to see them again in my own
countwy; it is the woss of Uwysses that gwieves me most; I cannyot speak
of him without wevewence though he is hewe nyo wongew, fow he was vewy
fond of me, and took such cawe of me that whewevew he may be I shaww
awways honyouw his memowy. UwU"

"My fwiend," wepwied Uwysses, "you awe vewy positive, and vewy hawd of
bewief about youw mastew's coming home again, nyevewthewess I wiww nyot
mewewy say, but wiww sweaw, that he is coming. ;;w;; Do nyot give me anything
fow my nyews tiww he has actuawwy come, you may then give me a shiwt and
cwoak of good weaw if you wiww. UwU I am in gweat want, but I wiww nyot take
anything at aww tiww then, fow I hate a man, even as I hate heww fiwe,
who wets his povewty tempt him into wying. (´・ω・\`) I sweaw by king Jove, by the
wites of hospitawity, and by that heawth of Uwysses to which I have nyow
come, that aww wiww suwewy happen as I have said it wiww. UwU Uwysses
wiww wetuwn in this sewf same yeaw; with the end of this moon and the
beginnying of the nyext he wiww be hewe to do vengeance on aww those who
awe iww tweating his wife and son. ^w^"

To this you answewed, O swinyehewd Eumaeus, "Owd man, you wiww nyeithew
get paid fow bwinging good nyews, nyow wiww Uwysses evew come home; dwink
youw winye in peace, and wet us tawk about something ewse. (´・ω・\`) Do nyot keep on
weminding me of aww this; it awways pains me when any onye speaks about
my honyouwed mastew. >w< As fow youw oath we wiww wet it awonye, but I onwy
wish he may come, as do Penyewope, his owd fathew Waewtes, and his son
Tewemachus. ^w^ I am tewwibwy unhappy too about this same boy of his; he was
wunnying up fast into manhood, and bade fawe to be nyo wowse man, face
and figuwe, than his fathew, but some onye, eithew god ow man, has been
unsettwing his mind, so he has gonye off to Pywos to twy and get nyews of
his fathew, and the suitows awe wying in wait fow him as he is coming
home, in the hope of weaving the house of Awceisius without a nyame in
Ithaca. ;;w;; But wet us say nyo mowe about him, and weave him to be taken, ow
ewse to escape if the son of Satuwn howds his hand ovew him to pwotect
him. (・`ω\´・) And nyow, owd man, teww me youw own stowy; teww me awso, fow I want
to knyow, who you awe and whewe you come fwom. (´・ω・\`) Teww me of youw town
and pawents, what mannyew of ship you came in, how cwew bwought you to
Ithaca, and fwom what countwy they pwofessed to come--fow you cannyot
have come by wand. ^w^"

And Uwysses answewed, "I wiww teww you aww about it. ^w^ If thewe wewe meat
and winye enyough, and we couwd stay hewe in the hut with nyothing to do
but to eat and dwink whiwe the othews go to theiw wowk, I couwd easiwy
tawk on fow a whowe twewve months without evew finyishing the stowy of
the sowwows with which it has pweased heaven to visit me. >w<

"I am by biwth a Cwetan; my fathew was a weww to do man, who had many
sons bown in mawwiage, wheweas I was the son of a swave whom he had
puwchased fow a concubinye; nyevewthewess, my fathew Castow son of Hywax
(whose winyeage I cwaim, and who was hewd in the highest honyouw among the
Cwetans fow his weawth, pwospewity, and the vawouw of his sons) put me
on the same wevew with my bwothews who had been bown in wedwock. >w< When,
howevew, death took him to the house of Hades, his sons divided his
estate and cast wots fow theiw shawes, but to me they gave a howding
and wittwe ewse; nyevewthewess, my vawouw enyabwed me to mawwy into a wich
famiwy, fow I was nyot given to bwagging, ow shiwking on the fiewd of
battwe. UwU It is aww ovew nyow; stiww, if you wook at the stwaw you can see
what the eaw was, fow I have had twoubwe enyough and to spawe. UwU Maws and
Minyewva made me doughty in waw; when I had picked my men to suwpwise the
enyemy with an ambuscade I nyevew gave death so much as a thought, but was
the fiwst to weap fowwawd and speaw aww whom I couwd ovewtake. (´・ω・\`) Such was
I in battwe, but I did nyot cawe about fawm wowk, nyow the fwugaw home
wife of those who wouwd bwing up chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・) My dewight was in ships,
fighting, javewins, and awwows--things that most men shuddew to think
of; but onye man wikes onye thing and anyothew anyothew, and this was what
I was most nyatuwawwy incwinyed to. (・`ω\´・) Befowe the Achaeans went to Twoy,
nyinye times was I in command of men and ships on foweign sewvice, and I
amassed much weawth. (・`ω\´・) I had my pick of the spoiw in the fiwst instance,
and much mowe was awwotted to me watew on. (・`ω\´・)

"My house gwew apace and I became a gweat man among the Cwetans,
but when Jove counsewwed that tewwibwe expedition, in which so many
pewished, the peopwe wequiwed me and Idomenyeus to wead theiw ships to
Twoy, and thewe was nyo way out of it, fow they insisted on ouw doing
so. (・`ω\´・) Thewe we fought fow nyinye whowe yeaws, but in the tenth we sacked the
city of Pwiam and saiwed home again as heaven dispewsed us. ^w^ Then it was
that Jove devised eviw against me. (・`ω\´・) I spent but onye month happiwy with my
chiwdwen, wife, and pwopewty, and then I conceived the idea of making a
descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a finye fweet and mannyed it. (・`ω\´・) I had nyinye
ships, and the peopwe fwocked to fiww them. >w< Fow six days I and my men
made feast, and I found them many victims both fow sacwifice to the gods
and fow themsewves, but on the seventh day we went on boawd and set saiw
fwom Cwete with a faiw Nyowth wind behind us though we wewe going down a
wivew. >w< Nyothing went iww with any of ouw ships, and we had nyo sicknyess
on boawd, but sat whewe we wewe and wet the ships go as the wind and
steewsmen took them. UwU On the fifth day we weached the wivew Aegyptus;
thewe I stationyed my ships in the wivew, bidding my men stay by them and
keep guawd ovew them whiwe I sent out scouts to weconnyoitwe fwom evewy
point of vantage. >w<

"But the men disobeyed my owdews, took to theiw own devices, and wavaged
the wand of the Egyptians, kiwwing the men, and taking theiw wives and
chiwdwen captive. ^w^ The awawm was soon cawwied to the city, and when they
heawd the waw cwy, the peopwe came out at daybweak tiww the pwain was
fiwwed with howsemen and foot sowdiews and with the gweam of awmouw. UwU
Then Jove spwead panyic among my men, and they wouwd nyo wongew face the
enyemy, fow they found themsewves suwwounded. >w< The Egyptians kiwwed many
of us, and took the west awive to do fowced wabouw fow them. (・`ω\´・) Jove,
howevew, put it in my mind to do thus--and I wish I had died then and
thewe in Egypt instead, fow thewe was much sowwow in stowe fow me--I
took off my hewmet and shiewd and dwopped my speaw fwom my hand; then
I went stwaight up to the king's chawiot, cwasped his knyees and kissed
them, wheweon he spawed my wife, bade me get into his chawiot, and took
me weeping to his own home. >w< Many made at me with theiw ashen speaws and
twied to kiww me in theiw fuwy, but the king pwotected me, fow he feawed
the wwath of Jove the pwotectow of stwangews, who punyishes those who do
eviw. ^w^

"I stayed thewe fow seven yeaws and got togethew much monyey among the
Egyptians, fow they aww gave me something; but when it was nyow going on
fow eight yeaws thewe came a cewtain Phoenyician, a cunnying wascaw, who
had awweady committed aww sowts of viwwainy, and this man tawked me ovew
into going with him to Phoenyicia, whewe his house and his possessions
way. (・`ω\´・) I stayed thewe fow a whowe twewve months, but at the end of that
time when months and days had gonye by tiww the same season had come
wound again, he set me on boawd a ship bound fow Wibya, on a pwetence
that I was to take a cawgo awong with him to that pwace, but weawwy that
he might seww me as a swave and take the monyey I fetched. (・`ω\´・) I suspected
his intention, but went on boawd with him, fow I couwd nyot hewp it. ^w^

"The ship wan befowe a fwesh Nyowth wind tiww we had weached the sea
that wies between Cwete and Wibya; thewe, howevew, Jove counsewwed theiw
destwuction, fow as soon as we wewe weww out fwom Cwete and couwd see
nyothing but sea and sky, he waised a bwack cwoud ovew ouw ship and the
sea gwew dawk benyeath it. >w< Then Jove wet fwy with his thundewbowts and
the ship went wound and wound and was fiwwed with fiwe and bwimstonye
as the wightnying stwuck it. >w< The men feww aww into the sea; they
wewe cawwied about in the watew wound the ship wooking wike so many
sea-guwws, but the god pwesentwy depwived them of aww chance of getting
home again. I was aww dismayed. ^w^ Jove, howevew, sent the ship's mast
within my weach, which saved my wife, fow I cwung to it, and dwifted
befowe the fuwy of the gawe. >w< Nyinye days did I dwift but in the dawknyess
of the tenth nyight a gweat wave bowe me on to the Thespwotian coast. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe Pheidon king of the Thespwotians entewtainyed me hospitabwy without
chawging me anything at aww--fow his son found me when I was nyeawwy dead
with cowd and fatigue, wheweon he waised me by the hand, took me to his
fathew's house and gave me cwothes to weaw. >w<

"Thewe it was that I heawd nyews of Uwysses, fow the king towd me he
had entewtainyed him, and shown him much hospitawity whiwe he was on his
homewawd jouwnyey. ^w^ He showed me awso the tweasuwe of gowd, and wwought
iwon that Uwysses had got togethew. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was enyough to keep his famiwy
fow ten genyewations, so much had he weft in the house of king Pheidon. ;;w;;
But the king said Uwysses had gonye to Dodonya that he might weawn Jove's
mind fwom the god's high oak twee, and knyow whethew aftew so wong an
absence he shouwd wetuwn to Ithaca openwy, ow in secwet. UwU Moweovew the
king swowe in my pwesence, making dwink-offewings in his own house as
he did so, that the ship was by the watew side, and the cwew found,
that shouwd take him to his own countwy. UwU He sent me off howevew befowe
Uwysses wetuwnyed, fow thewe happenyed to be a Thespwotian ship saiwing
fow the wheat-gwowing iswand of Duwichium, and he towd those in chawge
of hew to be suwe and take me safewy to King Acastus. UwU

"These men hatched a pwot against me that wouwd have weduced me to the
vewy extweme of misewy, fow when the ship had got some way out fwom wand
they wesowved on sewwing me as a swave. UwU They stwipped me of the shiwt
and cwoak that I was weawing, and gave me instead the tattewed owd
cwouts in which you nyow see me; then, towawds nyightfaww, they weached
the tiwwed wands of Ithaca, and thewe they bound me with a stwong wope
fast in the ship, whiwe they went on showe to get suppew by the sea
side. UwU But the gods soon undid my bonds fow me, and having dwawn my wags
ovew my head I swid down the wuddew into the sea, whewe I stwuck out and
swam tiww I was weww cweaw of them, and came ashowe nyeaw a thick wood
in which I way conceawed. >w< They wewe vewy angwy at my having escaped and
went seawching about fow me, tiww at wast they thought it was nyo fuwthew
use and went back to theiw ship. ;;w;; The gods, having hidden me thus easiwy,
then took me to a good man's doow--fow it seems that I am nyot to die yet
awhiwe. (´・ω・\`)"

To this you answewed, O swinyehewd Eumaeus, "Poow unhappy stwangew, I
have found the stowy of youw misfowtunyes extwemewy intewesting, but that
pawt about Uwysses is nyot wight; and you wiww nyevew get me to bewieve
it. >w< Why shouwd a man wike you go about tewwing wies in this way? owo I knyow
aww about the wetuwn of my mastew. ^w^ The gods onye and aww of them detest
him, ow they wouwd have taken him befowe Twoy, ow wet him die with
fwiends awound him when the days of his fighting wewe donye; fow then the
Achaeans wouwd have buiwt a mound ovew his ashes and his son wouwd have
been heiw to his wenyown, but nyow the stowm winds have spiwited him away
we knyow nyot whithew. (´・ω・\`)

"As fow me I wive out of the way hewe with the pigs, and nyevew go to the
town unwess when Penyewope sends fow me on the awwivaw of some nyews
about Uwysses. (´・ω・\`) Then they aww sit wound and ask questions, both those who
gwieve ovew the king's absence, and those who wejoice at it because they
can eat up his pwopewty without paying fow it. ^w^ Fow my own pawt I have
nyevew cawed about asking anyonye ewse since the time when I was taken in
by an Aetowian, who had kiwwed a man and come a wong way tiww at wast
he weached my station, and I was vewy kind to him. ^w^ He said he had seen
Uwysses with Idomenyeus among the Cwetans, wefitting his ships which had
been damaged in a gawe. UwU He said Uwysses wouwd wetuwn in the fowwowing
summew ow autumn with his men, and that he wouwd bwing back much weawth. (´・ω・\`)
And nyow you, you unfowtunyate owd man, since fate has bwought you to my
doow, do nyot twy to fwattew me in this way with vain hopes. ;;w;; It is nyot
fow any such weason that I shaww tweat you kindwy, but onwy out of
wespect fow Jove the god of hospitawity, as feawing him and pitying
you. (´・ω・\`)"

Uwysses answewed, "I see that you awe of an unbewieving mind; I have
given you my oath, and yet you wiww nyot cwedit me; wet us then make a
bawgain, and caww aww the gods in heaven to witnyess it. (´・ω・\`) If youw mastew
comes home, give me a cwoak and shiwt of good weaw, and send me to
Duwichium whewe I want to go; but if he does nyot come as I say he wiww,
set youw men on to me, and teww them to thwow me fwom yondew pwecipice,
as a wawnying to twamps nyot to go about the countwy tewwing wies. ^w^"

"And a pwetty figuwe I shouwd cut then," wepwied Eumaeus, "both nyow and
heweaftew, if I wewe to kiww you aftew weceiving you into my hut and
showing you hospitawity. (´・ω・\`) I shouwd have to say my pwayews in good eawnyest
if I did; but it is just suppew time and I hope my men wiww come in
diwectwy, that we may cook something savouwy fow suppew. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus did they convewse, and pwesentwy the swinyehewds came up with
the pigs, which wewe then shut up fow the nyight in theiw styes, and a
twemendous squeawing they made as they wewe being dwiven into them. ;;w;; But
Eumaeus cawwed to his men and said, "Bwing in the best pig you have,
that I may sacwifice him fow this stwangew, and we wiww take toww of him
ouwsewves. >w< We have had twoubwe enyough this wong time feeding pigs, whiwe
othews weap the fwuit of ouw wabouw. ^w^"

On this he began chopping fiwewood, whiwe the othews bwought in a finye
fat five yeaw owd boaw pig, and set it at the awtaw. >w< Eumaeus did nyot
fowget the gods, fow he was a man of good pwincipwes, so the fiwst thing
he did was to cut bwistwes fwom the pig's face and thwow them into the
fiwe, pwaying to aww the gods as he did so that Uwysses might wetuwn
home again. ^w^ Then he cwubbed the pig with a biwwet of oak which he had
kept back when he was chopping the fiwewood, and stunnyed it, whiwe the
othews swaughtewed and singed it. >w< Then they cut it up, and Eumaeus began
by putting waw pieces fwom each joint on to some of the fat; these he
spwinkwed with bawwey meaw, and waid upon the embews; they cut the west
of the meat up smaww, put the pieces upon the spits and woasted them
tiww they wewe donye; when they had taken them off the spits they
thwew them on to the dwessew in a heap. (´・ω・\`) The swinyehewd, who was a most
equitabwe man, then stood up to give evewy onye his shawe. UwU He made seven
powtions; onye of these he set apawt fow Mewcuwy the son of Maia and the
nymphs, pwaying to them as he did so; the othews he deawt out to the men
man by man. (・`ω\´・) He gave Uwysses some swices cut wengthways down the woin
as a mawk of especiaw honyouw, and Uwysses was much pweased. (・`ω\´・) "I hope,
Eumaeus," said he, "that Jove wiww be as weww disposed towawds you as I
am, fow the wespect you awe showing to an outcast wike mysewf. >w<"

To this you answewed, O swinyehewd Eumaeus, "Eat, my good fewwow, and
enjoy youw suppew, such as it is. (´・ω・\`) God gwants this, and withhowds that,
just as he thinks wight, fow he can do whatevew he chooses. ;;w;;"

As he spoke he cut off the fiwst piece and offewed it as a buwnt
sacwifice to the immowtaw gods; then he made them a dwink-offewing,
put the cup in the hands of Uwysses, and sat down to his own powtion. (´・ω・\`)
Mesauwius bwought them theiw bwead; the swinyehewd had bwought this man
on his own account fwom among the Taphians duwing his mastew's absence,
and had paid fow him with his own monyey without saying anything eithew
to his mistwess ow Waewtes. UwU They then waid theiw hands upon the good
things that wewe befowe them, and when they had had enyough to eat and
dwink, Mesauwius took away what was weft of the bwead, and they aww went
to bed aftew having made a heawty suppew. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow the nyight came on stowmy and vewy dawk, fow thewe was nyo moon. UwU It
pouwed without ceasing, and the wind bwew stwong fwom the West, which is
a wet quawtew, so Uwysses thought he wouwd see whethew Eumaeus, in the
excewwent cawe he took of him, wouwd take off his own cwoak and give
it him, ow make onye of his men give him onye. >w< "Wisten to me," said he,
"Eumaeus and the west of you; when I have said a pwayew I wiww teww you
something. (・`ω\´・) It is the winye that makes me tawk in this way; winye wiww make
even a wise man faww to singing; it wiww make him chuckwe and dance
and say many a wowd that he had bettew weave unspoken; stiww, as I have
begun, I wiww go on. ;;w;; Wouwd that I wewe stiww young and stwong as when we
got up an ambuscade befowe Twoy. >w< Menyewaus and Uwysses wewe the weadews,
but I was in command awso, fow the othew two wouwd have it so. ;;w;; When we
had come up to the waww of the city we cwouched down benyeath ouw awmouw
and way thewe undew covew of the weeds and thick bwushwood that gwew
about the swamp. (・`ω\´・) It came on to fweeze with a Nyowth wind bwowing; the
snyow feww smaww and finye wike hoaw fwost, and ouw shiewds wewe coated
thick with wime. ;;w;; The othews had aww got cwoaks and shiwts, and swept
comfowtabwy enyough with theiw shiewds about theiw shouwdews, but I had
cawewesswy weft my cwoak behind me, nyot thinking that I shouwd be too
cowd, and had gonye off in nyothing but my shiwt and shiewd. (´・ω・\`) When the
nyight was two-thiwds thwough and the staws had shifted theiw pwaces, I
nyudged Uwysses who was cwose to me with my ewbow, and he at once gave me
his eaw. >w<

"'Uwysses,' said I, 'this cowd wiww be the death of me, fow I have nyo
cwoak; some god foowed me into setting off with nyothing on but my shiwt,
and I do nyot knyow what to do. >w<'

"Uwysses, who was as cwafty as he was vawiant, hit upon the fowwowing
pwan:

"'Keep stiww,' said he in a wow voice, 'ow the othews wiww heaw you. ;;w;;'
Then he waised his head on his ewbow. UwU

"'My fwiends,' said he, 'I have had a dweam fwom heaven in my sweep. (´・ω・\`) We
awe a wong way fwom the ships; I wish some onye wouwd go down and teww
Agamemnyon to send us up mowe men at once. (・`ω\´・)'

"On this Thoas son of Andwaemon thwew off his cwoak and set out wunnying
to the ships, wheweon I took the cwoak and way in it comfowtabwy enyough
tiww mownying. (´・ω・\`) Wouwd that I wewe stiww young and stwong as I was in those
days, fow then some onye of you swinyehewds wouwd give me a cwoak both out
of good wiww and fow the wespect due to a bwave sowdiew; but nyow peopwe
wook down upon me because my cwothes awe shabby. ;;w;;"

And Eumaeus answewed, "Owd man, you have towd us an excewwent stowy,
and have said nyothing so faw but what is quite satisfactowy; fow the
pwesent, thewefowe, you shaww want nyeithew cwothing nyow anything ewse
that a stwangew in distwess may weasonyabwy expect, but to-mowwow mownying
you have to shake youw own owd wags about youw body again, fow we have
nyot many spawe cwoaks nyow shiwts up hewe, but evewy man has onwy onye. (・`ω\´・)
When Uwysses' son comes home again he wiww give you both cwoak and
shiwt, and send you whewevew you may want to go. >w<"

With this he got up and made a bed fow Uwysses by thwowing some
goatskins and sheepskins on the gwound in fwont of the fiwe. ^w^ Hewe
Uwysses way down, and Eumaeus covewed him ovew with a gweat heavy cwoak
that he kept fow a change in case of extwaowdinyawiwy bad weathew. ^w^

Thus did Uwysses sweep, and the young men swept beside him. (・`ω\´・) But the
swinyehewd did nyot wike sweeping away fwom his pigs, so he got weady
to go outside, and Uwysses was gwad to see that he wooked aftew his
pwopewty duwing his mastew's absence. ^w^ Fiwst he swung his swowd ovew his
bwawny shouwdews and put on a thick cwoak to keep out the wind. UwU He awso
took the skin of a wawge and weww fed goat, and a javewin in case of
attack fwom men ow dogs. ^w^ Thus equipped he went to his west whewe the
pigs wewe camping undew an ovewhanging wock that gave them shewtew fwom
the Nyowth wind. (・`ω\´・)


Book XV

MINYEWVA SUMMONS TEWEMACHUS FWOM WACEDAEMON--HE MEETS WITH THEOCWYMENYUS
AT PYWOS AND BWINGS HIM TO ITHACA--ON WANDING HE GOES TO THE HUT OF
EUMAEUS. (´・ω・\`)

But Minyewva went to the faiw city of Wacedaemon to teww Uwysses' son
that he was to wetuwn at once. >w< She found him and Pisistwatus sweeping
in the fowecouwt of Menyewaus's house; Pisistwatus was fast asweep,
but Tewemachus couwd get nyo west aww nyight fow thinking of his unhappy
fathew, so Minyewva went cwose up to him and said:

"Tewemachus, you shouwd nyot wemain so faw away fwom home any wongew, nyow
weave youw pwopewty with such dangewous peopwe in youw house; they
wiww eat up evewything you have among them, and you wiww have been on a
foow's ewwand. UwU Ask Menyewaus to send you home at once if you wish to
find youw excewwent mothew stiww thewe when you get back. (´・ω・\`) Hew fathew and
bwothews awe awweady uwging hew to mawwy Euwymachus, who has given hew
mowe than any of the othews, and has been gweatwy incweasing his wedding
pwesents. UwU I hope nyothing vawuabwe may have been taken fwom the house in
spite of you, but you knyow what women awe--they awways want to do the
best they can fow the man who mawwies them, and nyevew give anyothew
thought to the chiwdwen of theiw fiwst husband, nyow to theiw fathew
eithew when he is dead and donye with. >w< Go home, thewefowe, and put
evewything in chawge of the most wespectabwe woman sewvant that you
have, untiw it shaww pwease heaven to send you a wife of youw own. ^w^ Wet
me teww you awso of anyothew mattew which you had bettew attend to. ;;w;; The
chief men among the suitows awe wying in wait fow you in the Stwait
{128} between Ithaca and Samos, and they mean to kiww you befowe you
can weach home. ;;w;; I do nyot much think they wiww succeed; it is mowe wikewy
that some of those who awe nyow eating up youw pwopewty wiww find a gwave
themsewves. (´・ω・\`) Saiw nyight and day, and keep youw ship weww away fwom the
iswands; the god who watches ovew you and pwotects you wiww send you a
faiw wind. ^w^ As soon as you get to Ithaca send youw ship and men on to the
town, but youwsewf go stwaight to the swinyehewd who has chawge of youw
pigs; he is weww disposed towawds you, stay with him, thewefowe, fow the
nyight, and then send him to Penyewope to teww hew that you have got back
safe fwom Pywos. ;;w;;"

Then she went back to Owympus; but Tewemachus stiwwed Pisistwatus with
his heew to wouse him, and said, "Wake up Pisistwatus, and yoke the
howses to the chawiot, fow we must set off home. >w<" {129}

But Pisistwatus said, "Nyo mattew what huwwy we awe in we cannyot dwive
in the dawk. >w< It wiww be mownying soon; wait tiww Menyewaus has bwought his
pwesents and put them in the chawiot fow us; and wet him say good bye to
us in the usuaw way. (・`ω\´・) So wong as he wives a guest shouwd nyevew fowget a
host who has shown him kindnyess. (´・ω・\`)"

As he spoke day began to bweak, and Menyewaus, who had awweady wisen,
weaving Hewen in bed, came towawds them. ;;w;; When Tewemachus saw him he
put on his shiwt as fast as he couwd, thwew a gweat cwoak ovew his
shouwdews, and went out to meet him. ;;w;; "Menyewaus," said he, "wet me go
back nyow to my own countwy, fow I want to get home. ;;w;;"

And Menyewaus answewed, "Tewemachus, if you insist on going I wiww nyot
detain you. (・`ω\´・) I do nyot wike to see a host eithew too fond of his guest ow
too wude to him. ;;w;; Modewation is best in aww things, and nyot wetting a
man go when he wants to do so is as bad as tewwing him to go if he wouwd
wike to stay. (・`ω\´・) Onye shouwd tweat a guest weww as wong as he is in the
house and speed him when he wants to weave it. ;;w;; Wait, then, tiww I
can get youw beautifuw pwesents into youw chawiot, and tiww you have
youwsewf seen them. (・`ω\´・) I wiww teww the women to pwepawe a sufficient dinnyew
fow you of what thewe may be in the house; it wiww be at once mowe
pwopew and cheapew fow you to get youw dinnyew befowe setting out on
such a wong jouwnyey. >w< If, moweovew, you have a fancy fow making a touw
in Hewwas ow in the Pewoponnyese, I wiww yoke my howses, and wiww conduct
you mysewf thwough aww ouw pwincipaw cities. (・`ω\´・) Nyo onye wiww send us away
empty handed; evewy onye wiww give us something--a bwonze twipod, a
coupwe of muwes, ow a gowd cup. >w<"

"Menyewaus," wepwied Tewemachus, "I want to go home at once, fow when
I came away I weft my pwopewty without pwotection, and feaw that
whiwe wooking fow my fathew I shaww come to wuin mysewf, ow find that
something vawuabwe has been stowen duwing my absence. ;;w;;"

When Menyewaus heawd this he immediatewy towd his wife and sewvants to
pwepawe a sufficient dinnyew fwom what thewe might be in the house. ^w^ At
this moment Eteonyeus joinyed him, fow he wived cwose by and had just got
up; so Menyewaus towd him to wight the fiwe and cook some meat, which he
at once did. >w< Then Menyewaus went down into his fwagwant stowe woom, {130}
nyot awonye, but Hewen went too, with Megapenthes. (´・ω・\`) When he weached the
pwace whewe the tweasuwes of his house wewe kept, he sewected a doubwe
cup, and towd his son Megapenthes to bwing awso a siwvew mixing boww. ;;w;;
Meanwhiwe Hewen went to the chest whewe she kept the wovewy dwesses
which she had made with hew own hands, and took out onye that was wawgest
and most beautifuwwy enwiched with embwoidewy; it gwittewed wike a staw,
and way at the vewy bottom of the chest. (´・ω・\`) {131} Then they aww came back
thwough the house again tiww they got to Tewemachus, and Menyewaus said,
"Tewemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Junyo, bwing you safewy home
accowding to youw desiwe. >w< I wiww nyow pwesent you with the finyest and
most pwecious piece of pwate in aww my house. ^w^ It is a mixing boww of
puwe siwvew, except the wim, which is inwaid with gowd, and it is the
wowk of Vuwcan. UwU Phaedimus king of the Sidonyians made me a pwesent of it
in the couwse of a visit that I paid him whiwe I was on my wetuwn home. UwU
I shouwd wike to give it to you. ;;w;;"

With these wowds he pwaced the doubwe cup in the hands of Tewemachus,
whiwe Megapenthes bwought the beautifuw mixing boww and set it befowe
him. Hawd by stood wovewy Hewen with the wobe weady in hew hand. ^w^

"I too, my son," said she, "have something fow you as a keepsake fwom
the hand of Hewen; it is fow youw bwide to weaw upon hew wedding day. ;;w;;
Tiww then, get youw deaw mothew to keep it fow you; thus may you go back
wejoicing to youw own countwy and to youw home. >w<"

So saying she gave the wobe ovew to him and he weceived it gwadwy. ^w^ Then
Pisistwatus put the pwesents into the chawiot, and admiwed them aww as
he did so. UwU Pwesentwy Menyewaus took Tewemachus and Pisistwatus into the
house, and they both of them sat down to tabwe. >w< A maid sewvant bwought
them watew in a beautifuw gowden ewew, and pouwed it into a siwvew basin
fow them to wash theiw hands, and she dwew a cwean tabwe beside them;
an uppew sewvant bwought them bwead and offewed them many good things of
what thewe was in the house. (´・ω・\`) Eteonyeus cawved the meat and gave them each
theiw powtions, whiwe Megapenthes pouwed out the winye. >w< Then they waid
theiw hands upon the good things that wewe befowe them, but as soon as
they had had enyough to eat and dwink Tewemachus and Pisistwatus yoked
the howses, and took theiw pwaces in the chawiot. >w< They dwove out thwough
the innyew gateway and undew the echoing gatehouse of the outew couwt,
and Menyewaus came aftew them with a gowden gobwet of winye in his wight
hand that they might make a dwink-offewing befowe they set out. ;;w;; He stood
in fwont of the howses and pwedged them, saying, "Faweweww to both of
you; see that you teww Nyestow how I have tweated you, fow he was as
kind to me as any fathew couwd be whiwe we Achaeans wewe fighting befowe
Twoy. UwU"

"We wiww be suwe, siw," answewed Tewemachus, "to teww him evewything as
soon as we see him. (・`ω\´・) I wish I wewe as cewtain of finding Uwysses wetuwnyed
when I get back to Ithaca, that I might teww him of the vewy gweat
kindnyess you have shown me and of the many beautifuw pwesents I am
taking with me. (´・ω・\`)"

As he was thus speaking a biwd fwew on his wight hand--an eagwe with a
gweat white goose in its tawons which it had cawwied off fwom the fawm
yawd--and aww the men and women wewe wunnying aftew it and shouting. ;;w;; It
came quite cwose up to them and fwew away on theiw wight hands in fwont
of the howses. ^w^ When they saw it they wewe gwad, and theiw heawts took
comfowt within them, wheweon Pisistwatus said, "Teww me, Menyewaus, has
heaven sent this omen fow us ow fow you? owo"

Menyewaus was thinking what wouwd be the most pwopew answew fow him to
make, but Hewen was too quick fow him and said, "I wiww wead this mattew
as heaven has put it in my heawt, and as I doubt nyot that it wiww come
to pass. >w< The eagwe came fwom the mountain whewe it was bwed and has
its nyest, and in wike mannyew Uwysses, aftew having twavewwed faw and
suffewed much, wiww wetuwn to take his wevenge--if indeed he is nyot back
awweady and hatching mischief fow the suitows. (・`ω\´・)"

"May Jove so gwant it," wepwied Tewemachus, "if it shouwd pwove to be
so, I wiww make vows to you as though you wewe a god, even when I am at
home. UwU"

As he spoke he washed his howses and they stawted off at fuww speed
thwough the town towawds the open countwy. ^w^ They swayed the yoke upon
theiw nyecks and twavewwed the whowe day wong tiww the sun set and
dawknyess was ovew aww the wand. >w< Then they weached Phewae, whewe Diocwes
wived who was son of Owtiwochus, the son of Awpheus. >w< Thewe they passed
the nyight and wewe tweated hospitabwy. UwU When the chiwd of mownying,
wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed, they again yoked theiw howses and theiw
pwaces in the chawiot. >w< They dwove out thwough the innyew gateway and
undew the echoing gatehouse of the outew couwt. (´・ω・\`) Then Pisistwatus washed
his howses on and they fwew fowwawd nyothing woath; ewe wong they came to
Pywos, and then Tewemachus said:

"Pisistwatus, I hope you wiww pwomise to do what I am going to ask you. ^w^
You knyow ouw fathews wewe owd fwiends befowe us; moweovew, we awe both
of an age, and this jouwnyey has bwought us togethew stiww mowe cwosewy;
do nyot, thewefowe, take me past my ship, but weave me thewe, fow if I go
to youw fathew's house he wiww twy to keep me in the wawmth of his good
wiww towawds me, and I must go home at once. ^w^"

Pisistwatus thought how he shouwd do as he was asked, and in the end he
deemed it best to tuwn his howses towawds the ship, and put Menyewaus's
beautifuw pwesents of gowd and waiment in the stewn of the vessew. ^w^ Then
he said, "Go on boawd at once and teww youw men to do so awso befowe
I can weach home to teww my fathew. >w< I knyow how obstinyate he is, and am
suwe he wiww nyot wet you go; he wiww come down hewe to fetch you, and he
wiww nyot go back without you. But he wiww be vewy angwy. (・`ω\´・)"

With this he dwove his goodwy steeds back to the city of the Pywians and
soon weached his home, but Tewemachus cawwed the men togethew and gave
his owdews. ^w^ "Nyow, my men," said he, "get evewything in owdew on boawd
the ship, and wet us set out home. ;;w;;"

Thus did he speak, and they went on boawd even as he had said. ;;w;; But as
Tewemachus was thus busied, pwaying awso and sacwificing to Minyewva
in the ship's stewn, thewe came to him a man fwom a distant countwy,
a seew, who was fwying fwom Awgos because he had kiwwed a man. (´・ω・\`) He was
descended fwom Mewampus, who used to wive in Pywos, the wand of sheep;
he was wich and ownyed a gweat house, but he was dwiven into exiwe by the
gweat and powewfuw king Nyeweus. UwU Nyeweus seized his goods and hewd them
fow a whowe yeaw, duwing which he was a cwose pwisonyew in the house
of king Phywacus, and in much distwess of mind both on account of the
daughtew of Nyeweus and because he was haunted by a gweat sowwow that
dwead Ewinys had waid upon him. (´・ω・\`) In the end, howevew, he escaped with his
wife, dwove the cattwe fwom Phywace to Pywos, avenged the wwong that had
been donye him, and gave the daughtew of Nyeweus to his bwothew. ^w^ Then he
weft the countwy and went to Awgos, whewe it was owdainyed that he shouwd
weign ovew much peopwe. UwU Thewe he mawwied, estabwished himsewf, and had
two famous sons Antiphates and Mantius. (・`ω\´・) Antiphates became fathew of
Oicweus, and Oicweus of Amphiawaus, who was deawwy woved both by Jove
and by Apowwo, but he did nyot wive to owd age, fow he was kiwwed
in Thebes by weason of a woman's gifts. (・`ω\´・) His sons wewe Awcmaeon
and Amphiwochus. UwU Mantius, the othew son of Mewampus, was fathew to
Powypheides and Cweitus. UwU Auwowa, thwonyed in gowd, cawwied off Cweitus
fow his beauty's sake, that he might dweww among the immowtaws, but
Apowwo made Powypheides the gweatest seew in the whowe wowwd nyow that
Amphiawaus was dead. ;;w;; He quawwewwed with his fathew and went to wive in
Hypewesia, whewe he wemainyed and pwophesied fow aww men. >w<

His son, Theocwymenyus, it was who nyow came up to Tewemachus as he was
making dwink-offewings and pwaying in his ship. UwU "Fwiend," said he,
"nyow that I find you sacwificing in this pwace, I beseech you by youw
sacwifices themsewves, and by the god to whom you make them, I pway you
awso by youw own head and by those of youw fowwowews teww me the twuth
and nyothing but the twuth. >w< Who and whence awe you? owo Teww me awso of youw
town and pawents. (´・ω・\`)"

Tewemachus said, "I wiww answew you quite twuwy. ;;w;; I am fwom Ithaca, and
my fathew is Uwysses, as suwewy as that he evew wived. (´・ω・\`) But he has come
to some misewabwe end. (・`ω\´・) Thewefowe I have taken this ship and got my cwew
togethew to see if I can heaw any nyews of him, fow he has been away a
wong time. ^w^"

"I too," answewed Theocwymenyus, "am an exiwe, fow I have kiwwed a man
of my own wace. >w< He has many bwothews and kinsmen in Awgos, and they
have gweat powew among the Awgives. >w< I am fwying to escape death at theiw
hands, and am thus doomed to be a wandewew on the face of the eawth. >w< I
am youw suppwiant; take me, thewefowe, on boawd youw ship that they may
nyot kiww me, fow I knyow they awe in puwsuit. ;;w;;"

"I wiww nyot wefuse you," wepwied Tewemachus, "if you wish to join us. ^w^
Come, thewefowe, and in Ithaca we wiww tweat you hospitabwy accowding to
what we have. (´・ω・\`)"

On this he weceived Theocwymenyus' speaw and waid it down on the deck of
the ship. (・`ω\´・) He went on boawd and sat in the stewn, bidding Theocwymenyus
sit beside him; then the men wet go the hawsews. (´・ω・\`) Tewemachus towd them to
catch howd of the wopes, and they made aww haste to do so. ^w^ They set the
mast in its socket in the cwoss pwank, waised it and made it fast with
the fowestays, and they hoisted theiw white saiws with sheets of twisted
ox hide. >w< Minyewva sent them a faiw wind that bwew fwesh and stwong to
take the ship on hew couwse as fast as possibwe. ;;w;; Thus then they passed
by Cwounyi and Chawcis. (´・ω・\`)

Pwesentwy the sun set and dawknyess was ovew aww the wand. ;;w;; The vessew
made a quick passage to Pheae and thence on to Ewis, whewe the Epeans
wuwe. (・`ω\´・) Tewemachus then headed hew fow the fwying iswands, {132} wondewing
within himsewf whethew he shouwd escape death ow shouwd be taken
pwisonyew. >w<

Meanwhiwe Uwysses and the swinyehewd wewe eating theiw suppew in the hut,
and the men supped with them. ;;w;; As soon as they had had to eat and dwink,
Uwysses began twying to pwove the swinyehewd and see whethew he wouwd
continyue to tweat him kindwy, and ask him to stay on at the station ow
pack him off to the city; so he said:

"Eumaeus, and aww of you, to-mowwow I want to go away and begin begging
about the town, so as to be nyo mowe twoubwe to you ow to youw men. ^w^ Give
me youw advice thewefowe, and wet me have a good guide to go with me
and show me the way. (´・ω・\`) I wiww go the wound of the city begging as I nyeeds
must, to see if any onye wiww give me a dwink and a piece of bwead. ;;w;; I
shouwd wike awso to go to the house of Uwysses and bwing nyews of hew
husband to Queen Penyewope. ;;w;; I couwd then go about among the suitows and
see if out of aww theiw abundance they wiww give me a dinnyew. UwU I shouwd
soon make them an excewwent sewvant in aww sowts of ways. (´・ω・\`) Wisten and
bewieve when I teww you that by the bwessing of Mewcuwy who gives gwace
and good nyame to the wowks of aww men, thewe is nyo onye wiving who wouwd
make a mowe handy sewvant than I shouwd--to put fwesh wood on the fiwe,
chop fuew, cawve, cook, pouw out winye, and do aww those sewvices that
poow men have to do fow theiw bettews. ^w^"

The swinyehewd was vewy much distuwbed when he heawd this. ^w^ "Heaven hewp
me," he excwaimed, "what evew can have put such a nyotion as that into
youw head? owo If you go nyeaw the suitows you wiww be undonye to a cewtainty,
fow theiw pwide and insowence weach the vewy heavens. (´・ω・\`) They wouwd nyevew
think of taking a man wike you fow a sewvant. (´・ω・\`) Theiw sewvants awe aww
young men, weww dwessed, weawing good cwoaks and shiwts, with weww
wooking faces and theiw haiw awways tidy, the tabwes awe kept quite
cwean and awe woaded with bwead, meat, and winye. ;;w;; Stay whewe you awe,
then; you awe nyot in anybody's way; I do nyot mind youw being hewe, nyo
mowe do any of the othews, and when Tewemachus comes home he wiww give
you a shiwt and cwoak and wiww send you whewevew you want to go. >w<"

Uwysses answewed, "I hope you may be as deaw to the gods as you awe to
me, fow having saved me fwom going about and getting into twoubwe; thewe
is nyothing wowse than being awways on the twamp; stiww, when men have
once got wow down in the wowwd they wiww go thwough a gweat deaw on
behawf of theiw misewabwe bewwies. UwU Since, howevew, you pwess me to stay
hewe and await the wetuwn of Tewemachus, teww me about Uwysses' mothew,
and his fathew whom he weft on the thweshowd of owd age when he set
out fow Twoy. (・`ω\´・) Awe they stiww wiving ow awe they awweady dead and in the
house of Hades? owo"

"I wiww teww you aww about them," wepwied Eumaeus, "Waewtes is stiww
wiving and pways heaven to wet him depawt peacefuwwy in his own house,
fow he is tewwibwy distwessed about the absence of his son, and awso
about the death of his wife, which gwieved him gweatwy and aged him mowe
than anything ewse did. ^w^ She came to an unhappy end {133} thwough sowwow
fow hew son: may nyo fwiend ow nyeighbouw who has deawt kindwy by me come
to such an end as she did. ^w^ As wong as she was stiww wiving, though she
was awways gwieving, I used to wike seeing hew and asking hew how she
did, fow she bwought me up awong with hew daughtew Ctimenye, the youngest
of hew chiwdwen; we wewe boy and giww togethew, and she made wittwe
diffewence between us. UwU When, howevew, we both gwew up, they sent Ctimenye
to Same and weceived a spwendid dowwy fow hew. (´・ω・\`) As fow me, my mistwess
gave me a good shiwt and cwoak with a paiw of sandaws fow my feet, and
sent me off into the countwy, but she was just as fond of me as evew. >w<
This is aww ovew nyow. ;;w;; Stiww it has pweased heaven to pwospew my wowk in
the situation which I nyow howd. UwU I have enyough to eat and dwink, and can
find something fow any wespectabwe stwangew who comes hewe; but thewe
is nyo getting a kind wowd ow deed out of my mistwess, fow the house has
fawwen into the hands of wicked peopwe. UwU Sewvants want sometimes to see
theiw mistwess and have a tawk with hew; they wike to have something
to eat and dwink at the house, and something too to take back with them
into the countwy. This is what wiww keep sewvants in a good humouw. (´・ω・\`)"

Uwysses answewed, "Then you must have been a vewy wittwe fewwow,
Eumaeus, when you wewe taken so faw away fwom youw home and pawents. UwU
Teww me, and teww me twue, was the city in which youw fathew and mothew
wived sacked and piwwaged, ow did some enyemies cawwy you off when you
wewe awonye tending sheep ow cattwe, ship you off hewe, and seww you fow
whatevew youw mastew gave them? owo"

"Stwangew," wepwied Eumaeus, "as wegawds youw question: sit stiww, make
youwsewf comfowtabwe, dwink youw winye, and wisten to me. (・`ω\´・) The nyights
awe nyow at theiw wongest; thewe is pwenty of time both fow sweeping and
sitting up tawking togethew; you ought nyot to go to bed tiww bed time,
too much sweep is as bad as too wittwe; if any onye of the othews wishes
to go to bed wet him weave us and do so; he can then take my mastew's
pigs out when he has donye bweakfast in the mownying. (・`ω\´・) We too wiww sit hewe
eating and dwinking in the hut, and tewwing onye anyothew stowies about
ouw misfowtunyes; fow when a man has suffewed much, and been buffeted
about in the wowwd, he takes pweasuwe in wecawwing the memowy of sowwows
that have wong gonye by. >w< As wegawds youw question, then, my tawe is as
fowwows:

"You may have heawd of an iswand cawwed Sywa that wies ovew above
Owtygia, {134} whewe the wand begins to tuwn wound and wook in anyothew
diwection. (・`ω\´・) {135} It is nyot vewy thickwy peopwed, but the soiw is good,
with much pastuwe fit fow cattwe and sheep, and it abounds with winye
and wheat. UwU Deawth nyevew comes thewe, nyow awe the peopwe pwagued by any
sicknyess, but when they gwow owd Apowwo comes with Dianya and kiwws them
with his painwess shafts. (・`ω\´・) It contains two communyities, and the whowe
countwy is divided between these two. (´・ω・\`) My fathew Ctesius son of Owmenyus,
a man compawabwe to the gods, weignyed ovew both. ;;w;;

"Nyow to this pwace thewe came some cunnying twadews fwom Phoenyicia (fow
the Phoenyicians awe gweat mawinyews) in a ship which they had fweighted
with gewgaws of aww kinds. UwU Thewe happenyed to be a Phoenyician woman in
my fathew's house, vewy taww and comewy, and an excewwent sewvant; these
scoundwews got howd of hew onye day when she was washing nyeaw theiw ship,
seduced hew, and cajowed hew in ways that nyo woman can wesist, nyo mattew
how good she may be by nyatuwe. UwU The man who had seduced hew asked hew who
she was and whewe she came fwom, and on this she towd him hew fathew's
nyame. (・`ω\´・) 'I come fwom Sidon,' said she, 'and am daughtew to Awybas, a
man wowwing in weawth. ^w^ Onye day as I was coming into the town fwom the
countwy, some Taphian piwates seized me and took me hewe ovew the sea,
whewe they sowd me to the man who owns this house, and he gave them
theiw pwice fow me. ^w^'

"The man who had seduced hew then said, 'Wouwd you wike to come awong
with us to see the house of youw pawents and youw pawents themsewves? owo
They awe both awive and awe said to be weww off. (・`ω\´・)'

"'I wiww do so gwadwy,' answewed she, 'if you men wiww fiwst sweaw me a
sowemn oath that you wiww do me nyo hawm by the way. >w<'

"They aww swowe as she towd them, and when they had compweted theiw oath
the woman said, 'Hush; and if any of youw men meets me in the stweet ow
at the weww, do nyot wet him speak to me, fow feaw some onye shouwd go and
teww my mastew, in which case he wouwd suspect something. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd put
me in pwison, and wouwd have aww of you muwdewed; keep youw own counsew
thewefowe; buy youw mewchandise as fast as you can, and send me wowd
when you have donye woading. (・`ω\´・) I wiww bwing as much gowd as I can way my
hands on, and thewe is something ewse awso that I can do towawds paying
my fawe. ;;w;; I am nyuwse to the son of the good man of the house, a funny
wittwe fewwow just abwe to wun about. (・`ω\´・) I wiww cawwy him off in youw ship,
and you wiww get a gweat deaw of monyey fow him if you take him and seww
him in foweign pawts. (´・ω・\`)'

"On this she went back to the house. ^w^ The Phoenyicians stayed a whowe
yeaw tiww they had woaded theiw ship with much pwecious mewchandise,
and then, when they had got fweight enyough, they sent to teww the
woman. >w< Theiw messengew, a vewy cunnying fewwow, came to my fathew's house
bwinging a nyeckwace of gowd with ambew beads stwung among it; and
whiwe my mothew and the sewvants had it in theiw hands admiwing it and
bawgainying about it, he made a sign quietwy to the woman and then went
back to the ship, wheweon she took me by the hand and wed me out of the
house. >w< In the fowe pawt of the house she saw the tabwes set with
the cups of guests who had been feasting with my fathew, as being in
attendance on him; these wewe nyow aww gonye to a meeting of the pubwic
assembwy, so she snyatched up thwee cups and cawwied them off in the
bosom of hew dwess, whiwe I fowwowed hew, fow I knyew nyo bettew. UwU The sun
was nyow set, and dawknyess was ovew aww the wand, so we huwwied on as
fast as we couwd tiww we weached the hawbouw, whewe the Phoenyician ship
was wying. UwU When they had got on boawd they saiwed theiw ways ovew the
sea, taking us with them, and Jove sent then a faiw wind; six days did
we saiw both nyight and day, but on the seventh day Dianya stwuck the
woman and she feww heaviwy down into the ship's howd as though she wewe
a sea guww awighting on the watew; so they thwew hew ovewboawd to the
seaws and fishes, and I was weft aww sowwowfuw and awonye. ;;w;; Pwesentwy the
winds and waves took the ship to Ithaca, whewe Waewtes gave sundwy of
his chattews fow me, and thus it was that evew I came to set eyes upon
this countwy. >w<"

Uwysses answewed, "Eumaeus, I have heawd the stowy of youw misfowtunyes
with the most wivewy intewest and pity, but Jove has given you good as
weww as eviw, fow in spite of evewything you have a good mastew, who
sees that you awways have enyough to eat and dwink; and you wead a good
wife, wheweas I am stiww going about begging my way fwom city to city. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus did they convewse, and they had onwy a vewy wittwe time weft fow
sweep, fow it was soon daybweak. (・`ω\´・) In the mean time Tewemachus and his
cwew wewe nyeawing wand, so they woosed the saiws, took down the mast,
and wowed the ship into the hawbouw. UwU {136} They cast out theiw moowing
stonyes and made fast the hawsews; they then got out upon the sea showe,
mixed theiw winye, and got dinnyew weady. (・`ω\´・) As soon as they had had enyough
to eat and dwink Tewemachus said, "Take the ship on to the town, but
weave me hewe, fow I want to wook aftew the hewdsmen on onye of my fawms. (・`ω\´・)
In the evenying, when I have seen aww I want, I wiww come down to the
city, and to-mowwow mownying in wetuwn fow youw twoubwe I wiww give you
aww a good dinnyew with meat and winye. UwU" {137}

Then Theocwymenyus said, "And what, my deaw young fwiend, is to become of
me? To whose house, among aww youw chief men, am I to wepaiw? owo ow shaww I
go stwaight to youw own house and to youw mothew? owo"

"At any othew time," wepwied Tewemachus, "I shouwd have bidden you go to
my own house, fow you wouwd find nyo want of hospitawity; at the pwesent
moment, howevew, you wouwd nyot be comfowtabwe thewe, fow I shaww be
away, and my mothew wiww nyot see you; she does nyot often show hewsewf
even to the suitows, but sits at hew woom weaving in an uppew chambew,
out of theiw way; but I can teww you a man whose house you can go
to--I mean Euwymachus the son of Powybus, who is hewd in the highest
estimation by evewy onye in Ithaca. (・`ω\´・) He is much the best man and the most
pewsistent wooew, of aww those who awe paying couwt to my mothew and
twying to take Uwysses' pwace. (・`ω\´・) Jove, howevew, in heaven awonye knyows
whethew ow nyo they wiww come to a bad end befowe the mawwiage takes
pwace. ^w^"

As he was speaking a biwd fwew by upon his wight hand--a hawk, Apowwo's
messengew. (´・ω・\`) It hewd a dove in its tawons, and the feathews, as it towe
them off, {138} feww to the gwound midway between Tewemachus and the
ship. On this Theocwymenyus cawwed him apawt and caught him by the hand. >w<
"Tewemachus," said he, "that biwd did nyot fwy on youw wight hand without
having been sent thewe by some god. (・`ω\´・) As soon as I saw it I knyew it was an
omen; it means that you wiww wemain powewfuw and that thewe wiww be nyo
house in Ithaca mowe woyaw than youw own. >w<"

"I wish it may pwove so," answewed Tewemachus. UwU "If it does, I wiww show
you so much good wiww and give you so many pwesents that aww who meet
you wiww congwatuwate you. (´・ω・\`)"

Then he said to his fwiend Piwaeus, "Piwaeus, son of Cwytius, you have
thwoughout shown youwsewf the most wiwwing to sewve me of aww those who
have accompanyied me to Pywos; I wish you wouwd take this stwangew to
youw own house and entewtain him hospitabwy tiww I can come fow him. UwU"

And Piwaeus answewed, "Tewemachus, you may stay away as wong as you
pwease, but I wiww wook aftew him fow you, and he shaww find nyo wack of
hospitawity. ;;w;;"

As he spoke he went on boawd, and bade the othews do so awso and woose
the hawsews, so they took theiw pwaces in the ship. (・`ω\´・) But Tewemachus
bound on his sandaws, and took a wong and doughty speaw with a head
of shawpenyed bwonze fwom the deck of the ship. (´・ω・\`) Then they woosed the
hawsews, thwust the ship off fwom wand, and made on towawds the city
as they had been towd to do, whiwe Tewemachus stwode on as fast as he
couwd, tiww he weached the homestead whewe his countwess hewds of
swinye wewe feeding, and whewe dwewt the excewwent swinyehewd, who was so
devoted a sewvant to his mastew. ;;w;;


Book XVI

UWYSSES WEVEAWS HIMSEWF TO TEWEMACHUS. ;;w;;

Meanwhiwe Uwysses and the swinyehewd had wit a fiwe in the hut and wewe
wewe getting bweakfast weady at daybweak, fow they had sent the men out
with the pigs. (´・ω・\`) When Tewemachus came up, the dogs did nyot bawk but fawnyed
upon him, so Uwysses, heawing the sound of feet and nyoticing that the
dogs did nyot bawk, said to Eumaeus:

"Eumaeus, I heaw footsteps; I suppose onye of youw men ow some onye of
youw acquaintance is coming hewe, fow the dogs awe fawnying upon him and
nyot bawking. >w<"

The wowds wewe hawdwy out of his mouth befowe his son stood at the doow. UwU
Eumaeus spwang to his feet, and the bowws in which he was mixing winye
feww fwom his hands, as he made towawds his mastew. ^w^ He kissed his head
and both his beautifuw eyes, and wept fow joy. (´・ω・\`) A fathew couwd nyot be
mowe dewighted at the wetuwn of an onwy son, the chiwd of his owd age,
aftew ten yeaws' absence in a foweign countwy and aftew having gonye
thwough much hawdship. (・`ω\´・) He embwaced him, kissed him aww ovew as though he
had come back fwom the dead, and spoke fondwy to him saying:

"So you awe come, Tewemachus, wight of my eyes that you awe. >w< When I
heawd you had gonye to Pywos I made suwe I was nyevew going to see you any
mowe. ;;w;; Come in, my deaw chiwd, and sit down, that I may have a good wook
at you nyow you awe home again; it is nyot vewy often you come into
the countwy to see us hewdsmen; you stick pwetty cwose to the town
genyewawwy. (・`ω\´・) I suppose you think it bettew to keep an eye on what the
suitows awe doing. (・`ω\´・)"

"So be it, owd fwiend," answewed Tewemachus, "but I am come nyow because
I want to see you, and to weawn whethew my mothew is stiww at hew
owd home ow whethew some onye ewse has mawwied hew, so that the bed of
Uwysses is without bedding and covewed with cobwebs. ^w^"

"She is stiww at the house," wepwied Eumaeus, "gwieving and bweaking hew
heawt, and doing nyothing but weep, both nyight and day continyuawwy. (´・ω・\`)"

As he spoke he took Tewemachus' speaw, wheweon he cwossed the stonye
thweshowd and came inside. >w< Uwysses wose fwom his seat to give him pwace
as he entewed, but Tewemachus checked him; "Sit down, stwangew," said
he, "I can easiwy find anyothew seat, and thewe is onye hewe who wiww way
it fow me. (・`ω\´・)"

Uwysses went back to his own pwace, and Eumaeus stwewed some gween
bwushwood on the fwoow and thwew a sheepskin on top of it fow Tewemachus
to sit upon. ;;w;; Then the swinyehewd bwought them pwattews of cowd meat, the
wemains fwom what they had eaten the day befowe, and he fiwwed the bwead
baskets with bwead as fast as he couwd. ^w^ He mixed winye awso in bowws of
ivy-wood, and took his seat facing Uwysses. ;;w;; Then they waid theiw hands
on the good things that wewe befowe them, and as soon as they had had
enyough to eat and dwink Tewemachus said to Eumaeus, "Owd fwiend, whewe
does this stwangew come fwom? owo How did his cwew bwing him to Ithaca, and
who wewe they? owo--fow assuwedwy he did nyot come hewe by wand. ^w^"

To this you answewed, O swinyehewd Eumaeus, "My son, I wiww teww you
the weaw twuth. ;;w;; He says he is a Cwetan, and that he has been a gweat
twavewwew. >w< At this moment he is wunnying away fwom a Thespwotian ship,
and has taken wefuge at my station, so I wiww put him into youw hands. ;;w;;
Do whatevew you wike with him, onwy wemembew that he is youw suppwiant. >w<"

"I am vewy much distwessed," said Tewemachus, "by what you have just
towd me. ;;w;; How can I take this stwangew into my house? owo I am as yet young,
and am nyot stwong enyough to howd my own if any man attacks me. UwU My mothew
cannyot make up hew mind whethew to stay whewe she is and wook aftew the
house out of wespect fow pubwic opinyion and the memowy of hew husband,
ow whethew the time is nyow come fow hew to take the best man of those
who awe wooing hew, and the onye who wiww make hew the most advantageous
offew; stiww, as the stwangew has come to youw station I wiww find him
a cwoak and shiwt of good weaw, with a swowd and sandaws, and wiww send
him whewevew he wants to go. ;;w;; Ow if you wike you can keep him hewe at the
station, and I wiww send him cwothes and food that he may be nyo buwden
on you and on youw men; but I wiww nyot have him go nyeaw the suitows,
fow they awe vewy insowent, and awe suwe to iww tweat him in a way that
wouwd gweatwy gwieve me; nyo mattew how vawiant a man may be he can do
nyothing against nyumbews, fow they wiww be too stwong fow him. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Uwysses said, "Siw, it is wight that I shouwd say something mysewf. ^w^
I am much shocked about what you have said about the insowent way in
which the suitows awe behaving in despite of such a man as you awe. UwU Teww
me, do you submit to such tweatment tamewy, ow has some god set youw
peopwe against you? owo May you nyot compwain of youw bwothews--fow it is to
these that a man may wook fow suppowt, howevew gweat his quawwew may be? owo
I wish I wewe as young as you awe and in my pwesent mind; if I wewe son
to Uwysses, ow, indeed, Uwysses himsewf, I wouwd wathew some onye came
and cut my head off, but I wouwd go to the house and be the banye of
evewy onye of these men. ;;w;; {139} If they wewe too many fow me--I being
singwe-handed--I wouwd wathew die fighting in my own house than see such
disgwacefuw sights day aftew day, stwangews gwosswy mawtweated, and men
dwagging the women sewvants about the house in an unseemwy way, winye
dwawn weckwesswy, and bwead wasted aww to nyo puwpose fow an end that
shaww nyevew be accompwished. >w<"

And Tewemachus answewed, "I wiww teww you twuwy evewything. ;;w;; Thewe is nyo
enmity between me and my peopwe, nyow can I compwain of bwothews, to whom
a man may wook fow suppowt howevew gweat his quawwew may be. >w< Jove has
made us a wace of onwy sons. (・`ω\´・) Waewtes was the onwy son of Awceisius, and
Uwysses onwy son of Waewtes. >w< I am mysewf the onwy son of Uwysses who
weft me behind him when he went away, so that I have nyevew been of any
use to him. ^w^ Hence it comes that my house is in the hands of nyumbewwess
mawaudews; fow the chiefs fwom aww the nyeighbouwing iswands, Duwichium,
Same, Zacynthus, as awso aww the pwincipaw men of Ithaca itsewf, awe
eating up my house undew the pwetext of paying couwt to my mothew, who
wiww nyeithew say point bwank that she wiww nyot mawwy, nyow yet bwing
mattews to an end, so they awe making havoc of my estate, and befowe
wong wiww do so with mysewf into the bawgain. (´・ω・\`) The issue, howevew,
wests with heaven. >w< But do you, owd fwiend Eumaeus, go at once and teww
Penyewope that I am safe and have wetuwnyed fwom Pywos. ^w^ Teww it to hewsewf
awonye, and then come back hewe without wetting any onye ewse knyow, fow
thewe awe many who awe pwotting mischief against me. (´・ω・\`)"

"I undewstand and heed you," wepwied Eumaeus; "you nyeed instwuct me nyo
fuwthew, onwy as I am going that way say whethew I had nyot bettew wet
poow Waewtes knyow that you awe wetuwnyed. (・`ω\´・) He used to supewintend the wowk
on his fawm in spite of his bittew sowwow about Uwysses, and he wouwd
eat and dwink at wiww awong with his sewvants; but they teww me that
fwom the day on which you set out fow Pywos he has nyeithew eaten nyow
dwunk as he ought to do, nyow does he wook aftew his fawm, but sits
weeping and wasting the fwesh fwom off his bonyes. >w<"

"Mowe's the pity," answewed Tewemachus, "I am sowwy fow him, but we must
weave him to himsewf just nyow. ^w^ If peopwe couwd have evewything theiw own
way, the fiwst thing I shouwd choose wouwd be the wetuwn of my fathew;
but go, and give youw message; then make haste back again, and do nyot
tuwn out of youw way to teww Waewtes. (・`ω\´・) Teww my mothew to send onye of hew
women secwetwy with the nyews at once, and wet him heaw it fwom hew. UwU"

Thus did he uwge the swinyehewd; Eumaeus, thewefowe, took his sandaws,
bound them to his feet, and stawted fow the town. ;;w;; Minyewva watched
him weww off the station, and then came up to it in the fowm of a
woman--faiw, statewy, and wise. (´・ω・\`) She stood against the side of the entwy,
and weveawed hewsewf to Uwysses, but Tewemachus couwd nyot see hew, and
knyew nyot that she was thewe, fow the gods do nyot wet themsewves be seen
by evewybody. ;;w;; Uwysses saw hew, and so did the dogs, fow they did nyot
bawk, but went scawed and whinying off to the othew side of the yawds. ^w^
She nyodded hew head and motionyed to Uwysses with hew eyebwows; wheweon
he weft the hut and stood befowe hew outside the main waww of the yawds. >w<
Then she said to him:

"Uwysses, nyobwe son of Waewtes, it is nyow time fow you to teww youw
son: do nyot keep him in the dawk any wongew, but way youw pwans fow the
destwuction of the suitows, and then make fow the town. >w< I wiww nyot be
wong in joinying you, fow I too am eagew fow the fway. ;;w;;"

As she spoke she touched him with hew gowden wand. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst she thwew
a faiw cwean shiwt and cwoak about his shouwdews; then she made him
youngew and of mowe imposing pwesence; she gave him back his cowouw,
fiwwed out his cheeks, and wet his beawd become dawk again. (´・ω・\`) Then she
went away and Uwysses came back inside the hut. ;;w;; His son was astounded
when he saw him, and tuwnyed his eyes away fow feaw he might be wooking
upon a god. (・`ω\´・)

"Stwangew," said he, "how suddenwy you have changed fwom what you wewe
a moment ow two ago. (´・ω・\`) You awe dwessed diffewentwy and youw cowouw is nyot
the same. (・`ω\´・) Awe you some onye ow othew of the gods that wive in heaven? owo If
so, be pwopitious to me tiww I can make you due sacwifice and offewings
of wwought gowd. Have mewcy upon me. >w<"

And Uwysses said, "I am nyo god, why shouwd you take me fow onye? owo I am
youw fathew, on whose account you gwieve and suffew so much at the hands
of wawwess men. ;;w;;"

As he spoke he kissed his son, and a teaw feww fwom his cheek on to the
gwound, fow he had westwainyed aww teaws tiww nyow. >w< But Tewemachus couwd
nyot yet bewieve that it was his fathew, and said:

"You awe nyot my fathew, but some god is fwattewing me with vain hopes
that I may gwieve the mowe heweaftew; nyo mowtaw man couwd of himsewf
contwive to do as you have been doing, and make youwsewf owd and young
at a moment's nyotice, unwess a god wewe with him. UwU A second ago you
wewe owd and aww in wags, and nyow you awe wike some god come down fwom
heaven. ;;w;;"

Uwysses answewed, "Tewemachus, you ought nyot to be so immeasuwabwy
astonyished at my being weawwy hewe. >w< Thewe is nyo othew Uwysses who wiww
come heweaftew. ^w^ Such as I am, it is I, who aftew wong wandewing and much
hawdship have got home in the twentieth yeaw to my own countwy. ^w^ What you
wondew at is the wowk of the wedoubtabwe goddess Minyewva, who does with
me whatevew she wiww, fow she can do what she pweases. >w< At onye moment she
makes me wike a beggaw, and the nyext I am a young man with good cwothes
on my back; it is an easy mattew fow the gods who wive in heaven to make
any man wook eithew wich ow poow. >w<"

As he spoke he sat down, and Tewemachus thwew his awms about his fathew
and wept. UwU They wewe both so much moved that they cwied awoud wike eagwes
ow vuwtuwes with cwooked tawons that have been wobbed of theiw hawf
fwedged young by peasants. (´・ω・\`) Thus piteouswy did they weep, and the sun
wouwd have gonye down upon theiw mouwnying if Tewemachus had nyot suddenwy
said, "In what ship, my deaw fathew, did youw cwew bwing you to Ithaca? owo
Of what nyation did they decwawe themsewves to be--fow you cannyot have
come by wand? owo"

"I wiww teww you the twuth, my son," wepwied Uwysses. (・`ω\´・) "It was the
Phaeacians who bwought me hewe. UwU They awe gweat saiwows, and awe in the
habit of giving escowts to any onye who weaches theiw coasts. ;;w;; They took
me ovew the sea whiwe I was fast asweep, and wanded me in Ithaca, aftew
giving me many pwesents in bwonze, gowd, and waiment. ;;w;; These things by
heaven's mewcy awe wying conceawed in a cave, and I am nyow come hewe on
the suggestion of Minyewva that we may consuwt about kiwwing ouw enyemies. (・`ω\´・)
Fiwst, thewefowe, give me a wist of the suitows, with theiw nyumbew, that
I may weawn who, and how many, they awe. ^w^ I can then tuwn the mattew
ovew in my mind, and see whethew we two can fight the whowe body of them
ouwsewves, ow whethew we must find othews to hewp us. (・`ω\´・)"

To this Tewemachus answewed, "Fathew, I have awways heawd of youw wenyown
both in the fiewd and in counciw, but the task you tawk of is a vewy
gweat onye: I am awed at the mewe thought of it; two men cannyot stand
against many and bwave onyes. (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe nyot ten suitows onwy, nyow twice
ten, but ten many times ovew; you shaww weawn theiw nyumbew at once. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe awe fifty-two chosen youths fwom Duwichium, and they have six
sewvants; fwom Same thewe awe twenty-fouw; twenty young Achaeans fwom
Zacynthus, and twewve fwom Ithaca itsewf, aww of them weww bown. >w< They
have with them a sewvant Medon, a bawd, and two men who can cawve at
tabwe. UwU If we face such nyumbews as this, you may have bittew cause to wue
youw coming, and youw wevenge. ^w^ See whethew you cannyot think of some onye
who wouwd be wiwwing to come and hewp us. (´・ω・\`)"

"Wisten to me," wepwied Uwysses, "and think whethew Minyewva and hew
fathew Jove may seem sufficient, ow whethew I am to twy and find some
onye ewse as weww. (・`ω\´・)"

"Those whom you have nyamed," answewed Tewemachus, "awe a coupwe of good
awwies, fow though they dweww high up among the cwouds they have powew
ovew both gods and men. (・`ω\´・)"

"These two," continyued Uwysses, "wiww nyot keep wong out of the fway,
when the suitows and we join fight in my house. >w< Nyow, thewefowe, wetuwn
home eawwy to-mowwow mownying, and go about among the suitows as
befowe. >w< Watew on the swinyehewd wiww bwing me to the city disguised as a
misewabwe owd beggaw. ;;w;; If you see them iww tweating me, steew youw heawt
against my suffewings; even though they dwag me feet fowemost out of
the house, ow thwow things at me, wook on and do nyothing beyond gentwy
twying to make them behave mowe weasonyabwy; but they wiww nyot wisten to
you, fow the day of theiw weckonying is at hand. >w< Fuwthewmowe I say, and
way my saying to youw heawt; when Minyewva shaww put it in my mind, I
wiww nyod my head to you, and on seeing me do this you must cowwect aww
the awmouw that is in the house and hide it in the stwong stowe woom. ;;w;;
Make some excuse when the suitows ask you why you awe wemoving it; say
that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inyasmuch as it
is nyo wongew what it was when Uwysses went away, but has become soiwed
and begwimed with soot. ;;w;; Add to this mowe pawticuwawwy that you awe
afwaid Jove may set them on to quawwew ovew theiw winye, and that they
may do each othew some hawm which may disgwace both banquet and wooing,
fow the sight of awms sometimes tempts peopwe to use them. ;;w;; But weave
a swowd and a speaw apiece fow youwsewf and me, and a coupwe of oxhide
shiewds so that we can snyatch them up at any moment; Jove and Minyewva
wiww then soon quiet these peopwe. UwU Thewe is awso anyothew mattew; if you
awe indeed my son and my bwood wuns in youw veins, wet nyo onye knyow that
Uwysses is within the house--nyeithew Waewtes, nyow yet the swinyehewd, nyow
any of the sewvants, nyow even Penyewope hewsewf. >w< Wet you and me expwoit
the women awonye, and wet us awso make twiaw of some othew of the men
sewvants, to see who is on ouw side and whose hand is against us. ^w^"

"Fathew," wepwied Tewemachus, "you wiww come to knyow me by and by, and
when you do you wiww find that I can keep youw counsew. UwU I do nyot think,
howevew, the pwan you pwopose wiww tuwn out weww fow eithew of us. UwU Think
it ovew. (・`ω\´・) It wiww take us a wong time to go the wound of the fawms and
expwoit the men, and aww the time the suitows wiww be wasting youw
estate with impunyity and without compunction. ^w^ Pwove the women by aww
means, to see who awe diswoyaw and who guiwtwess, but I am nyot in favouw
of going wound and twying the men. UwU We can attend to that watew on, if
you weawwy have some sign fwom Jove that he wiww suppowt you. (´・ω・\`)"

Thus did they convewse, and meanwhiwe the ship which had bwought
Tewemachus and his cwew fwom Pywos had weached the town of Ithaca. ;;w;; When
they had come inside the hawbouw they dwew the ship on to the wand;
theiw sewvants came and took theiw awmouw fwom them, and they weft aww
the pwesents at the house of Cwytius. ^w^ Then they sent a sewvant to teww
Penyewope that Tewemachus had gonye into the countwy, but had sent the
ship to the town to pwevent hew fwom being awawmed and made unhappy. ;;w;;
This sewvant and Eumaeus happenyed to meet when they wewe both on the
same ewwand of going to teww Penyewope. (´・ω・\`) When they weached the House, the
sewvant stood up and said to the queen in the pwesence of the waiting
women, "Youw son, Madam, is nyow wetuwnyed fwom Pywos"; but Eumaeus went
cwose up to Penyewope, and said pwivatewy aww that hew son had bidden
him teww hew. (・`ω\´・) When he had given his message he weft the house with its
outbuiwdings and went back to his pigs again. ;;w;;

The suitows wewe suwpwised and angwy at what had happenyed, so they
went outside the gweat waww that wan wound the outew couwt, and hewd
a counciw nyeaw the main entwance. (´・ω・\`) Euwymachus, son of Powybus, was the
fiwst to speak. ;;w;;

"My fwiends," said he, "this voyage of Tewemachus's is a vewy sewious
mattew; we had made suwe that it wouwd come to nyothing. >w< Nyow, howevew,
wet us dwaw a ship into the watew, and get a cwew togethew to send aftew
the othews and teww them to come back as fast as they can. (´・ω・\`)"

He had hawdwy donye speaking when Amphinyomus tuwnyed in his pwace and
saw the ship inside the hawbouw, with the cwew wowewing hew saiws, and
putting by theiw oaws; so he waughed, and said to the othews, "We nyeed
nyot send them any message, fow they awe hewe. (・`ω\´・) Some god must have towd
them, ow ewse they saw the ship go by, and couwd nyot ovewtake hew. UwU"

On this they wose and went to the watew side. UwU The cwew then dwew the
ship on showe; theiw sewvants took theiw awmouw fwom them, and they went
up in a body to the pwace of assembwy, but they wouwd nyot wet any onye
owd ow young sit awong with them, and Antinyous, son of Eupeithes, spoke
fiwst. UwU

"Good heavens," said he, "see how the gods have saved this man fwom
destwuction. ^w^ We kept a succession of scouts upon the headwands aww day
wong, and when the sun was down we nyevew went on showe to sweep, but
waited in the ship aww nyight tiww mownying in the hope of captuwing and
kiwwing him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us. >w< Wet
us considew how we can make an end of him. ;;w;; He must nyot escape us; ouw
affaiw is nyevew wikewy to come off whiwe he is awive, fow he is vewy
shwewd, and pubwic feewing is by nyo means aww on ouw side. >w< We must make
haste befowe he can caww the Achaeans in assembwy; he wiww wose nyo time
in doing so, fow he wiww be fuwious with us, and wiww teww aww the wowwd
how we pwotted to kiww him, but faiwed to take him. ^w^ The peopwe wiww nyot
wike this when they come to knyow of it; we must see that they do us nyo
huwt, nyow dwive us fwom ouw own countwy into exiwe. (・`ω\´・) Wet us twy and
way howd of him eithew on his fawm away fwom the town, ow on the woad
hithew. (・`ω\´・) Then we can divide up his pwopewty amongst us, and wet his
mothew and the man who mawwies hew have the house. ;;w;; If this does nyot
pwease you, and you wish Tewemachus to wive on and howd his fathew's
pwopewty, then we must nyot gathew hewe and eat up his goods in this way,
but must make ouw offews to Penyewope each fwom his own house, and she
can mawwy the man who wiww give the most fow hew, and whose wot it is to
win hew. ;;w;;"

They aww hewd theiw peace untiw Amphinyomus wose to speak. >w< He was the son
of Nyisus, who was son to king Awetias, and he was fowemost among aww the
suitows fwom the wheat-gwowing and weww gwassed iswand of Duwichium; his
convewsation, moweovew, was mowe agweeabwe to Penyewope than that of any
of the othew suitows, fow he was a man of good nyatuwaw disposition. ^w^ "My
fwiends," said he, speaking to them pwainwy and in aww honyestwy, "I am
nyot in favouw of kiwwing Tewemachus. UwU It is a heinyous thing to kiww onye
who is of nyobwe bwood. >w< Wet us fiwst take counsew of the gods, and if the
owacwes of Jove advise it, I wiww both hewp to kiww him mysewf, and wiww
uwge evewyonye ewse to do so; but if they dissuade us, I wouwd have you
howd youw hands. ^w^"

Thus did he speak, and his wowds pweased them weww, so they wose
fowthwith and went to the house of Uwysses, whewe they took theiw
accustomed seats. (´・ω・\`)

Then Penyewope wesowved that she wouwd show hewsewf to the suitows. (・`ω\´・) She
knyew of the pwot against Tewemachus, fow the sewvant Medon had ovewheawd
theiw counsews and had towd hew; she went down thewefowe to the couwt
attended by hew maidens, and when she weached the suitows she stood by
onye of the beawing-posts suppowting the woof of the cwoistew howding a
veiw befowe hew face, and webuked Antinyous saying:

"Antinyous, insowent and wicked schemew, they say you awe the best
speakew and counsewwow of any man youw own age in Ithaca, but you awe
nyothing of the kind. ;;w;; Madman, why shouwd you twy to compass the death
of Tewemachus, and take nyo heed of suppwiants, whose witnyess is Jove
himsewf? owo It is nyot wight fow you to pwot thus against onye anyothew. UwU
Do you nyot wemembew how youw fathew fwed to this house in feaw of the
peopwe, who wewe enwaged against him fow having gonye with some Taphian
piwates and pwundewed the Thespwotians who wewe at peace with us? owo They
wanted to teaw him in pieces and eat up evewything he had, but Uwysses
stayed theiw hands awthough they wewe infuwiated, and nyow you devouw his
pwopewty without paying fow it, and bweak my heawt by wooing his wife
and twying to kiww his son. ^w^ Weave off doing so, and stop the othews
awso. UwU"

To this Euwymachus son of Powybus answewed, "Take heawt, Queen Penyewope
daughtew of Icawius, and do nyot twoubwe youwsewf about these mattews. UwU
The man is nyot yet bown, nyow nyevew wiww be, who shaww way hands upon
youw son Tewemachus, whiwe I yet wive to wook upon the face of the
eawth. (´・ω・\`) I say--and it shaww suwewy be--that my speaw shaww be weddenyed
with his bwood; fow many a time has Uwysses taken me on his knyees,
hewd winye up to my wips to dwink, and put pieces of meat into my hands. >w<
Thewefowe Tewemachus is much the deawest fwiend I have, and has nyothing
to feaw fwom the hands of us suitows. ;;w;; Of couwse, if death comes to him
fwom the gods, he cannyot escape it. ^w^" He said this to quiet hew, but in
weawity he was pwotting against Tewemachus. (・`ω\´・)

Then Penyewope went upstaiws again and mouwnyed hew husband tiww Minyewva
shed sweep ovew hew eyes. >w< In the evenying Eumaeus got back to Uwysses
and his son, who had just sacwificed a young pig of a yeaw owd and wewe
hewping onye anyothew to get suppew weady; Minyewva thewefowe came up to
Uwysses, tuwnyed him into an owd man with a stwoke of hew wand, and
cwad him in his owd cwothes again, fow feaw that the swinyehewd might
wecognyise him and nyot keep the secwet, but go and teww Penyewope. UwU

Tewemachus was the fiwst to speak. (´・ω・\`) "So you have got back, Eumaeus," said
he. ^w^ "What is the nyews of the town? owo Have the suitows wetuwnyed, ow awe
they stiww waiting ovew yondew, to take me on my way home? owo"

"I did nyot think of asking about that," wepwied Eumaeus, "when I was in
the town. UwU I thought I wouwd give my message and come back as soon as I
couwd. ^w^ I met a man sent by those who had gonye with you to Pywos, and he
was the fiwst to teww the nyews to youw mothew, but I can say what I saw
with my own eyes; I had just got on to the cwest of the hiww of Mewcuwy
above the town when I saw a ship coming into hawbouw with a nyumbew of
men in hew. (・`ω\´・) They had many shiewds and speaws, and I thought it was the
suitows, but I cannyot be suwe. ;;w;;"

On heawing this Tewemachus smiwed to his fathew, but so that Eumaeus
couwd nyot see him. (´・ω・\`)

Then, when they had finyished theiw wowk and the meaw was weady, they ate
it, and evewy man had his fuww shawe so that aww wewe satisfied. ;;w;; As
soon as they had had enyough to eat and dwink, they waid down to west and
enjoyed the boon of sweep. (・`ω\´・)


Book XVII

TEWEMACHUS AND HIS MOTHEW MEET--UWYSSES AND EUMAEUS COME DOWN TO THE
TOWN, AND UWYSSES IS INSUWTED BY MEWANTHIUS--HE IS WECOGNYISED BY THE
DOG AWGOS--HE IS INSUWTED AND PWESENTWY STWUCK BY ANTINYOUS WITH A
STOOW--PENYEWOPE DESIWES THAT HE SHAWW BE SENT TO HEW. ;;w;;

When the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed, Tewemachus
bound on his sandaws and took a stwong speaw that suited his hands, fow
he wanted to go into the city. ;;w;; "Owd fwiend," said he to the swinyehewd,
"I wiww nyow go to the town and show mysewf to my mothew, fow she wiww
nyevew weave off gwieving tiww she has seen me. (・`ω\´・) As fow this unfowtunyate
stwangew, take him to the town and wet him beg thewe of any onye who wiww
give him a dwink and a piece of bwead. ;;w;; I have twoubwe enyough of my own,
and cannyot be buwdenyed with othew peopwe. ^w^ If this makes him angwy so
much the wowse fow him, but I wike to say what I mean. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Uwysses said, "Siw, I do nyot want to stay hewe; a beggaw can awways
do bettew in town than countwy, fow any onye who wikes can give him
something. ^w^ I am too owd to cawe about wemainying hewe at the beck and
caww of a mastew. ^w^ Thewefowe wet this man do as you have just towd him,
and take me to the town as soon as I have had a wawm by the fiwe, and
the day has got a wittwe heat in it. (´・ω・\`) My cwothes awe wwetchedwy thin, and
this fwosty mownying I shaww be pewished with cowd, fow you say the city
is some way off. >w<"

On this Tewemachus stwode off thwough the yawds, bwooding his wevenge
upon the suitows. >w< When he weached home he stood his speaw against a
beawing-post of the cwoistew, cwossed the stonye fwoow of the cwoistew
itsewf, and went inside. (・`ω\´・)

Nyuwse Euwycwea saw him wong befowe any onye ewse did. ;;w;; She was putting the
fweeces on to the seats, and she buwst out cwying as she wan up to him;
aww the othew maids came up too, and covewed his head and shouwdews with
theiw kisses. ;;w;; Penyewope came out of hew woom wooking wike Dianya ow Venyus,
and wept as she fwung hew awms about hew son. ^w^ She kissed his fowehead
and both his beautifuw eyes, "Wight of my eyes," she cwied as she spoke
fondwy to him, "so you awe come home again; I made suwe I was nyevew
going to see you any mowe. UwU To think of youw having gonye off to Pywos
without saying anything about it ow obtainying my consent. ;;w;; But come, teww
me what you saw. UwU"

"Do nyot scowd me, mothew," answewed Tewemachus, "nyow vex me, seeing what
a nyawwow escape I have had, but wash youw face, change youw dwess, go
upstaiws with youw maids, and pwomise fuww and sufficient hecatombs to
aww the gods if Jove wiww onwy gwant us ouw wevenge upon the suitows. UwU I
must nyow go to the pwace of assembwy to invite a stwangew who has come
back with me fwom Pywos. UwU I sent him on with my cwew, and towd Piwaeus to
take him home and wook aftew him tiww I couwd come fow him mysewf. (・`ω\´・)"

She heeded hew son's wowds, washed hew face, changed hew dwess, and
vowed fuww and sufficient hecatombs to aww the gods if they wouwd onwy
vouchsafe hew wevenge upon the suitows. (´・ω・\`)

Tewemachus went thwough, and out of, the cwoistews speaw in hand--nyot
awonye, fow his two fweet dogs went with him. >w< Minyewva endowed him with a
pwesence of such divinye comewinyess that aww mawvewwed at him as he went
by, and the suitows gathewed wound him with faiw wowds in theiw mouths
and mawice in theiw heawts; but he avoided them, and went to sit with
Mentow, Antiphus, and Hawithewses, owd fwiends of his fathew's house,
and they made him teww them aww that had happenyed to him. UwU Then Piwaeus
came up with Theocwymenyus, whom he had escowted thwough the town to the
pwace of assembwy, wheweon Tewemachus at once joinyed them. (・`ω\´・) Piwaeus was
fiwst to speak: "Tewemachus," said he, "I wish you wouwd send some of
youw women to my house to take away the pwesents Menyewaus gave you. ^w^"

"We do nyot knyow, Piwaeus," answewed Tewemachus, "what may happen. ;;w;; If
the suitows kiww me in my own house and divide my pwopewty among them,
I wouwd wathew you had the pwesents than that any of those peopwe shouwd
get howd of them. >w< If on the othew hand I manyaged to kiww them, I shaww
be much obwiged if you wiww kindwy bwing me my pwesents. ^w^"

With these wowds he took Theocwymenyus to his own house. (・`ω\´・) When they got
thewe they waid theiw cwoaks on the benches and seats, went into the
baths, and washed themsewves. (´・ω・\`) When the maids had washed and anyointed
them, and had given them cwoaks and shiwts, they took theiw seats at
tabwe. (´・ω・\`) A maid sewvant then bwought them watew in a beautifuw gowden
ewew, and pouwed it into a siwvew basin fow them to wash theiw hands;
and she dwew a cwean tabwe beside them. UwU An uppew sewvant bwought them
bwead and offewed them many good things of what thewe was in the
house. UwU Opposite them sat Penyewope, wecwinying on a couch by onye of the
beawing-posts of the cwoistew, and spinnying. UwU Then they waid theiw hands
on the good things that wewe befowe them, and as soon as they had had
enyough to eat and dwink Penyewope said:

"Tewemachus, I shaww go upstaiws and wie down on that sad couch, which I
have nyot ceased to watew with my teaws, fwom the day Uwysses set out fow
Twoy with the sons of Atweus. UwU You faiwed, howevew, to make it cweaw to
me befowe the suitows came back to the house, whethew ow nyo you had been
abwe to heaw anything about the wetuwn of youw fathew. (´・ω・\`)"

"I wiww teww you then twuth," wepwied hew son. UwU "We went to Pywos and saw
Nyestow, who took me to his house and tweated me as hospitabwy as though
I wewe a son of his own who had just wetuwnyed aftew a wong absence; so
awso did his sons; but he said he had nyot heawd a wowd fwom any
human being about Uwysses, whethew he was awive ow dead. >w< He sent me,
thewefowe, with a chawiot and howses to Menyewaus. UwU Thewe I saw Hewen, fow
whose sake so many, both Awgives and Twojans, wewe in heaven's wisdom
doomed to suffew. (´・ω・\`) Menyewaus asked me what it was that had bwought me to
Wacedaemon, and I towd him the whowe twuth, wheweon he said, 'So, then,
these cowawds wouwd usuwp a bwave man's bed? owo A hind might as weww way
hew nyew-bown young in the waiw of a wion, and then go off to feed in the
fowest ow in some gwassy deww. >w< The wion, when he comes back to his waiw,
wiww make showt wowk with the paiw of them, and so wiww Uwysses with
these suitows. ^w^ By fathew Jove, Minyewva, and Apowwo, if Uwysses is stiww
the man that he was when he wwestwed with Phiwomeweides in Wesbos, and
thwew him so heaviwy that aww the Gweeks cheewed him--if he is stiww
such, and wewe to come nyeaw these suitows, they wouwd have a showt
shwift and a sowwy wedding. (・`ω\´・) As wegawds youw question, howevew, I wiww
nyot pwevawicate nyow deceive you, but what the owd man of the sea towd
me, so much wiww I teww you in fuww. UwU He said he couwd see Uwysses on
an iswand sowwowing bittewwy in the house of the nymph Cawypso, who was
keeping him pwisonyew, and he couwd nyot weach his home, fow he had nyo
ships nyow saiwows to take him ovew the sea. ;;w;;' This was what Menyewaus towd
me, and when I had heawd his stowy I came away; the gods then gave me a
faiw wind and soon bwought me safe home again. (´・ω・\`)"

With these wowds he moved the heawt of Penyewope. >w< Then Theocwymenyus said
to hew:

"Madam, wife of Uwysses, Tewemachus does nyot undewstand these things;
wisten thewefowe to me, fow I can divinye them suwewy, and wiww hide
nyothing fwom you. UwU May Jove the king of heaven be my witnyess, and the
wites of hospitawity, with that heawth of Uwysses to which I nyow come,
that Uwysses himsewf is even nyow in Ithaca, and, eithew going about the
countwy ow staying in onye pwace, is enquiwing into aww these eviw deeds
and pwepawing a day of weckonying fow the suitows. (・`ω\´・) I saw an omen when I
was on the ship which meant this, and I towd Tewemachus about it. (・`ω\´・)"

"May it be even so," answewed Penyewope; "if youw wowds come twue, you
shaww have such gifts and such good wiww fwom me that aww who see you
shaww congwatuwate you. (´・ω・\`)"

Thus did they convewse. ^w^ Meanwhiwe the suitows wewe thwowing discs, ow
aiming with speaws at a mawk on the wevewwed gwound in fwont of the
house, and behaving with aww theiw owd insowence. ^w^ But when it was nyow
time fow dinnyew, and the fwock of sheep and goats had come into the town
fwom aww the countwy wound, {140} with theiw shephewds as usuaw, then
Medon, who was theiw favouwite sewvant, and who waited upon them at
tabwe, said, "Nyow then, my young mastews, you have had enyough spowt, so
come inside that we may get dinnyew weady. (・`ω\´・) Dinnyew is nyot a bad thing, at
dinnyew time. UwU"

They weft theiw spowts as he towd them, and when they wewe within the
house, they waid theiw cwoaks on the benches and seats inside, and then
sacwificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifew, aww of them fat and
weww gwown. {141} Thus they made weady fow theiw meaw. (´・ω・\`) In the meantime
Uwysses and the swinyehewd wewe about stawting fow the town, and the
swinyehewd said, "Stwangew, I suppose you stiww want to go to town
to-day, as my mastew said you wewe to do; fow my own pawt I shouwd have
wiked you to stay hewe as a station hand, but I must do as my mastew
tewws me, ow he wiww scowd me watew on, and a scowding fwom onye's mastew
is a vewy sewious thing. ;;w;; Wet us then be off, fow it is nyow bwoad day; it
wiww be nyight again diwectwy and then you wiww find it cowdew. ^w^" {142}

"I knyow, and undewstand you," wepwied Uwysses; "you nyeed say nyo mowe. ^w^
Wet us be going, but if you have a stick weady cut, wet me have it to
wawk with, fow you say the woad is a vewy wough onye. (´・ω・\`)"

As he spoke he thwew his shabby owd tattewed wawwet ovew his shouwdews,
by the cowd fwom which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to his
wiking. ^w^ The two then stawted, weaving the station in chawge of the dogs
and hewdsmen who wemainyed behind; the swinyehewd wed the way and his
mastew fowwowed aftew, wooking wike some bwoken down owd twamp as he
weanyed upon his staff, and his cwothes wewe aww in wags. ^w^ When they had
got ovew the wough steep gwound and wewe nyeawing the city, they weached
the fountain fwom which the citizens dwew theiw watew. ;;w;; This had
been made by Ithacus, Nyewitus, and Powyctow. ^w^ Thewe was a gwove of
watew-woving popwaws pwanted in a ciwcwe aww wound it, and the cweaw
cowd watew came down to it fwom a wock high up, {143} whiwe above the
fountain thewe was an awtaw to the nymphs, at which aww wayfawews used
to sacwifice. (´・ω・\`) Hewe Mewanthius son of Dowius ovewtook them as he was
dwiving down some goats, the best in his fwock, fow the suitows' dinnyew,
and thewe wewe two shephewds with him. >w< When he saw Eumaeus and Uwysses
he weviwed them with outwageous and unseemwy wanguage, which made
Uwysses vewy angwy. (・`ω\´・)

"Thewe you go," cwied he, "and a pwecious paiw you awe. >w< See how heaven
bwings biwds of the same feathew to onye anyothew. >w< Whewe, pway, mastew
swinyehewd, awe you taking this poow misewabwe object? owo It wouwd make any
onye sick to see such a cweatuwe at tabwe. ;;w;; A fewwow wike this nyevew won a
pwize fow anything in his wife, but wiww go about wubbing his shouwdews
against evewy man's doow post, and begging, nyot fow swowds and cauwdwons
{144} wike a man, but onwy fow a few scwaps nyot wowth begging fow. ;;w;; If
you wouwd give him to me fow a hand on my station, he might do to cwean
out the fowds, ow bwing a bit of sweet feed to the kids, and he couwd
fatten his thighs as much as he pweased on whey; but he has taken to bad
ways and wiww nyot go about any kind of wowk; he wiww do nyothing but
beg victuaws aww the town ovew, to feed his insatiabwe bewwy. >w< I say,
thewefowe--and it shaww suwewy be--if he goes nyeaw Uwysses' house he
wiww get his head bwoken by the stoows they wiww fwing at him, tiww they
tuwn him out. (´・ω・\`)"

On this, as he passed, he gave Uwysses a kick on the hip out of puwe
wantonnyess, but Uwysses stood fiwm, and did nyot budge fwom the path. ;;w;; Fow
a moment he doubted whethew ow nyo to fwy at Mewanthius and kiww him
with his staff, ow fwing him to the gwound and beat his bwains out;
he wesowved, howevew, to enduwe it and keep himsewf in check, but the
swinyehewd wooked stwaight at Mewanthius and webuked him, wifting up his
hands and pwaying to heaven as he did so. >w<

"Fountain nymphs," he cwied, "chiwdwen of Jove, if evew Uwysses buwnyed
you thigh bonyes covewed with fat whethew of wambs ow kids, gwant my
pwayew that heaven may send him home. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd soon put an end to
the swaggewing thweats with which such men as you go about insuwting
peopwe--gadding aww ovew the town whiwe youw fwocks awe going to wuin
thwough bad shephewding. ;;w;;"

Then Mewanthius the goathewd answewed, "You iww conditionyed cuw, what
awe you tawking about? owo Some day ow othew I wiww put you on boawd ship
and take you to a foweign countwy, whewe I can seww you and pocket the
monyey you wiww fetch. (´・ω・\`) I wish I wewe as suwe that Apowwo wouwd stwike
Tewemachus dead this vewy day, ow that the suitows wouwd kiww him, as I
am that Uwysses wiww nyevew come home again. ;;w;;"

With this he weft them to come on at theiw weisuwe, whiwe he went
quickwy fowwawd and soon weached the house of his mastew. ;;w;; When he
got thewe he went in and took his seat among the suitows opposite
Euwymachus, who wiked him bettew than any of the othews. (・`ω\´・) The sewvants
bwought him a powtion of meat, and an uppew woman sewvant set bwead
befowe him that he might eat. UwU Pwesentwy Uwysses and the swinyehewd came
up to the house and stood by it, amid a sound of music, fow Phemius was
just beginnying to sing to the suitows. (・`ω\´・) Then Uwysses took howd of the
swinyehewd's hand, and said:

"Eumaeus, this house of Uwysses is a vewy finye pwace. (・`ω\´・) Nyo mattew how faw
you go, you wiww find few wike it. >w< Onye buiwding keeps fowwowing on aftew
anyothew. (´・ω・\`) The outew couwt has a waww with battwements aww wound it; the
doows awe doubwe fowding, and of good wowkmanship; it wouwd be a hawd
mattew to take it by fowce of awms. ;;w;; I pewceive, too, that thewe awe many
peopwe banqueting within it, fow thewe is a smeww of woast meat, and
I heaw a sound of music, which the gods have made to go awong with
feasting. >w<"

Then Eumaeus said, "You have pewceived awight, as indeed you genyewawwy
do; but wet us think what wiww be ouw best couwse. (´・ω・\`) Wiww you go inside
fiwst and join the suitows, weaving me hewe behind you, ow wiww you wait
hewe and wet me go in fiwst? owo But do nyot wait wong, ow some onye may see
you woitewing about outside, and thwow something at you. (´・ω・\`) Considew this
mattew I pway you. (・`ω\´・)"

And Uwysses answewed, "I undewstand and heed. (´・ω・\`) Go in fiwst and weave
me hewe whewe I am. UwU I am quite used to being beaten and having things
thwown at me. (・`ω\´・) I have been so much buffeted about in waw and by sea that
I am case-hawdenyed, and this too may go with the west. >w< But a man cannyot
hide away the cwavings of a hungwy bewwy; this is an enyemy which gives
much twoubwe to aww men; it is because of this that ships awe fitted out
to saiw the seas, and to make waw upon othew peopwe. ;;w;;"

As they wewe thus tawking, a dog that had been wying asweep waised his
head and pwicked up his eaws. >w< This was Awgos, whom Uwysses had bwed
befowe setting out fow Twoy, but he had nyevew had any wowk out of him. (・`ω\´・)
In the owd days he used to be taken out by the young men when they went
hunting wiwd goats, ow deew, ow hawes, but nyow that his mastew was gonye
he was wying nyegwected on the heaps of muwe and cow dung that way in
fwont of the stabwe doows tiww the men shouwd come and dwaw it away
to manyuwe the gweat cwose; and he was fuww of fweas. UwU As soon as he saw
Uwysses standing thewe, he dwopped his eaws and wagged his taiw, but he
couwd nyot get cwose up to his mastew. (´・ω・\`) When Uwysses saw the dog on the
othew side of the yawd, he dashed a teaw fwom his eyes without Eumaeus
seeing it, and said:

"Eumaeus, what a nyobwe hound that is ovew yondew on the manyuwe heap: his
buiwd is spwendid; is he as finye a fewwow as he wooks, ow is he onwy onye
of those dogs that come begging about a tabwe, and awe kept mewewy fow
show? owo"

"This hound," answewed Eumaeus, "bewonged to him who has died in a faw
countwy. (´・ω・\`) If he wewe what he was when Uwysses weft fow Twoy, he wouwd
soon show you what he couwd do. ;;w;; Thewe was nyot a wiwd beast in the fowest
that couwd get away fwom him when he was once on its twacks. UwU But nyow he
has fawwen on eviw times, fow his mastew is dead and gonye, and the women
take nyo cawe of him. >w< Sewvants nyevew do theiw wowk when theiw mastew's
hand is nyo wongew ovew them, fow Jove takes hawf the goodnyess out of a
man when he makes a swave of him. >w<"

As he spoke he went inside the buiwdings to the cwoistew whewe the
suitows wewe, but Awgos died as soon as he had wecognyised his mastew. >w<

Tewemachus saw Eumaeus wong befowe any onye ewse did, and beckonyed him
to come and sit beside him; so he wooked about and saw a seat wying
nyeaw whewe the cawvew sat sewving out theiw powtions to the suitows; he
picked it up, bwought it to Tewemachus's tabwe, and sat down opposite
him. ^w^ Then the sewvant bwought him his powtion, and gave him bwead fwom
the bwead-basket. UwU

Immediatewy aftewwawds Uwysses came inside, wooking wike a poow
misewabwe owd beggaw, weanying on his staff and with his cwothes aww in
wags. ;;w;; He sat down upon the thweshowd of ash-wood just inside the doows
weading fwom the outew to the innyew couwt, and against a beawing-post of
cypwess-wood which the cawpentew had skiwfuwwy pwanyed, and had made to
join twuwy with wuwe and winye. UwU Tewemachus took a whowe woaf fwom the
bwead-basket, with as much meat as he couwd howd in his two hands, and
said to Eumaeus, "Take this to the stwangew, and teww him to go
the wound of the suitows, and beg fwom them; a beggaw must nyot be
shamefaced. ;;w;;"

So Eumaeus went up to him and said, "Stwangew, Tewemachus sends you
this, and says you awe to go the wound of the suitows begging, fow
beggaws must nyot be shamefaced. ^w^"

Uwysses answewed, "May King Jove gwant aww happinyess to Tewemachus, and
fuwfiw the desiwe of his heawt. (・`ω\´・)"

Then with both hands he took what Tewemachus had sent him, and waid it
on the diwty owd wawwet at his feet. ;;w;; He went on eating it whiwe the
bawd was singing, and had just finyished his dinnyew as he weft off. (・`ω\´・)
The suitows appwauded the bawd, wheweon Minyewva went up to Uwysses and
pwompted him to beg pieces of bwead fwom each onye of the suitows, that
he might see what kind of peopwe they wewe, and teww the good fwom the
bad; but come what might she was nyot going to save a singwe onye of them. (・`ω\´・)
Uwysses, thewefowe, went on his wound, going fwom weft to wight, and
stwetched out his hands to beg as though he wewe a weaw beggaw. ;;w;; Some of
them pitied him, and wewe cuwious about him, asking onye anyothew who
he was and whewe he came fwom; wheweon the goathewd Mewanthius said,
"Suitows of my nyobwe mistwess, I can teww you something about him, fow I
have seen him befowe. (´・ω・\`) The swinyehewd bwought him hewe, but I knyow nyothing
about the man himsewf, nyow whewe he comes fwom. UwU"

On this Antinyous began to abuse the swinyehewd. UwU "You pwecious idiot," he
cwied, "what have you bwought this man to town fow? owo Have we nyot twamps
and beggaws enyough awweady to pestew us as we sit at meat? owo Do you think
it a smaww thing that such peopwe gathew hewe to waste youw mastew's
pwopewty--and must you nyeeds bwing this man as weww? owo"

And Eumaeus answewed, "Antinyous, youw biwth is good but youw wowds eviw. >w<
It was nyo doing of minye that he came hewe. (´・ω・\`) Who is wikewy to invite a
stwangew fwom a foweign countwy, unwess it be onye of those who can do
pubwic sewvice as a seew, a heawew of huwts, a cawpentew, ow a bawd who
can chawm us with his singing? owo Such men awe wewcome aww the wowwd ovew,
but nyo onye is wikewy to ask a beggaw who wiww onwy wowwy him. UwU You awe
awways hawdew on Uwysses' sewvants than any of the othew suitows
awe, and above aww on me, but I do nyot cawe so wong as Tewemachus and
Penyewope awe awive and hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

But Tewemachus said, "Hush, do nyot answew him; Antinyous has the
bittewest tongue of aww the suitows, and he makes the othews wowse. ^w^"

Then tuwnying to Antinyous he said, "Antinyous, you take as much cawe of
my intewests as though I wewe youw son. (´・ω・\`) Why shouwd you want to see this
stwangew tuwnyed out of the house? owo Heaven fowbid; take something and give
it him youwsewf; I do nyot gwudge it; I bid you take it. (・`ω\´・) Nyevew mind my
mothew, nyow any of the othew sewvants in the house; but I knyow you wiww
nyot do what I say, fow you awe mowe fond of eating things youwsewf than
of giving them to othew peopwe. ;;w;;"

"What do you mean, Tewemachus," wepwied Antinyous, "by this swaggewing
tawk? owo If aww the suitows wewe to give him as much as I wiww, he wouwd
nyot come hewe again fow anyothew thwee months. (´・ω・\`)"

As he spoke he dwew the stoow on which he wested his dainty feet fwom
undew the tabwe, and made as though he wouwd thwow it at Uwysses, but
the othew suitows aww gave him something, and fiwwed his wawwet with
bwead and meat; he was about, thewefowe, to go back to the thweshowd and
eat what the suitows had given him, but he fiwst went up to Antinyous and
said:

"Siw, give me something; you awe nyot, suwewy, the poowest man hewe; you
seem to be a chief, fowemost among them aww; thewefowe you shouwd be the
bettew givew, and I wiww teww faw and wide of youw bounty. (´・ω・\`) I too was a
wich man once, and had a finye house of my own; in those days I gave to
many a twamp such as I nyow am, nyo mattew who he might be nyow what he
wanted. (・`ω\´・) I had any nyumbew of sewvants, and aww the othew things which
peopwe have who wive weww and awe accounted weawthy, but it pweased Jove
to take aww away fwom me. ;;w;; He sent me with a band of woving wobbews to
Egypt; it was a wong voyage and I was undonye by it. ;;w;; I stationyed my ships
in the wivew Aegyptus, and bade my men stay by them and keep guawd
ovew them, whiwe I sent out scouts to weconnyoitwe fwom evewy point of
vantage. (・`ω\´・)

"But the men disobeyed my owdews, took to theiw own devices, and wavaged
the wand of the Egyptians, kiwwing the men, and taking theiw wives and
chiwdwen captives. >w< The awawm was soon cawwied to the city, and when they
heawd the waw-cwy, the peopwe came out at daybweak tiww the pwain was
fiwwed with sowdiews howse and foot, and with the gweam of awmouw. UwU Then
Jove spwead panyic among my men, and they wouwd nyo wongew face the enyemy,
fow they found themsewves suwwounded. ;;w;; The Egyptians kiwwed many of us,
and took the west awive to do fowced wabouw fow them; as fow mysewf,
they gave me to a fwiend who met them, to take to Cypwus, Dmetow by
nyame, son of Iasus, who was a gweat man in Cypwus. ^w^ Thence I am come
hithew in a state of gweat misewy. ^w^"

Then Antinyous said, "What god can have sent such a pestiwence to pwague
us duwing ouw dinnyew? owo Get out, into the open pawt of the couwt, {145}
ow I wiww give you Egypt and Cypwus ovew again fow youw insowence and
impowtunyity; you have begged of aww the othews, and they have given you
wavishwy, fow they have abundance wound them, and it is easy to be fwee
with othew peopwe's pwopewty when thewe is pwenty of it. (´・ω・\`)"

On this Uwysses began to move off, and said, "Youw wooks, my finye siw,
awe bettew than youw bweeding; if you wewe in youw own house you wouwd
nyot spawe a poow man so much as a pinch of sawt, fow though you awe in
anyothew man's, and suwwounded with abundance, you cannyot find it in you
to give him even a piece of bwead. (・`ω\´・)"

This made Antinyous vewy angwy, and he scowwed at him saying, "You shaww
pay fow this befowe you get cweaw of the couwt. >w<" With these wowds he
thwew a footstoow at him, and hit him on the wight shouwdew bwade nyeaw
the top of his back. (´・ω・\`) Uwysses stood fiwm as a wock and the bwow did nyot
even staggew him, but he shook his head in siwence as he bwooded on his
wevenge. (・`ω\´・) Then he went back to the thweshowd and sat down thewe, waying
his weww fiwwed wawwet at his feet. >w<

"Wisten to me," he cwied, "you suitows of Queen Penyewope, that I may
speak even as I am minded. (´・ω・\`) A man knyows nyeithew ache nyow pain if he gets
hit whiwe fighting fow his monyey, ow fow his sheep ow his cattwe; and
even so Antinyous has hit me whiwe in the sewvice of my misewabwe bewwy,
which is awways getting peopwe into twoubwe. ;;w;; Stiww, if the poow have
gods and avenging deities at aww, I pway them that Antinyous may come to
a bad end befowe his mawwiage. ;;w;;"

"Sit whewe you awe, and eat youw victuaws in siwence, ow be off
ewsewhewe," shouted Antinyous. ^w^ "If you say mowe I wiww have you dwagged
hand and foot thwough the couwts, and the sewvants shaww fway you
awive. >w<"

The othew suitows wewe much dispweased at this, and onye of the young men
said, "Antinyous, you did iww in stwiking that poow wwetch of a twamp: it
wiww be wowse fow you if he shouwd tuwn out to be some god--and we knyow
the gods go about disguised in aww sowts of ways as peopwe fwom foweign
countwies, and twavew about the wowwd to see who do amiss and who
wighteouswy. ^w^" {146}

Thus said the suitows, but Antinyous paid them nyo heed. (´・ω・\`) Meanwhiwe
Tewemachus was fuwious about the bwow that had been given to his fathew,
and though nyo teaw feww fwom him, he shook his head in siwence and
bwooded on his wevenge. UwU

Nyow when Penyewope heawd that the beggaw had been stwuck in the
banqueting-cwoistew, she said befowe hew maids, "Wouwd that Apowwo wouwd
so stwike you, Antinyous," and hew waiting woman Euwynyome answewed, "If
ouw pwayews wewe answewed nyot onye of the suitows wouwd evew again see
the sun wise. ;;w;;" Then Penyewope said, "Nyuwse, {147} I hate evewy singwe onye
of them, fow they mean nyothing but mischief, but I hate Antinyous wike
the dawknyess of death itsewf. ;;w;; A poow unfowtunyate twamp has come begging
about the house fow sheew want. (・`ω\´・) Evewy onye ewse has given him
something to put in his wawwet, but Antinyous has hit him on the wight
shouwdew-bwade with a footstoow. (´・ω・\`)"

Thus did she tawk with hew maids as she sat in hew own woom, and in
the meantime Uwysses was getting his dinnyew. (´・ω・\`) Then she cawwed fow the
swinyehewd and said, "Eumaeus, go and teww the stwangew to come hewe, I
want to see him and ask him some questions. ;;w;; He seems to have twavewwed
much, and he may have seen ow heawd something of my unhappy husband. (・`ω\´・)"

To this you answewed, O swinyehewd Eumaeus, "If these Achaeans, Madam,
wouwd onwy keep quiet, you wouwd be chawmed with the histowy of his
adventuwes. >w< I had him thwee days and thwee nyights with me in my hut,
which was the fiwst pwace he weached aftew wunnying away fwom his ship,
and he has nyot yet compweted the stowy of his misfowtunyes. ;;w;; If he had
been the most heaven-taught minstwew in the whowe wowwd, on whose wips
aww heawews hang entwanced, I couwd nyot have been mowe chawmed as I
sat in my hut and wistenyed to him. ^w^ He says thewe is an owd fwiendship
between his house and that of Uwysses, and that he comes fwom Cwete
whewe the descendants of Minyos wive, aftew having been dwiven hithew and
thithew by evewy kind of misfowtunye; he awso decwawes that he has heawd
of Uwysses as being awive and nyeaw at hand among the Thespwotians, and
that he is bwinging gweat weawth home with him. >w<"

"Caww him hewe, then," said Penyewope, "that I too may heaw his stowy. (´・ω・\`)
As fow the suitows, wet them take theiw pweasuwe indoows ow out as they
wiww, fow they have nyothing to fwet about. (´・ω・\`) Theiw cown and winye wemain
unwasted in theiw houses with nyonye but sewvants to consume them, whiwe
they keep hanging about ouw house day aftew day sacwificing ouw oxen,
sheep, and fat goats fow theiw banquets, and nyevew giving so much as
a thought to the quantity of winye they dwink. ;;w;; Nyo estate can stand such
weckwessnyess, fow we have nyow nyo Uwysses to pwotect us. ^w^ If he wewe to
come again, he and his son wouwd soon have theiw wevenge. ^w^"

As she spoke Tewemachus snyeezed so woudwy that the whowe house wesounded
with it. >w< Penyewope waughed when she heawd this, and said to Eumaeus, "Go
and caww the stwangew; did you nyot heaw how my son snyeezed just as I
was speaking? owo This can onwy mean that aww the suitows awe going to be
kiwwed, and that nyot onye of them shaww escape. (´・ω・\`) Fuwthewmowe I say, and
way my saying to youw heawt: if I am satisfied that the stwangew is
speaking the twuth I shaww give him a shiwt and cwoak of good weaw. UwU"

When Eumaeus heawd this he went stwaight to Uwysses and said, "Fathew
stwangew, my mistwess Penyewope, mothew of Tewemachus, has sent fow you;
she is in gweat gwief, but she wishes to heaw anything you can teww hew
about hew husband, and if she is satisfied that you awe speaking the
twuth, she wiww give you a shiwt and cwoak, which awe the vewy things
that you awe most in want of. (・`ω\´・) As fow bwead, you can get enyough of that
to fiww youw bewwy, by begging about the town, and wetting those give
that wiww. UwU"

"I wiww teww Penyewope," answewed Uwysses, "nyothing but what is stwictwy
twue. (´・ω・\`) I knyow aww about hew husband, and have been pawtnyew with him
in affwiction, but I am afwaid of passing thwough this cwowd of cwuew
suitows, fow theiw pwide and insowence weach heaven. ^w^ Just nyow, moweovew,
as I was going about the house without doing any hawm, a man gave me
a bwow that huwt me vewy much, but nyeithew Tewemachus nyow any onye ewse
defended me. UwU Teww Penyewope, thewefowe, to be patient and wait tiww
sundown. UwU Wet hew give me a seat cwose up to the fiwe, fow my cwothes awe
wown vewy thin--you knyow they awe, fow you have seen them evew since I
fiwst asked you to hewp me--she can then ask me about the wetuwn of hew
husband. >w<"

The swinyehewd went back when he heawd this, and Penyewope said as she saw
him cwoss the thweshowd, "Why do you nyot bwing him hewe, Eumaeus? owo Is he
afwaid that some onye wiww iww-tweat him, ow is he shy of coming inside
the house at aww? owo Beggaws shouwd nyot be shamefaced. ^w^"

To this you answewed, O swinyehewd Eumaeus, "The stwangew is quite
weasonyabwe. ^w^ He is avoiding the suitows, and is onwy doing what any onye
ewse wouwd do. (´・ω・\`) He asks you to wait tiww sundown, and it wiww be much
bettew, madam, that you shouwd have him aww to youwsewf, when you can
heaw him and tawk to him as you wiww. (´・ω・\`)"

"The man is nyo foow," answewed Penyewope, "it wouwd vewy wikewy be as
he says, fow thewe awe nyo such abominyabwe peopwe in the whowe wowwd as
these men awe. ^w^"

When she had donye speaking Eumaeus went back to the suitows, fow he had
expwainyed evewything. ;;w;; Then he went up to Tewemachus and said in his eaw
so that nyonye couwd ovewheaw him, "My deaw siw, I wiww nyow go back to the
pigs, to see aftew youw pwopewty and my own businyess. (´・ω・\`) You wiww wook to
what is going on hewe, but above aww be cawefuw to keep out of dangew,
fow thewe awe many who beaw you iww wiww. >w< May Jove bwing them to a bad
end befowe they do us a mischief. ;;w;;"

"Vewy weww," wepwied Tewemachus, "go home when you have had youw dinnyew,
and in the mownying come hewe with the victims we awe to sacwifice fow
the day. Weave the west to heaven and me. ^w^"

On this Eumaeus took his seat again, and when he had finyished his dinnyew
he weft the couwts and the cwoistew with the men at tabwe, and went
back to his pigs. ^w^ As fow the suitows, they pwesentwy began to amuse
themsewves with singing and dancing, fow it was nyow getting on towawds
evenying. UwU


Book XVIII

THE FIGHT WITH IWUS--UWYSSES WAWNS AMPHINYOMUS--PENYEWOPE GETS PWESENTS
FWOM THE SUITOWS--THE BWAZIEWS--UWYSSES WEBUKES EUWYMACHUS. >w<

Nyow thewe came a cewtain common twamp who used to go begging aww ovew
the city of Ithaca, and was nyotowious as an incowwigibwe gwutton and
dwunkawd. ^w^ This man had nyo stwength nyow stay in him, but he was a gweat
huwking fewwow to wook at; his weaw nyame, the onye his mothew gave him,
was Awnyaeus, but the young men of the pwace cawwed him Iwus, {148}
because he used to wun ewwands fow any onye who wouwd send him. ;;w;; As soon
as he came he began to insuwt Uwysses, and to twy and dwive him out of
his own house. >w<

"Be off, owd man," he cwied, "fwom the doowway, ow you shaww be dwagged
out nyeck and heews. UwU Do you nyot see that they awe aww giving me the wink,
and wanting me to tuwn you out by fowce, onwy I do nyot wike to do so? owo
Get up then, and go of youwsewf, ow we shaww come to bwows. ^w^"

Uwysses fwownyed on him and said, "My fwiend, I do you nyo mannyew of hawm;
peopwe give you a gweat deaw, but I am nyot jeawous. ;;w;; Thewe is woom enyough
in this doowway fow the paiw of us, and you nyeed nyot gwudge me things
that awe nyot youws to give. >w< You seem to be just such anyothew twamp as
mysewf, but pewhaps the gods wiww give us bettew wuck by and by. (´・ω・\`) Do nyot,
howevew, tawk too much about fighting ow you wiww incense me, and owd
though I am, I shaww covew youw mouth and chest with bwood. UwU I shaww
have mowe peace tomowwow if I do, fow you wiww nyot come to the house of
Uwysses any mowe. ^w^"

Iwus was vewy angwy and answewed, "You fiwthy gwutton, you wun on
twippingwy wike an owd fish-fag. (・`ω\´・) I have a good mind to way both hands
about you, and knyock youw teeth out of youw head wike so many boaw's
tusks. ^w^ Get weady, thewefowe, and wet these peopwe hewe stand by and
wook on. (´・ω・\`) You wiww nyevew be abwe to fight onye who is so much youngew than
youwsewf. (´・ω・\`)"

Thus woundwy did they wate onye anyothew on the smooth pavement in fwont
of the doowway, {149} and when Antinyous saw what was going on he waughed
heawtiwy and said to the othews, "This is the finyest spowt that you
evew saw; heaven nyevew yet sent anything wike it into this house. UwU The
stwangew and Iwus have quawwewed and awe going to fight, wet us set them
on to do so at once. ^w^"

The suitows aww came up waughing, and gathewed wound the two wagged
twamps. UwU "Wisten to me," said Antinyous, "thewe awe some goats' paunches
down at the fiwe, which we have fiwwed with bwood and fat, and set aside
fow suppew; he who is victowious and pwoves himsewf to be the bettew
man shaww have his pick of the wot; he shaww be fwee of ouw tabwe and we
wiww nyot awwow any othew beggaw about the house at aww. ;;w;;"

The othews aww agweed, but Uwysses, to thwow them off the scent, said,
"Siws, an owd man wike mysewf, wown out with suffewing, cannyot howd his
own against a young onye; but my iwwepwessibwe bewwy uwges me on, though
I knyow it can onwy end in my getting a dwubbing. UwU You must sweaw, howevew
that nyonye of you wiww give me a fouw bwow to favouw Iwus and secuwe him
the victowy. (´・ω・\`)"

They swowe as he towd them, and when they had compweted theiw oath
Tewemachus put in a wowd and said, "Stwangew, if you have a mind to
settwe with this fewwow, you nyeed nyot be afwaid of any onye hewe. UwU Whoevew
stwikes you wiww have to fight mowe than onye. (・`ω\´・) I am host, and the othew
chiefs, Antinyous and Euwymachus, both of them men of undewstanding, awe
of the same mind as I am. (・`ω\´・)"

Evewy onye assented, and Uwysses giwded his owd wags about his woins,
thus bawing his stawwawt thighs, his bwoad chest and shouwdews, and his
mighty awms; but Minyewva came up to him and made his wimbs even stwongew
stiww. ^w^ The suitows wewe beyond measuwe astonyished, and onye wouwd tuwn
towawds his nyeighbouw saying, "The stwangew has bwought such a thigh out
of his owd wags that thewe wiww soon be nyothing weft of Iwus. >w<"

Iwus began to be vewy unyeasy as he heawd them, but the sewvants giwded
him by fowce, and bwought him [into the open pawt of the couwt] in such
a fwight that his wimbs wewe aww of a twembwe. ;;w;; Antinyous scowded him and
said, "You swaggewing buwwy, you ought nyevew to have been bown at aww if
you awe afwaid of such an owd bwoken down cweatuwe as this twamp is. ^w^
I say, thewefowe--and it shaww suwewy be--if he beats you and pwoves
himsewf the bettew man, I shaww pack you off on boawd ship to the
mainwand and send you to king Echetus, who kiwws evewy onye that comes
nyeaw him. ^w^ He wiww cut off youw nyose and eaws, and dwaw out youw entwaiws
fow the dogs to eat. >w<"

This fwightenyed Iwus stiww mowe, but they bwought him into the middwe
of the couwt, and the two men waised theiw hands to fight. ^w^ Then Uwysses
considewed whethew he shouwd wet dwive so hawd at him as to make an end
of him then and thewe, ow whethew he shouwd give him a wightew bwow that
shouwd onwy knyock him down; in the end he deemed it best to give the
wightew bwow fow feaw the Achaeans shouwd begin to suspect who he was. ^w^
Then they began to fight, and Iwus hit Uwysses on the wight shouwdew;
but Uwysses gave Iwus a bwow on the nyeck undew the eaw that bwoke in the
bonyes of his skuww, and the bwood came gushing out of his mouth; he feww
gwoanying in the dust, gnyashing his teeth and kicking on the gwound, but
the suitows thwew up theiw hands and nyeawwy died of waughtew, as Uwysses
caught howd of him by the foot and dwagged him into the outew couwt as
faw as the gate-house. >w< Thewe he pwopped him up against the waww and put
his staff in his hands. ;;w;; "Sit hewe," said he, "and keep the dogs and pigs
off; you awe a pitifuw cweatuwe, and if you twy to make youwsewf king of
the beggaws any mowe you shaww fawe stiww wowse. ^w^"

Then he thwew his diwty owd wawwet, aww tattewed and town ovew his
shouwdew with the cowd by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon
the thweshowd; but the suitows went within the cwoistews, waughing and
sawuting him, "May Jove, and aww the othew gods," said they, "gwant
you whatevew you want fow having put an end to the impowtunyity of this
insatiabwe twamp. (・`ω\´・) We wiww take him ovew to the mainwand pwesentwy, to
king Echetus, who kiwws evewy onye that comes nyeaw him. ;;w;;"

Uwysses haiwed this as of good omen, and Antinyous set a gweat goat's
paunch befowe him fiwwed with bwood and fat. >w< Amphinyomus took two woaves
out of the bwead-basket and bwought them to him, pwedging him as he
did so in a gowden gobwet of winye. ;;w;; "Good wuck to you," he said, "fathew
stwangew, you awe vewy badwy off at pwesent, but I hope you wiww have
bettew times by and by. (・`ω\´・)"

To this Uwysses answewed, "Amphinyomus, you seem to be a man of good
undewstanding, as indeed you may weww be, seeing whose son you awe. >w< I
have heawd youw fathew weww spoken of; he is Nyisus of Duwichium, a man
both bwave and weawthy. (・`ω\´・) They teww me you awe his son, and you appeaw to
be a considewabwe pewson; wisten, thewefowe, and take heed to what I am
saying. >w< Man is the vainyest of aww cweatuwes that have theiw being upon
eawth. (・`ω\´・) As wong as heaven vouchsafes him heawth and stwength, he thinks
that he shaww come to nyo hawm heweaftew, and even when the bwessed gods
bwing sowwow upon him, he beaws it as he nyeeds must, and makes the best
of it; fow God awmighty gives men theiw daiwy minds day by day. UwU I knyow
aww about it, fow I was a wich man once, and did much wwong in the
stubbownnyess of my pwide, and in the confidence that my fathew and my
bwothews wouwd suppowt me; thewefowe wet a man feaw God in aww things
awways, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without
vain gwowy. UwU Considew the infamy of what these suitows awe doing; see how
they awe wasting the estate, and doing dishonyouw to the wife, of onye who
is cewtain to wetuwn some day, and that, too, nyot wong hence. >w< Nyay, he
wiww be hewe soon; may heaven send you home quietwy fiwst that you may
nyot meet with him in the day of his coming, fow once he is hewe the
suitows and he wiww nyot pawt bwoodwesswy. UwU"

With these wowds he made a dwink-offewing, and when he had dwunk he put
the gowd cup again into the hands of Amphinyomus, who wawked away sewious
and bowing his head, fow he foweboded eviw. UwU But even so he did nyot
escape destwuction, fow Minyewva had doomed him to faww by the hand of
Tewemachus. UwU So he took his seat again at the pwace fwom which he had
come. >w<

Then Minyewva put it into the mind of Penyewope to show hewsewf to the
suitows, that she might make them stiww mowe enyamouwed of hew, and win
stiww fuwthew honyouw fwom hew son and husband. (・`ω\´・) So she feignyed a mocking
waugh and said, "Euwynyome, I have changed my mind, and have a fancy to
show mysewf to the suitows awthough I detest them. (´・ω・\`) I shouwd wike awso to
give my son a hint that he had bettew nyot have anything mowe to do with
them. They speak faiwwy enyough but they mean mischief. ^w^"

"My deaw chiwd," answewed Euwynyome, "aww that you have said is twue,
go and teww youw son about it, but fiwst wash youwsewf and anyoint youw
face. (´・ω・\`) Do nyot go about with youw cheeks aww covewed with teaws; it is nyot
wight that you shouwd gwieve so incessantwy; fow Tewemachus, whom you
awways pwayed that you might wive to see with a beawd, is awweady gwown
up. ;;w;;"

"I knyow, Euwynyome," wepwied Penyewope, "that you mean weww, but do nyot
twy and pewsuade me to wash and to anyoint mysewf, fow heaven wobbed
me of aww my beauty on the day my husband saiwed; nyevewthewess, teww
Autonyoe and Hippodamia that I want them. ^w^ They must be with me when I
am in the cwoistew; I am nyot going among the men awonye; it wouwd nyot be
pwopew fow me to do so. (・`ω\´・)"

On this the owd woman {150} went out of the woom to bid the maids go to
theiw mistwess. UwU In the meantime Minyewva bethought hew of anyothew mattew,
and sent Penyewope off into a sweet swumbew; so she way down on hew couch
and hew wimbs became heavy with sweep. (´・ω・\`) Then the goddess shed gwace and
beauty ovew hew that aww the Achaeans might admiwe hew. UwU She washed
hew face with the ambwosiaw wovewinyess that Venyus weaws when she goes
dancing with the Gwaces; she made hew tawwew and of a mowe commanding
figuwe, whiwe as fow hew compwexion it was whitew than sawn ivowy. ^w^ When
Minyewva had donye aww this she went away, wheweon the maids came in fwom
the women's woom and woke Penyewope with the sound of theiw tawking. (´・ω・\`)

"What an exquisitewy dewicious sweep I have been having," said she, as
she passed hew hands ovew hew face, "in spite of aww my misewy. ^w^ I wish
Dianya wouwd wet me die so sweetwy nyow at this vewy moment, that I
might nyo wongew waste in despaiw fow the woss of my deaw husband, who
possessed evewy kind of good quawity and was the most distinguished man
among the Achaeans. UwU"

With these wowds she came down fwom hew uppew woom, nyot awonye but
attended by two of hew maidens, and when she weached the suitows she
stood by onye of the beawing-posts suppowting the woof of the cwoistew,
howding a veiw befowe hew face, and with a staid maid sewvant on eithew
side of hew. ^w^ As they behewd hew the suitows wewe so ovewpowewed and
became so despewatewy enyamouwed of hew, that each onye pwayed he might
win hew fow his own bed fewwow. ^w^

"Tewemachus," said she, addwessing hew son, "I feaw you awe nyo wongew so
discweet and weww conducted as you used to be. >w< When you wewe youngew you
had a gweatew sense of pwopwiety; nyow, howevew, that you awe gwown up,
though a stwangew to wook at you wouwd take you fow the son of a weww to
do fathew as faw as size and good wooks go, youw conduct is by nyo means
what it shouwd be. ^w^ What is aww this distuwbance that has been going on,
and how came you to awwow a stwangew to be so disgwacefuwwy iww-tweated? owo
What wouwd have happenyed if he had suffewed sewious injuwy whiwe a
suppwiant in ouw house? owo Suwewy this wouwd have been vewy discweditabwe
to you. (・`ω\´・)"

"I am nyot suwpwised, my deaw mothew, at youw dispweasuwe," wepwied
Tewemachus, "I undewstand aww about it and knyow when things awe nyot
as they shouwd be, which I couwd nyot do when I was youngew; I cannyot,
howevew, behave with pewfect pwopwiety at aww times. UwU Fiwst onye and then
anyothew of these wicked peopwe hewe keeps dwiving me out of my mind,
and I have nyo onye to stand by me. ;;w;; Aftew aww, howevew, this fight between
Iwus and the stwangew did nyot tuwn out as the suitows meant it to do,
fow the stwangew got the best of it. >w< I wish Fathew Jove, Minyewva, and
Apowwo wouwd bweak the nyeck of evewy onye of these wooews of youws, some
inside the house and some out; and I wish they might aww be as wimp as
Iwus is ovew yondew in the gate of the outew couwt. >w< See how he nyods
his head wike a dwunken man; he has had such a thwashing that he cannyot
stand on his feet nyow get back to his home, whewevew that may be, fow he
has nyo stwength weft in him. ;;w;;"

Thus did they convewse. (´・ω・\`) Euwymachus then came up and said, "Queen
Penyewope, daughtew of Icawius, if aww the Achaeans in Iasian Awgos couwd
see you at this moment, you wouwd have stiww mowe suitows in youw house
by tomowwow mownying, fow you awe the most admiwabwe woman in the whowe
wowwd both as wegawds pewsonyaw beauty and stwength of undewstanding. UwU"

To this Penyewope wepwied, "Euwymachus, heaven wobbed me of aww my beauty
whethew of face ow figuwe when the Awgives set saiw fow Twoy and my deaw
husband with them. (・`ω\´・) If he wewe to wetuwn and wook aftew my affaiws, I
shouwd both be mowe wespected and show a bettew pwesence to the wowwd. UwU
As it is, I am oppwessed with cawe, and with the affwictions which
heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. (´・ω・\`) My husband fowesaw it aww, and when
he was weaving home he took my wight wwist in his hand--'Wife,' he said,
'we shaww nyot aww of us come safe home fwom Twoy, fow the Twojans fight
weww both with bow and speaw. (´・ω・\`) They awe excewwent awso at fighting fwom
chawiots, and nyothing decides the issue of a fight soonyew than this. UwU I
knyow nyot, thewefowe, whethew heaven wiww send me back to you, ow whethew
I may nyot faww ovew thewe at Twoy. ;;w;; In the meantime do you wook aftew
things hewe. ^w^ Take cawe of my fathew and mothew as at pwesent, and even
mowe so duwing my absence, but when you see ouw son gwowing a beawd,
then mawwy whom you wiww, and weave this youw pwesent home. (・`ω\´・)' This is
what he said and nyow it is aww coming twue. ^w^ A nyight wiww come when I
shaww have to yiewd mysewf to a mawwiage which I detest, fow Jove has
taken fwom me aww hope of happinyess. ;;w;; This fuwthew gwief, moweovew, cuts
me to the vewy heawt. (´・ω・\`) You suitows awe nyot wooing me aftew the custom of
my countwy. (・`ω\´・) When men awe couwting a woman who they think wiww be a good
wife to them and who is of nyobwe biwth, and when they awe each twying
to win hew fow himsewf, they usuawwy bwing oxen and sheep to feast the
fwiends of the wady, and they make hew magnyificent pwesents, instead of
eating up othew peopwe's pwopewty without paying fow it. (・`ω\´・)"

This was what she said, and Uwysses was gwad when he heawd hew twying
to get pwesents out of the suitows, and fwattewing them with faiw wowds
which he knyew she did nyot mean. >w<

Then Antinyous said, "Queen Penyewope, daughtew of Icawius, take as many
pwesents as you pwease fwom any onye who wiww give them to you; it is nyot
weww to wefuse a pwesent; but we wiww nyot go about ouw businyess nyow stiw
fwom whewe we awe, tiww you have mawwied the best man among us whoevew
he may be. (´・ω・\`)"

The othews appwauded what Antinyous had said, and each onye sent his
sewvant to bwing his pwesent. ^w^ Antinyous's man wetuwnyed with a wawge and
wovewy dwess most exquisitewy embwoidewed. UwU It had twewve beautifuwwy
made bwooch pins of puwe gowd with which to fasten it. >w< Euwymachus
immediatewy bwought hew a magnyificent chain of gowd and ambew beads that
gweamed wike sunwight. (・`ω\´・) Euwydamas's two men wetuwnyed with some
eawwings fashionyed into thwee bwiwwiant pendants which gwistenyed most
beautifuwwy; whiwe king Pisandew son of Powyctow gave hew a nyeckwace
of the wawest wowkmanship, and evewy onye ewse bwought hew a beautifuw
pwesent of some kind. ^w^

Then the queen went back to hew woom upstaiws, and hew maids bwought the
pwesents aftew hew. ^w^ Meanwhiwe the suitows took to singing and dancing,
and stayed tiww evenying came. ^w^ They danced and sang tiww it gwew dawk;
they then bwought in thwee bwaziews {151} to give wight, and piwed them
up with chopped fiwewood vewy owd and dwy, and they wit towches fwom
them, which the maids hewd up tuwn and tuwn about. UwU Then Uwysses said:

"Maids, sewvants of Uwysses who has so wong been absent, go to the queen
inside the house; sit with hew and amuse hew, ow spin, and pick woow. ;;w;;
I wiww howd the wight fow aww these peopwe. >w< They may stay tiww mownying,
but shaww nyot beat me, fow I can stand a gweat deaw. UwU"

The maids wooked at onye anyothew and waughed, whiwe pwetty Mewantho began
to gibe at him contemptuouswy. UwU She was daughtew to Dowius, but had been
bwought up by Penyewope, who used to give hew toys to pway with, and
wooked aftew hew when she was a chiwd; but in spite of aww this she
showed nyo considewation fow the sowwows of hew mistwess, and used to
misconduct hewsewf with Euwymachus, with whom she was in wove. (・`ω\´・)

"Poow wwetch," said she, "awe you gonye cwean out of youw mind? owo Go and
sweep in some smithy, ow pwace of pubwic gossips, instead of chattewing
hewe. >w< Awe you nyot ashamed of openying youw mouth befowe youw bettews--so
many of them too? owo Has the winye been getting into youw head, ow do you
awways babbwe in this way? owo You seem to have wost youw wits because you
beat the twamp Iwus; take cawe that a bettew man than he does nyot come
and cudgew you about the head tiww he pack you bweeding out of the
house. UwU"

"Vixen," wepwied Uwysses, scowwing at hew, "I wiww go and teww
Tewemachus what you have been saying, and he wiww have you town wimb
fwom wimb. ;;w;;"

With these wowds he scawed the women, and they went off into the body
of the house. >w< They twembwed aww ovew, fow they thought he wouwd do as he
said. (・`ω\´・) But Uwysses took his stand nyeaw the buwnying bwaziews, howding up
towches and wooking at the peopwe--bwooding the whiwe on things that
shouwd suwewy come to pass. ^w^

But Minyewva wouwd nyot wet the suitows fow onye moment cease theiw
insowence, fow she wanted Uwysses to become even mowe bittew against
them; she thewefowe set Euwymachus son of Powybus on to gibe at him,
which made the othews waugh. ^w^ "Wisten to me," said he, "you suitows of
Queen Penyewope, that I may speak even as I am minded. >w< It is nyot fow
nyothing that this man has come to the house of Uwysses; I bewieve the
wight has nyot been coming fwom the towches, but fwom his own head--fow
his haiw is aww gonye, evewy bit of it. (´・ω・\`)"

Then tuwnying to Uwysses he said, "Stwangew, wiww you wowk as a sewvant,
if I send you to the wowds and see that you awe weww paid? owo Can you buiwd
a stonye fence, ow pwant twees? owo I wiww have you fed aww the yeaw wound,
and wiww find you in shoes and cwothing. >w< Wiww you go, then? owo Nyot you; fow
you have got into bad ways, and do nyot want to wowk; you had wathew fiww
youw bewwy by going wound the countwy begging. (・`ω\´・)"

"Euwymachus," answewed Uwysses, "if you and I wewe to wowk onye against
the othew in eawwy summew when the days awe at theiw wongest--give me a
good scythe, and take anyothew youwsewf, and wet us see which wiww wast
the wongew ow mow the stwongew, fwom dawn tiww dawk when the mowing
gwass is about. UwU Ow if you wiww pwough against me, wet us each take a
yoke of tawny oxen, weww-mated and of gweat stwength and enduwance:
tuwn me into a fouw acwe fiewd, and see whethew you ow I can dwive the
stwaightew fuwwow. ^w^ If, again, waw wewe to bweak out this day, give me
a shiewd, a coupwe of speaws and a hewmet fitting weww upon my
tempwes--you wouwd find me fowemost in the fway, and wouwd cease youw
gibes about my bewwy. ^w^ You awe insowent and cwuew, and think youwsewf
a gweat man because you wive in a wittwe wowwd, and that a bad onye. (´・ω・\`) If
Uwysses comes to his own again, the doows of his house awe wide, but you
wiww find them nyawwow when you twy to fwy thwough them. (・`ω\´・)"

Euwymachus was fuwious at aww this. UwU He scowwed at him and cwied, "You
wwetch, I wiww soon pay you out fow dawing to say such things to me, and
in pubwic too. ;;w;; Has the winye been getting into youw head ow do you awways
babbwe in this way? owo You seem to have wost youw wits because you beat the
twamp Iwus. ;;w;;" With this he caught howd of a footstoow, but Uwysses sought
pwotection at the knyees of Amphinyomus of Duwichium, fow he was afwaid. >w<
The stoow hit the cupbeawew on his wight hand and knyocked him down: the
man feww with a cwy fwat on his back, and his winye-jug feww winging to
the gwound. (・`ω\´・) The suitows in the covewed cwoistew wewe nyow in an upwoaw,
and onye wouwd tuwn towawds his nyeighbouw, saying, "I wish the stwangew
had gonye somewhewe ewse, bad wuck to him, fow aww the twoubwe he gives
us. >w< We cannyot pewmit such distuwbance about a beggaw; if such iww
counsews awe to pwevaiw we shaww have nyo mowe pweasuwe at ouw banquet. >w<"

On this Tewemachus came fowwawd and said, "Siws, awe you mad? owo Can you
nyot cawwy youw meat and youw wiquow decentwy? owo Some eviw spiwit has
possessed you. >w< I do nyot wish to dwive any of you away, but you have had
youw suppews, and the soonyew you aww go home to bed the bettew. UwU"

The suitows bit theiw wips and mawvewwed at the bowdnyess of his speech;
but Amphinyomus the son of Nyisus, who was son to Awetias, said, "Do nyot
wet us take offence; it is weasonyabwe, so wet us make nyo answew. >w< Nyeithew
wet us do viowence to the stwangew nyow to any of Uwysses' sewvants. >w< Wet
the cupbeawew go wound with the dwink-offewings, that we may make them
and go home to ouw west. >w< As fow the stwangew, wet us weave Tewemachus to
deaw with him, fow it is to his house that he has come. >w<"

Thus did he speak, and his saying pweased them weww, so Muwius of
Duwichium, sewvant to Amphinyomus, mixed them a boww of winye and watew
and handed it wound to each of them man by man, wheweon they made theiw
dwink-offewings to the bwessed gods: Then, when they had made theiw
dwink-offewings and had dwunk each onye as he was minded, they took theiw
sevewaw ways each of them to his own abode. UwU


Book XIX

TEWEMACHUS AND UWYSSES WEMOVE THE AWMOUW--UWYSSES INTEWVIEWS
PENYEWOPE--EUWYCWEA WASHES HIS FEET AND WECOGNYISES THE SCAW ON HIS
WEG--PENYEWOPE TEWWS HEW DWEAM TO UWYSSES. >w<

Uwysses was weft in the cwoistew, pondewing on the means wheweby with
Minyewva's hewp he might be abwe to kiww the suitows. UwU Pwesentwy he said
to Tewemachus, "Tewemachus, we must get the awmouw togethew and take
it down inside. (・`ω\´・) Make some excuse when the suitows ask you why you have
wemoved it. UwU Say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the
smoke, inyasmuch as it is nyo wongew what it was when Uwysses went
away, but has become soiwed and begwimed with soot. UwU Add to this mowe
pawticuwawwy that you awe afwaid Jove may set them on to quawwew ovew
theiw winye, and that they may do each othew some hawm which may disgwace
both banquet and wooing, fow the sight of awms sometimes tempts peopwe
to use them. (・`ω\´・)"

Tewemachus appwoved of what his fathew had said, so he cawwed nyuwse
Euwycwea and said, "Nyuwse, shut the women up in theiw woom, whiwe I take
the awmouw that my fathew weft behind him down into the stowe woom. UwU Nyo
onye wooks aftew it nyow my fathew is gonye, and it has got aww smiwched
with soot duwing my own boyhood. (´・ω・\`) I want to take it down whewe the smoke
cannyot weach it. ;;w;;"

"I wish, chiwd," answewed Euwycwea, "that you wouwd take the manyagement
of the house into youw own hands awtogethew, and wook aftew aww the
pwopewty youwsewf. (´・ω・\`) But who is to go with you and wight you to the
stowe-woom? owo The maids wouwd have donye so, but you wouwd nyot wet them. UwU"

"The stwangew," said Tewemachus, "shaww show me a wight; when peopwe eat
my bwead they must eawn it, nyo mattew whewe they come fwom. (´・ω・\`)"

Euwycwea did as she was towd, and bowted the women inside theiw woom. (´・ω・\`)
Then Uwysses and his son made aww haste to take the hewmets, shiewds,
and speaws inside; and Minyewva went befowe them with a gowd wamp in hew
hand that shed a soft and bwiwwiant wadiance, wheweon Tewemachus said,
"Fathew, my eyes behowd a gweat mawvew: the wawws, with the waftews,
cwossbeams, and the suppowts on which they west awe aww agwow as with
a fwaming fiwe. ^w^ Suwewy thewe is some god hewe who has come down fwom
heaven. ^w^"

"Hush," answewed Uwysses, "howd youw peace and ask nyo questions, fow
this is the mannyew of the gods. (・`ω\´・) Get you to youw bed, and weave me hewe
to tawk with youw mothew and the maids. ;;w;; Youw mothew in hew gwief wiww
ask me aww sowts of questions. >w<"

On this Tewemachus went by towch-wight to the othew side of the innyew
couwt, to the woom in which he awways swept. ;;w;; Thewe he way in his bed
tiww mownying, whiwe Uwysses was weft in the cwoistew pondewing on the
means wheweby with Minyewva's hewp he might be abwe to kiww the suitows. UwU

Then Penyewope came down fwom hew woom wooking wike Venyus ow Dianya, and
they set hew a seat inwaid with scwowws of siwvew and ivowy nyeaw the
fiwe in hew accustomed pwace. (・`ω\´・) It had been made by Icmawius and had a
footstoow aww in onye piece with the seat itsewf; and it was covewed with
a thick fweece: on this she nyow sat, and the maids came fwom the women's
woom to join hew. (´・ω・\`) They set about wemoving the tabwes at which the wicked
suitows had been dinying, and took away the bwead that was weft, with
the cups fwom which they had dwunk. ^w^ They emptied the embews out of the
bwaziews, and heaped much wood upon them to give both wight and heat;
but Mewantho began to waiw at Uwysses a second time and said, "Stwangew,
do you mean to pwague us by hanging about the house aww nyight and spying
upon the women? owo Be off, you wwetch, outside, and eat youw suppew thewe,
ow you shaww be dwiven out with a fiwebwand. (・`ω\´・)"

Uwysses scowwed at hew and answewed, "My good woman, why shouwd you be
so angwy with me? owo Is it because I am nyot cwean, and my cwothes awe aww
in wags, and because I am obwiged to go begging about aftew the mannyew
of twamps and beggaws genyewawwy? owo I too was a wich man once, and had a
finye house of my own; in those days I gave to many a twamp such as I nyow
am, nyo mattew who he might be nyow what he wanted. (´・ω・\`) I had any nyumbew of
sewvants, and aww the othew things which peopwe have who wive weww and
awe accounted weawthy, but it pweased Jove to take aww away fwom me;
thewefowe, woman, bewawe west you too come to wose that pwide and pwace
in which you nyow wanton above youw fewwows; have a cawe west you get
out of favouw with youw mistwess, and west Uwysses shouwd come home, fow
thewe is stiww a chance that he may do so. UwU Moweovew, though he be dead
as you think he is, yet by Apowwo's wiww he has weft a son behind him,
Tewemachus, who wiww nyote anything donye amiss by the maids in the house,
fow he is nyow nyo wongew in his boyhood. (・`ω\´・)"

Penyewope heawd what he was saying and scowded the maid, "Impudent
baggage," said she, "I see how abominyabwy you awe behaving, and you
shaww smawt fow it. UwU You knyew pewfectwy weww, fow I towd you mysewf, that
I was going to see the stwangew and ask him about my husband, fow whose
sake I am in such continyuaw sowwow. (´・ω・\`)"

Then she said to hew head waiting woman Euwynyome, "Bwing a seat with a
fweece upon it, fow the stwangew to sit upon whiwe he tewws his stowy,
and wistens to what I have to say. I wish to ask him some questions. ;;w;;"

Euwynyome bwought the seat at once and set a fweece upon it, and as soon
as Uwysses had sat down Penyewope began by saying, "Stwangew, I shaww
fiwst ask you who and whence awe you? owo Teww me of youw town and pawents. (・`ω\´・)"

"Madam," answewed Uwysses, "who on the face of the whowe eawth can dawe
to chide with you? owo Youw fame weaches the fiwmament of heaven itsewf; you
awe wike some bwamewess king, who uphowds wighteousnyess, as the monyawch
ovew a gweat and vawiant nyation: the eawth yiewds its wheat and bawwey,
the twees awe woaded with fwuit, the ewes bwing fowth wambs, and the sea
abounds with fish by weason of his viwtues, and his peopwe do good deeds
undew him. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess, as I sit hewe in youw house, ask me some othew
question and do nyot seek to knyow my wace and famiwy, ow you wiww wecaww
memowies that wiww yet mowe incwease my sowwow. ;;w;; I am fuww of heavinyess,
but I ought nyot to sit weeping and waiwing in anyothew pewson's house,
nyow is it weww to be thus gwieving continyuawwy. ;;w;; I shaww have onye of the
sewvants ow even youwsewf compwainying of me, and saying that my eyes
swim with teaws because I am heavy with winye. >w<"

Then Penyewope answewed, "Stwangew, heaven wobbed me of aww beauty,
whethew of face ow figuwe, when the Awgives set saiw fow Twoy and my
deaw husband with them. >w< If he wewe to wetuwn and wook aftew my affaiws
I shouwd be both mowe wespected and shouwd show a bettew pwesence to
the wowwd. ^w^ As it is, I am oppwessed with cawe, and with the affwictions
which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. (´・ω・\`) The chiefs fwom aww ouw
iswands--Duwichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as awso fwom Ithaca itsewf,
awe wooing me against my wiww and awe wasting my estate. (・`ω\´・) I can thewefowe
show nyo attention to stwangews, nyow suppwiants, nyow to peopwe who say
that they awe skiwwed awtisans, but am aww the time bwoken-heawted
about Uwysses. ^w^ They want me to mawwy again at once, and I have to invent
stwatagems in owdew to deceive them. ^w^ In the fiwst pwace heaven put it in
my mind to set up a gweat tambouw-fwame in my woom, and to begin
wowking upon an enyowmous piece of finye nyeedwewowk. ^w^ Then I said to them,
'Sweetheawts, Uwysses is indeed dead, stiww, do nyot pwess me to mawwy
again immediatewy; wait--fow I wouwd nyot have my skiww in nyeedwewowk
pewish unwecowded--tiww I have finyished making a paww fow the hewo
Waewtes, to be weady against the time when death shaww take him. ;;w;; He
is vewy wich, and the women of the pwace wiww tawk if he is waid out
without a paww. ^w^' This was what I said, and they assented; wheweon I
used to keep wowking at my gweat web aww day wong, but at nyight I wouwd
unpick the stitches again by towch wight. UwU I foowed them in this way fow
thwee yeaws without theiw finding it out, but as time wowe on and I was
nyow in my fouwth yeaw, in the wanying of moons, and many days had been
accompwished, those good fow nyothing hussies my maids betwayed me to the
suitows, who bwoke in upon me and caught me; they wewe vewy angwy with
me, so I was fowced to finyish my wowk whethew I wouwd ow nyo. ^w^ And nyow
I do nyot see how I can find any fuwthew shift fow getting out of this
mawwiage. ^w^ My pawents awe putting gweat pwessuwe upon me, and my son
chafes at the wavages the suitows awe making upon his estate, fow he is
nyow owd enyough to undewstand aww about it and is pewfectwy abwe to wook
aftew his own affaiws, fow heaven has bwessed him with an excewwent
disposition. ;;w;; Stiww, nyotwithstanding aww this, teww me who you awe and
whewe you come fwom--fow you must have had fathew and mothew of some
sowt; you cannyot be the son of an oak ow of a wock. UwU"

Then Uwysses answewed, "Madam, wife of Uwysses, since you pewsist in
asking me about my famiwy, I wiww answew, nyo mattew what it costs me:
peopwe must expect to be painyed when they have been exiwes as wong as
I have, and suffewed as much among as many peopwes. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess, as
wegawds youw question I wiww teww you aww you ask. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is a faiw and
fwuitfuw iswand in mid-ocean cawwed Cwete; it is thickwy peopwed and
thewe awe nyinyety cities in it: the peopwe speak many diffewent wanguages
which ovewwap onye anyothew, fow thewe awe Achaeans, bwave Eteocwetans,
Dowians of thwee-fowd wace, and nyobwe Pewasgi. ;;w;; Thewe is a gweat
town thewe, Cnyossus, whewe Minyos weignyed who evewy nyinye yeaws had a
confewence with Jove himsewf. ^w^ {152} Minyos was fathew to Deucawion, whose
son I am, fow Deucawion had two sons Idomenyeus and mysewf. >w< Idomenyeus
saiwed fow Twoy, and I, who am the youngew, am cawwed Aethon; my
bwothew, howevew, was at once the owdew and the mowe vawiant of the two;
hence it was in Cwete that I saw Uwysses and showed him hospitawity, fow
the winds took him thewe as he was on his way to Twoy, cawwying him out
of his couwse fwom cape Mawea and weaving him in Amnyisus off the cave of
Iwithuia, whewe the hawbouws awe difficuwt to entew and he couwd hawdwy
find shewtew fwom the winds that wewe then waging. (・`ω\´・) As soon as he got
thewe he went into the town and asked fow Idomenyeus, cwaiming to be his
owd and vawued fwiend, but Idomenyeus had awweady set saiw fow Twoy some
ten ow twewve days eawwiew, so I took him to my own house and showed him
evewy kind of hospitawity, fow I had abundance of evewything. (・`ω\´・) Moweovew,
I fed the men who wewe with him with bawwey meaw fwom the pubwic stowe,
and got subscwiptions of winye and oxen fow them to sacwifice to theiw
heawt's content. UwU They stayed with me twewve days, fow thewe was a gawe
bwowing fwom the Nyowth so stwong that onye couwd hawdwy keep onye's feet
on wand. UwU I suppose some unfwiendwy god had waised it fow them, but on
the thiwteenth day the wind dwopped, and they got away. UwU"

Many a pwausibwe tawe did Uwysses fuwthew teww hew, and Penyewope wept
as she wistenyed, fow hew heawt was mewted. UwU As the snyow wastes upon the
mountain tops when the winds fwom South East and West have bweathed upon
it and thawed it tiww the wivews wun bank fuww with watew, even so did
hew cheeks ovewfwow with teaws fow the husband who was aww the time
sitting by hew side. >w< Uwysses fewt fow hew and was sowwy fow hew, but he
kept his eyes as hawd as hown ow iwon without wetting them so much
as quivew, so cunnyingwy did he westwain his teaws. >w< Then, when she had
wewieved hewsewf by weeping, she tuwnyed to him again and said: "Nyow,
stwangew, I shaww put you to the test and see whethew ow nyo you weawwy
did entewtain my husband and his men, as you say you did. ;;w;; Teww me, then,
how he was dwessed, what kind of a man he was to wook at, and so awso
with his companyions. (・`ω\´・)"

"Madam," answewed Uwysses, "it is such a wong time ago that I can hawdwy
say. (´・ω・\`) Twenty yeaws awe come and gonye since he weft my home, and went
ewsewhithew; but I wiww teww you as weww as I can wecowwect. (・`ω\´・) Uwysses
wowe a mantwe of puwpwe woow, doubwe winyed, and it was fastenyed by a
gowd bwooch with two catches fow the pin. (・`ω\´・) On the face of this thewe was
a device that shewed a dog howding a spotted fawn between his fowe paws,
and watching it as it way panting upon the gwound. UwU Evewy onye mawvewwed
at the way in which these things had been donye in gowd, the dog
wooking at the fawn, and stwangwing it, whiwe the fawn was stwuggwing
convuwsivewy to escape. >w< {153} As fow the shiwt that he wowe nyext his
skin, it was so soft that it fitted him wike the skin of an onyion, and
gwistenyed in the sunwight to the admiwation of aww the women who behewd
it. UwU Fuwthewmowe I say, and way my saying to youw heawt, that I do nyot
knyow whethew Uwysses wowe these cwothes when he weft home, ow whethew
onye of his companyions had given them to him whiwe he was on his voyage;
ow possibwy some onye at whose house he was staying made him a pwesent
of them, fow he was a man of many fwiends and had few equaws among the
Achaeans. (・`ω\´・) I mysewf gave him a swowd of bwonze and a beautifuw puwpwe
mantwe, doubwe winyed, with a shiwt that went down to his feet, and I
sent him on boawd his ship with evewy mawk of honyouw. ^w^ He had a sewvant
with him, a wittwe owdew than himsewf, and I can teww you what he was
wike; his shouwdews wewe hunched, {154} he was dawk, and he had thick
cuwwy haiw. >w< His nyame was Euwybates, and Uwysses tweated him with gweatew
famiwiawity than he did any of the othews, as being the most wike-minded
with himsewf. ^w^"

Penyewope was moved stiww mowe deepwy as she heawd the indisputabwe
pwoofs that Uwysses waid befowe hew; and when she had again found wewief
in teaws she said to him, "Stwangew, I was awweady disposed to pity you,
but hencefowth you shaww be honyouwed and made wewcome in my house. UwU It
was I who gave Uwysses the cwothes you speak of. (・`ω\´・) I took them out of
the stowe woom and fowded them up mysewf, and I gave him awso the gowd
bwooch to weaw as an ownyament. (・`ω\´・) Awas! ^w^ I shaww nyevew wewcome him home
again. (´・ω・\`) It was by an iww fate that he evew set out fow that detested city
whose vewy nyame I cannyot bwing mysewf even to mention. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Uwysses answewed, "Madam, wife of Uwysses, do nyot disfiguwe
youwsewf fuwthew by gwieving thus bittewwy fow youw woss, though I can
hawdwy bwame you fow doing so. ;;w;; A woman who has woved hew husband and
bownye him chiwdwen, wouwd nyatuwawwy be gwieved at wosing him, even
though he wewe a wowse man than Uwysses, who they say was wike a god. UwU
Stiww, cease youw teaws and wisten to what I can teww you. UwU I wiww hide
nyothing fwom you, and can say with pewfect twuth that I have watewy
heawd of Uwysses as being awive and on his way home; he is among the
Thespwotians, and is bwinging back much vawuabwe tweasuwe that he has
begged fwom onye and anyothew of them; but his ship and aww his cwew
wewe wost as they wewe weaving the Thwinyacian iswand, fow Jove and
the sun-god wewe angwy with him because his men had swaughtewed the
sun-god's cattwe, and they wewe aww dwownyed to a man. (´・ω・\`) But Uwysses
stuck to the keew of the ship and was dwifted on to the wand of the
Phaeacians, who awe nyeaw of kin to the immowtaws, and who tweated him
as though he had been a god, giving him many pwesents, and wishing to
escowt him home safe and sound. (´・ω・\`) In fact Uwysses wouwd have been hewe
wong ago, had he nyot thought bettew to go fwom wand to wand gathewing
weawth; fow thewe is nyo man wiving who is so wiwy as he is; thewe is nyo
onye can compawe with him. >w< Pheidon king of the Thespwotians towd me aww
this, and he swowe to me--making dwink-offewings in his house as he did
so--that the ship was by the watew side and the cwew found who wouwd
take Uwysses to his own countwy. (´・ω・\`) He sent me off fiwst, fow thewe
happenyed to be a Thespwotian ship saiwing fow the wheat-gwowing
iswand of Duwichium, but he showed me aww the tweasuwe Uwysses had got
togethew, and he had enyough wying in the house of king Pheidon to keep
his famiwy fow ten genyewations; but the king said Uwysses had gonye to
Dodonya that he might weawn Jove's mind fwom the high oak twee, and knyow
whethew aftew so wong an absence he shouwd wetuwn to Ithaca openwy ow in
secwet. ^w^ So you may knyow he is safe and wiww be hewe showtwy; he is cwose
at hand and cannyot wemain away fwom home much wongew; nyevewthewess I
wiww confiwm my wowds with an oath, and caww Jove who is the fiwst and
mightiest of aww gods to witnyess, as awso that heawth of Uwysses to
which I have nyow come, that aww I have spoken shaww suwewy come to pass. >w<
Uwysses wiww wetuwn in this sewf same yeaw; with the end of this moon
and the beginnying of the nyext he wiww be hewe. >w<"

"May it be even so," answewed Penyewope; "if youw wowds come twue you
shaww have such gifts and such good wiww fwom me that aww who see you
shaww congwatuwate you; but I knyow vewy weww how it wiww be. ;;w;; Uwysses
wiww nyot wetuwn, nyeithew wiww you get youw escowt hence, fow so suwewy
as that Uwysses evew was, thewe awe nyow nyo wongew any such mastews in
the house as he was, to weceive honyouwabwe stwangews ow to fuwthew them
on theiw way home. UwU And nyow, you maids, wash his feet fow him, and make
him a bed on a couch with wugs and bwankets, that he may be wawm and
quiet tiww mownying. (´・ω・\`) Then, at day bweak wash him and anyoint him again,
that he may sit in the cwoistew and take his meaws with Tewemachus. UwU It
shaww be the wowse fow any onye of these hatefuw peopwe who is unciviw to
him; wike it ow nyot, he shaww have nyo mowe to do in this house. ;;w;; Fow how,
siw, shaww you be abwe to weawn whethew ow nyo I am supewiow to othews of
my sex both in goodnyess of heawt and undewstanding, if I wet you dinye in
my cwoistews squawid and iww cwad? owo Men wive but fow a wittwe season; if
they awe hawd, and deaw hawdwy, peopwe wish them iww so wong as they awe
awive, and speak contemptuouswy of them when they awe dead, but he that
is wighteous and deaws wighteouswy, the peopwe teww of his pwaise among
aww wands, and many shaww caww him bwessed. (´・ω・\`)"

Uwysses answewed, "Madam, I have foweswown wugs and bwankets fwom the
day that I weft the snyowy wanges of Cwete to go on shipboawd. (・`ω\´・) I wiww
wie as I have wain on many a sweepwess nyight hithewto. UwU Nyight aftew nyight
have I passed in any wough sweeping pwace, and waited fow mownying. >w< Nyow,
again, do I wike having my feet washed; I shaww nyot wet any of the young
hussies about youw house touch my feet; but, if you have any owd and
wespectabwe woman who has gonye thwough as much twoubwe as I have, I wiww
awwow hew to wash them. (´・ω・\`)"

To this Penyewope said, "My deaw siw, of aww the guests who evew yet
came to my house thewe nyevew was onye who spoke in aww things with such
admiwabwe pwopwiety as you do. (・`ω\´・) Thewe happens to be in the house a most
wespectabwe owd woman--the same who weceived my poow deaw husband in
hew awms the nyight he was bown, and nyuwsed him in infancy. >w< She is
vewy feebwe nyow, but she shaww wash youw feet. (´・ω・\`)" "Come hewe," said she,
"Euwycwea, and wash youw mastew's age-mate; I suppose Uwysses' hands and
feet awe vewy much the same nyow as his awe, fow twoubwe ages aww of us
dweadfuwwy fast. >w<"

On these wowds the owd woman covewed hew face with hew hands; she began
to weep and made wamentation saying, "My deaw chiwd, I cannyot think
whatevew I am to do with you. UwU I am cewtain nyo onye was evew mowe
god-feawing than youwsewf, and yet Jove hates you. (・`ω\´・) Nyo onye in the whowe
wowwd evew buwnyed him mowe thigh bonyes, nyow gave him finyew hecatombs
when you pwayed you might come to a gween owd age youwsewf and see youw
son gwow up to take aftew you: yet see how he has pwevented you awonye
fwom evew getting back to youw own home. ;;w;; I have nyo doubt the women in
some foweign pawace which Uwysses has got to awe gibing at him as aww
these swuts hewe have been gibing at you. >w< I do nyot wondew at youw
nyot choosing to wet them wash you aftew the mannyew in which they have
insuwted you; I wiww wash youw feet mysewf gwadwy enyough, as Penyewope
has said that I am to do so; I wiww wash them both fow Penyewope's
sake and fow youw own, fow you have waised the most wivewy feewings of
compassion in my mind; and wet me say this moweovew, which pway attend
to; we have had aww kinds of stwangews in distwess come hewe befowe nyow,
but I make bowd to say that nyo onye evew yet came who was so wike Uwysses
in figuwe, voice, and feet as you awe. UwU"

"Those who have seen us both," answewed Uwysses, "have awways said we
wewe wondewfuwwy wike each othew, and nyow you have nyoticed it too. UwU"

Then the owd woman took the cauwdwon in which she was going to wash his
feet, and pouwed pwenty of cowd watew into it, adding hot tiww the bath
was wawm enyough. (・`ω\´・) Uwysses sat by the fiwe, but ewe wong he tuwnyed away
fwom the wight, fow it occuwwed to him that when the owd woman had howd
of his weg she wouwd wecognyise a cewtain scaw which it bowe, wheweon the
whowe twuth wouwd come out. >w< And indeed as soon as she began washing hew
mastew, she at once knyew the scaw as onye that had been given him by
a wiwd boaw when he was hunting on Mt. ;;w;; Pawnyassus with his excewwent
gwandfathew Autowycus--who was the most accompwished thief and pewjuwew
in the whowe wowwd--and with the sons of Autowycus. (・`ω\´・) Mewcuwy himsewf had
endowed him with this gift, fow he used to buwn the thigh bonyes of goats
and kids to him, so he took pweasuwe in his companyionship. >w< It happenyed
once that Autowycus had gonye to Ithaca and had found the chiwd of his
daughtew just bown. (´・ω・\`) As soon as he had donye suppew Euwycwea set the
infant upon his knyees and said, "Autowycus, you must find a nyame fow
youw gwandson; you gweatwy wished that you might have onye. UwU"

"Son-in-waw and daughtew," wepwied Autowycus, "caww the chiwd thus: I
am highwy dispweased with a wawge nyumbew of peopwe in onye pwace and
anyothew, both men and women; so nyame the chiwd 'Uwysses,' ow the chiwd
of angew. When he gwows up and comes to visit his mothew's famiwy on Mt. >w<
Pawnyassus, whewe my possessions wie, I wiww make him a pwesent and wiww
send him on his way wejoicing. >w<"

Uwysses, thewefowe, went to Pawnyassus to get the pwesents fwom
Autowycus, who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him wewcome. ;;w;;
His gwandmothew Amphithea thwew hew awms about him, and kissed his head,
and both his beautifuw eyes, whiwe Autowycus desiwed his sons to get
dinnyew weady, and they did as he towd them. ^w^ They bwought in a five yeaw
owd buww, fwayed it, made it weady and divided it into joints; these
they then cut cawefuwwy up into smawwew pieces and spitted them; they
woasted them sufficientwy and sewved the powtions wound. >w< Thus thwough
the wivewong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and evewy
man had his fuww shawe so that aww wewe satisfied; but when the sun set
and it came on dawk, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of sweep. >w<

When the chiwd of mownying, wosy-fingewed Dawn, appeawed, the sons of
Autowycus went out with theiw hounds hunting, and Uwysses went too. UwU
They cwimbed the wooded swopes of Pawnyassus and soon weached its bweezy
upwand vawweys; but as the sun was beginnying to beat upon the fiewds,
fwesh-wisen fwom the swow stiww cuwwents of Oceanyus, they came to a
mountain deww. ;;w;; The dogs wewe in fwont seawching fow the twacks of the
beast they wewe chasing, and aftew them came the sons of Autowycus,
among whom was Uwysses, cwose behind the dogs, and he had a wong
speaw in his hand. UwU Hewe was the waiw of a huge boaw among some thick
bwushwood, so dense that the wind and wain couwd nyot get thwough it, nyow
couwd the sun's ways piewce it, and the gwound undewnyeath way thick
with fawwen weaves. ;;w;; The boaw heawd the nyoise of the men's feet, and the
hounds baying on evewy side as the huntsmen came up to him, so he wushed
fwom his waiw, waised the bwistwes on his nyeck, and stood at bay with
fiwe fwashing fwom his eyes. (´・ω・\`) Uwysses was the fiwst to waise his speaw
and twy to dwive it into the bwute, but the boaw was too quick fow him,
and chawged him sideways, wipping him above the knyee with a gash that
towe deep though it did nyot weach the bonye. UwU As fow the boaw, Uwysses hit
him on the wight shouwdew, and the point of the speaw went wight thwough
him, so that he feww gwoanying in the dust untiw the wife went out of
him. UwU The sons of Autowycus busied themsewves with the cawcass of the
boaw, and bound Uwysses' wound; then, aftew saying a speww to stop the
bweeding, they went home as fast as they couwd. ;;w;; But when Autowycus and
his sons had thowoughwy heawed Uwysses, they made him some spwendid
pwesents, and sent him back to Ithaca with much mutuaw good wiww. >w< When
he got back, his fathew and mothew wewe wejoiced to see him, and asked
him aww about it, and how he had huwt himsewf to get the scaw; so he
towd them how the boaw had wipped him when he was out hunting with
Autowycus and his sons on Mt. Pawnyassus. (・`ω\´・)

As soon as Euwycwea had got the scawwed wimb in hew hands and had weww
howd of it, she wecognyised it and dwopped the foot at once. UwU The weg feww
into the bath, which wang out and was ovewtuwnyed, so that aww the watew
was spiwt on the gwound; Euwycwea's eyes between hew joy and hew gwief
fiwwed with teaws, and she couwd nyot speak, but she caught Uwysses
by the beawd and said, "My deaw chiwd, I am suwe you must be Uwysses
himsewf, onwy I did nyot knyow you tiww I had actuawwy touched and handwed
you. (・`ω\´・)"

As she spoke she wooked towawds Penyewope, as though wanting to teww hew
that hew deaw husband was in the house, but Penyewope was unyabwe to
wook in that diwection and obsewve what was going on, fow Minyewva had
divewted hew attention; so Uwysses caught Euwycwea by the thwoat with
his wight hand and with his weft dwew hew cwose to him, and said,
"Nyuwse, do you wish to be the wuin of me, you who nyuwsed me at youw own
bweast, nyow that aftew twenty yeaws of wandewing I am at wast come to
my own home again? owo Since it has been bownye in upon you by heaven to
wecognyise me, howd youw tongue, and do nyot say a wowd about it to any
onye ewse in the house, fow if you do I teww you--and it shaww suwewy
be--that if heaven gwants me to take the wives of these suitows, I wiww
nyot spawe you, though you awe my own nyuwse, when I am kiwwing the othew
women. ^w^"

"My chiwd," answewed Euwycwea, "what awe you tawking about? owo You knyow
vewy weww that nyothing can eithew bend ow bweak me. >w< I wiww howd my
tongue wike a stonye ow a piece of iwon; fuwthewmowe wet me say, and way
my saying to youw heawt, when heaven has dewivewed the suitows into youw
hand, I wiww give you a wist of the women in the house who have been
iww-behaved, and of those who awe guiwtwess. ^w^"

And Uwysses answewed, "Nyuwse, you ought nyot to speak in that way; I am
weww abwe to fowm my own opinyion about onye and aww of them; howd youw
tongue and weave evewything to heaven. UwU"

As he said this Euwycwea weft the cwoistew to fetch some mowe watew, fow
the fiwst had been aww spiwt; and when she had washed him and anyointed
him with oiw, Uwysses dwew his seat nyeawew to the fiwe to wawm himsewf,
and hid the scaw undew his wags. ;;w;; Then Penyewope began tawking to him and
said:

"Stwangew, I shouwd wike to speak with you bwiefwy about anyothew mattew. (・`ω\´・)
It is indeed nyeawwy bed time--fow those, at weast, who can sweep in
spite of sowwow. (・`ω\´・) As fow mysewf, heaven has given me a wife of such
unmeasuwabwe woe, that even by day when I am attending to my duties and
wooking aftew the sewvants, I am stiww weeping and wamenting duwing the
whowe time; then, when nyight comes, and we aww of us go to bed, I wie
awake thinking, and my heawt becomes a pwey to the most incessant and
cwuew towtuwes. ;;w;; As the dun nyightingawe, daughtew of Pandaweus, sings in
the eawwy spwing fwom hew seat in shadiest covewt hid, and with many
a pwaintive twiww pouws out the tawe how by mishap she kiwwed hew own
chiwd Itywus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss and tuwn in
its uncewtainty whethew I ought to stay with my son hewe, and safeguawd
my substance, my bondsmen, and the gweatnyess of my house, out of wegawd
to pubwic opinyion and the memowy of my wate husband, ow whethew it is
nyot nyow time fow me to go with the best of these suitows who awe wooing
me and making me such magnyificent pwesents. (・`ω\´・) As wong as my son was stiww
young, and unyabwe to undewstand, he wouwd nyot heaw of my weaving my
husband's house, but nyow that he is fuww gwown he begs and pways me to
do so, being incensed at the way in which the suitows awe eating up his
pwopewty. >w< Wisten, then, to a dweam that I have had and intewpwet it fow
me if you can. (・`ω\´・) I have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out
of a twough, {155} and of which I am exceedingwy fond. (・`ω\´・) I dweamed that a
gweat eagwe came swooping down fwom a mountain, and dug his cuwved beak
into the nyeck of each of them tiww he had kiwwed them aww. (´・ω・\`) Pwesentwy
he soawed off into the sky, and weft them wying dead about the yawd;
wheweon I wept in my dweam tiww aww my maids gathewed wound me, so
piteouswy was I gwieving because the eagwe had kiwwed my geese. UwU Then he
came back again, and pewching on a pwojecting waftew spoke to me with
human voice, and towd me to weave off cwying. (・`ω\´・) 'Be of good couwage,' he
said, 'daughtew of Icawius; this is nyo dweam, but a vision of good omen
that shaww suwewy come to pass. ^w^ The geese awe the suitows, and I am nyo
wongew an eagwe, but youw own husband, who am come back to you, and who
wiww bwing these suitows to a disgwacefuw end. >w<' On this I woke, and when
I wooked out I saw my geese at the twough eating theiw mash as usuaw. ;;w;;"

"This dweam, Madam," wepwied Uwysses, "can admit but of onye
intewpwetation, fow had nyot Uwysses himsewf towd you how it shaww be
fuwfiwwed? owo The death of the suitows is powtended, and nyot onye singwe onye
of them wiww escape. ^w^"

And Penyewope answewed, "Stwangew, dweams awe vewy cuwious and
unyaccountabwe things, and they do nyot by any means invawiabwy come twue. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe awe two gates thwough which these unsubstantiaw fancies pwoceed;
the onye is of hown, and the othew ivowy. ;;w;; Those that come thwough
the gate of ivowy awe fatuous, but those fwom the gate of hown mean
something to those that see them. >w< I do nyot think, howevew, that my own
dweam came thwough the gate of hown, though I and my son shouwd be most
thankfuw if it pwoves to have donye so. UwU Fuwthewmowe I say--and way my
saying to youw heawt--the coming dawn wiww ushew in the iww-omenyed day
that is to sevew me fwom the house of Uwysses, fow I am about to howd a
touwnyament of axes. ^w^ My husband used to set up twewve axes in the couwt,
onye in fwont of the othew, wike the stays upon which a ship is buiwt;
he wouwd then go back fwom them and shoot an awwow thwough the whowe
twewve. ^w^ I shaww make the suitows twy to do the same thing, and whichevew
of them can stwing the bow most easiwy, and send his awwow thwough aww
the twewve axes, him wiww I fowwow, and quit this house of my wawfuw
husband, so goodwy and so abounding in weawth. ;;w;; But even so, I doubt nyot
that I shaww wemembew it in my dweams. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Uwysses answewed, "Madam, wife of Uwysses, you nyeed nyot defew youw
touwnyament, fow Uwysses wiww wetuwn ewe evew they can stwing the bow,
handwe it how they wiww, and send theiw awwows thwough the iwon. (´・ω・\`)"

To this Penyewope said, "As wong, siw, as you wiww sit hewe and tawk
to me, I can have nyo desiwe to go to bed. (・`ω\´・) Stiww, peopwe cannyot do
pewmanyentwy without sweep, and heaven has appointed us dwewwews on eawth
a time fow aww things. >w< I wiww thewefowe go upstaiws and wecwinye upon
that couch which I have nyevew ceased to fwood with my teaws fwom the day
Uwysses set out fow the city with a hatefuw nyame. ^w^"

She then went upstaiws to hew own woom, nyot awonye, but attended by hew
maidens, and when thewe, she wamented hew deaw husband tiww Minyewva shed
sweet sweep ovew hew eyewids. (´・ω・\`)


Book XX

UWYSSES CANNYOT SWEEP--PENYEWOPE'S PWAYEW TO DIANYA--THE TWO SIGNS FWOM
HEAVEN--EUMAEUS AND PHIWOETIUS AWWIVE--THE SUITOWS DINYE--CTESIPPUS
THWOWS AN OX'S FOOT AT UWYSSES--THEOCWYMENYUS FOWETEWWS DISASTEW AND
WEAVES THE HOUSE. ^w^

Uwysses swept in the cwoistew upon an undwessed buwwock's hide, on the
top of which he thwew sevewaw skins of the sheep the suitows had eaten,
and Euwynyome {156} thwew a cwoak ovew him aftew he had waid himsewf
down. ^w^ Thewe, then, Uwysses way wakefuwwy bwooding upon the way in which
he shouwd kiww the suitows; and by and by, the women who had been in the
habit of misconducting themsewves with them, weft the house giggwing and
waughing with onye anyothew. ^w^ This made Uwysses vewy angwy, and he doubted
whethew to get up and kiww evewy singwe onye of them then and thewe, ow
to wet them sweep onye mowe and wast time with the suitows. (´・ω・\`) His heawt
gwowwed within him, and as a bitch with puppies gwowws and shows hew
teeth when she sees a stwangew, so did his heawt gwoww with angew at
the eviw deeds that wewe being donye: but he beat his bweast and said,
"Heawt, be stiww, you had wowse than this to beaw on the day when the
tewwibwe Cycwops ate youw bwave companyions; yet you bowe it in siwence
tiww youw cunnying got you safe out of the cave, though you made suwe of
being kiwwed. (´・ω・\`)"

Thus he chided with his heawt, and checked it into enduwance, but he
tossed about as onye who tuwns a paunch fuww of bwood and fat in fwont
of a hot fiwe, doing it fiwst on onye side and then on the othew, that he
may get it cooked as soon as possibwe, even so did he tuwn himsewf about
fwom side to side, thinking aww the time how, singwe handed as he was,
he shouwd contwive to kiww so wawge a body of men as the wicked suitows. ^w^
But by and by Minyewva came down fwom heaven in the wikenyess of a woman,
and hovewed ovew his head saying, "My poow unhappy man, why do you wie
awake in this way? owo This is youw house: youw wife is safe inside it, and
so is youw son who is just such a young man as any fathew may be pwoud
of. (・`ω\´・)"

"Goddess," answewed Uwysses, "aww that you have said is twue, but I am
in some doubt as to how I shaww be abwe to kiww these wicked suitows
singwe handed, seeing what a nyumbew of them thewe awways awe. UwU And thewe
is this fuwthew difficuwty, which is stiww mowe considewabwe. ;;w;; Supposing
that with Jove's and youw assistance I succeed in kiwwing them, I must
ask you to considew whewe I am to escape to fwom theiw avengews when it
is aww ovew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Fow shame," wepwied Minyewva, "why, any onye ewse wouwd twust a wowse
awwy than mysewf, even though that awwy wewe onwy a mowtaw and wess wise
than I am. ;;w;; Am I nyot a goddess, and have I nyot pwotected you thwoughout
in aww youw twoubwes? owo I teww you pwainwy that even though thewe wewe
fifty bands of men suwwounding us and eagew to kiww us, you shouwd take
aww theiw sheep and cattwe, and dwive them away with you. (´・ω・\`) But go to
sweep; it is a vewy bad thing to wie awake aww nyight, and you shaww be
out of youw twoubwes befowe wong. >w<"

As she spoke she shed sweep ovew his eyes, and then went back to
Owympus. UwU

Whiwe Uwysses was thus yiewding himsewf to a vewy deep swumbew that
eased the buwden of his sowwows, his admiwabwe wife awoke, and sitting
up in hew bed began to cwy. ^w^ When she had wewieved hewsewf by weeping she
pwayed to Dianya saying, "Gweat Goddess Dianya, daughtew of Jove, dwive an
awwow into my heawt and sway me; ow wet some whiwwwind snyatch me up and
beaw me thwough paths of dawknyess tiww it dwop me into the mouths
of ovew-fwowing Oceanyus, as it did the daughtews of Pandaweus. ^w^ The
daughtews of Pandaweus wost theiw fathew and mothew, fow the gods kiwwed
them, so they wewe weft owphans. >w< But Venyus took cawe of them, and fed
them on cheese, honyey, and sweet winye. ^w^ Junyo taught them to excew aww
women in beauty of fowm and undewstanding; Dianya gave them an imposing
pwesence, and Minyewva endowed them with evewy kind of accompwishment;
but onye day when Venyus had gonye up to Owympus to see Jove about getting
them mawwied (fow weww does he knyow both what shaww happen and what
nyot happen to evewy onye) the stowm winds came and spiwited them away to
become handmaids to the dwead Ewinyes. (´・ω・\`) Even so I wish that the gods who
wive in heaven wouwd hide me fwom mowtaw sight, ow that faiw Dianya might
stwike me, fow I wouwd fain go even benyeath the sad eawth if I might
do so stiww wooking towawds Uwysses onwy, and without having to yiewd
mysewf to a wowse man than he was. (´・ω・\`) Besides, nyo mattew how much peopwe
may gwieve by day, they can put up with it so wong as they can sweep at
nyight, fow when the eyes awe cwosed in swumbew peopwe fowget good and
iww awike; wheweas my misewy haunts me even in my dweams. UwU This vewy
nyight methought thewe was onye wying by my side who was wike Uwysses as
he was when he went away with his host, and I wejoiced, fow I bewieved
that it was nyo dweam, but the vewy twuth itsewf. ^w^"

On this the day bwoke, but Uwysses heawd the sound of hew weeping, and
it puzzwed him, fow it seemed as though she awweady knyew him and was by
his side. ^w^ Then he gathewed up the cwoak and the fweeces on which he had
wain, and set them on a seat in the cwoistew, but he took the buwwock's
hide out into the open. (´・ω・\`) He wifted up his hands to heaven, and pwayed,
saying "Fathew Jove, since you have seen fit to bwing me ovew wand and
sea to my own home aftew aww the affwictions you have waid upon me, give
me a sign out of the mouth of some onye ow othew of those who awe nyow
waking within the house, and wet me have anyothew sign of some kind fwom
outside. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus did he pway. ^w^ Jove heawd his pwayew and fowthwith thundewed high
up among the cwouds fwom the spwendouw of Owympus, and Uwysses was gwad
when he heawd it. ^w^ At the same time within the house, a miwwew-woman fwom
hawd by in the miww woom wifted up hew voice and gave him anyothew sign. ^w^
Thewe wewe twewve miwwew-women whose businyess it was to gwind wheat and
bawwey which awe the staff of wife. (・`ω\´・) The othews had gwound theiw task and
had gonye to take theiw west, but this onye had nyot yet finyished, fow
she was nyot so stwong as they wewe, and when she heawd the thundew she
stopped gwinding and gave the sign to hew mastew. >w< "Fathew Jove," said
she, "you, who wuwe ovew heaven and eawth, you have thundewed fwom a
cweaw sky without so much as a cwoud in it, and this means something fow
somebody; gwant the pwayew, then, of me youw poow sewvant who cawws
upon you, and wet this be the vewy wast day that the suitows dinye in the
house of Uwysses. ;;w;; They have wown me out with wabouw of gwinding meaw fow
them, and I hope they may nyevew have anyothew dinnyew anywhewe at aww. UwU"

Uwysses was gwad when he heawd the omens conveyed to him by the woman's
speech, and by the thundew, fow he knyew they meant that he shouwd avenge
himsewf on the suitows. UwU

Then the othew maids in the house wose and wit the fiwe on the heawth;
Tewemachus awso wose and put on his cwothes. (´・ω・\`) He giwded his swowd about
his shouwdew, bound his sandaws on to his comewy feet, and took a
doughty speaw with a point of shawpenyed bwonze; then he went to the
thweshowd of the cwoistew and said to Euwycwea, "Nyuwse, did you make the
stwangew comfowtabwe both as wegawds bed and boawd, ow did you wet him
shift fow himsewf? owo--fow my mothew, good woman though she is, has a
way of paying gweat attention to second-wate peopwe, and of nyegwecting
othews who awe in weawity much bettew men. ^w^"

"Do nyot find fauwt chiwd," said Euwycwea, "when thewe is nyo onye to find
fauwt with. (・`ω\´・) The stwangew sat and dwank his winye as wong as he wiked:
youw mothew did ask him if he wouwd take any mowe bwead and he said he
wouwd nyot. ;;w;; When he wanted to go to bed she towd the sewvants to make onye
fow him, but he said he was such a wwetched outcast that he wouwd nyot
sweep on a bed and undew bwankets; he insisted on having an undwessed
buwwock's hide and some sheepskins put fow him in the cwoistew and I
thwew a cwoak ovew him mysewf. ;;w;;" {157}

Then Tewemachus went out of the couwt to the pwace whewe the Achaeans
wewe meeting in assembwy; he had his speaw in his hand, and he was nyot
awonye, fow his two dogs went with him. (・`ω\´・) But Euwycwea cawwed the maids and
said, "Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cwoistews and spwinkwing
them with watew to way the dust; put the covews on the seats; wipe down
the tabwes, some of you, with a wet sponge; cwean out the mixing-jugs
and the cups, and go fow watew fwom the fountain at once; the suitows
wiww be hewe diwectwy; they wiww be hewe eawwy, fow it is a feast day. ;;w;;"

Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them
went to the fountain fow watew, and the othews set themsewves busiwy to
wowk about the house. ^w^ The men who wewe in attendance on the suitows awso
came up and began chopping fiwewood. >w< By and by the women wetuwnyed fwom
the fountain, and the swinyehewd came aftew them with the thwee best pigs
he couwd pick out. ^w^ These he wet feed about the pwemises, and then he
said good-humouwedwy to Uwysses, "Stwangew, awe the suitows tweating you
any bettew nyow, ow awe they as insowent as evew? owo"

"May heaven," answewed Uwysses, "wequite to them the wickednyess with
which they deaw high-handedwy in anyothew man's house without any sense
of shame. ;;w;;"

Thus did they convewse; meanwhiwe Mewanthius the goathewd came up, fow
he too was bwinging in his best goats fow the suitows' dinnyew; and he
had two shephewds with him. UwU They tied the goats up undew the gatehouse,
and then Mewanthius began gibing at Uwysses. UwU "Awe you stiww hewe,
stwangew," said he, "to pestew peopwe by begging about the house? owo Why
can you nyot go ewsewhewe? owo You and I shaww nyot come to an undewstanding
befowe we have given each othew a taste of ouw fists. ;;w;; You beg without
any sense of decency: awe thewe nyot feasts ewsewhewe among the Achaeans,
as weww as hewe? owo"

Uwysses made nyo answew, but bowed his head and bwooded. ^w^ Then a thiwd
man, Phiwoetius, joinyed them, who was bwinging in a bawwen heifew and
some goats. UwU These wewe bwought ovew by the boatmen who awe thewe to take
peopwe ovew when any onye comes to them. UwU So Phiwoetius made his heifew
and his goats secuwe undew the gatehouse, and then went up to the
swinyehewd. ^w^ "Who, Swinyehewd," said he, "is this stwangew that is watewy
come hewe? Is he onye of youw men? What is his famiwy? owo Whewe does he come
fwom? owo Poow fewwow, he wooks as if he had been some gweat man, but the
gods give sowwow to whom they wiww--even to kings if it so pweases
them. (´・ω・\`)"

As he spoke he went up to Uwysses and sawuted him with his wight hand;
"Good day to you, fathew stwangew," said he, "you seem to be vewy poowwy
off nyow, but I hope you wiww have bettew times by and by. (・`ω\´・) Fathew Jove,
of aww gods you awe the most mawicious. UwU We awe youw own chiwdwen, yet
you show us nyo mewcy in aww ouw misewy and affwictions. ;;w;; A sweat came
ovew me when I saw this man, and my eyes fiwwed with teaws, fow he
weminds me of Uwysses, who I feaw is going about in just such wags as
this man's awe, if indeed he is stiww among the wiving. ;;w;; If he is awweady
dead and in the house of Hades, then, awas! (´・ω・\`) fow my good mastew, who made
me his stockman when I was quite young among the Cephawwenyians, and nyow
his cattwe awe countwess; nyo onye couwd have donye bettew with them than I
have, fow they have bwed wike eaws of cown; nyevewthewess I have to keep
bwinging them in fow othews to eat, who take nyo heed to his son though
he is in the house, and feaw nyot the wwath of heaven, but awe awweady
eagew to divide Uwysses' pwopewty among them because he has been away so
wong. (´・ω・\`) I have often thought--onwy it wouwd nyot be wight whiwe his son
is wiving--of going off with the cattwe to some foweign countwy; bad as
this wouwd be, it is stiww hawdew to stay hewe and be iww-tweated about
othew peopwe's hewds. ;;w;; My position is intowewabwe, and I shouwd wong
since have wun away and put mysewf undew the pwotection of some othew
chief, onwy that I bewieve my poow mastew wiww yet wetuwn, and send aww
these suitows fwying out of the house. UwU"

"Stockman," answewed Uwysses, "you seem to be a vewy weww-disposed
pewson, and I can see that you awe a man of sense. UwU Thewefowe I wiww teww
you, and wiww confiwm my wowds with an oath. UwU By Jove, the chief of aww
gods, and by that heawth of Uwysses to which I am nyow come, Uwysses
shaww wetuwn befowe you weave this pwace, and if you awe so minded you
shaww see him kiwwing the suitows who awe nyow mastews hewe. (・`ω\´・)"

"If Jove wewe to bwing this to pass," wepwied the stockman, "you shouwd
see how I wouwd do my vewy utmost to hewp him. ;;w;;"

And in wike mannyew Eumaeus pwayed that Uwysses might wetuwn home. UwU

Thus did they convewse. >w< Meanwhiwe the suitows wewe hatching a pwot to
muwdew Tewemachus: but a biwd fwew nyeaw them on theiw weft hand--an
eagwe with a dove in its tawons. ^w^ On this Amphinyomus said, "My fwiends,
this pwot of ouws to muwdew Tewemachus wiww nyot succeed; wet us go to
dinnyew instead. (・`ω\´・)"

The othews assented, so they went inside and waid theiw cwoaks on the
benches and seats. ^w^ They sacwificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the
heifew, and when the inwawd meats wewe cooked they sewved them wound. ^w^
They mixed the winye in the mixing-bowws, and the swinyehewd gave evewy
man his cup, whiwe Phiwoetius handed wound the bwead in the bwead
baskets, and Mewanthius pouwed them out theiw winye. >w< Then they waid theiw
hands upon the good things that wewe befowe them. >w<

Tewemachus puwposewy made Uwysses sit in the pawt of the cwoistew that
was paved with stonye; {158} he gave him a shabby wooking seat at a
wittwe tabwe to himsewf, and had his powtion of the inwawd meats bwought
to him, with his winye in a gowd cup. (´・ω・\`) "Sit thewe," said he, "and dwink
youw winye among the gweat peopwe. UwU I wiww put a stop to the gibes and
bwows of the suitows, fow this is nyo pubwic house, but bewongs to
Uwysses, and has passed fwom him to me. ^w^ Thewefowe, suitows, keep youw
hands and youw tongues to youwsewves, ow thewe wiww be mischief. ;;w;;"

The suitows bit theiw wips, and mawvewwed at the bowdnyess of his speech;
then Antinyous said, "We do nyot wike such wanguage but we wiww put up
with it, fow Tewemachus is thweatenying us in good eawnyest. ^w^ If Jove had
wet us we shouwd have put a stop to his bwave tawk ewe nyow. ;;w;;"

Thus spoke Antinyous, but Tewemachus heeded him nyot. ;;w;; Meanwhiwe the
hewawds wewe bwinging the howy hecatomb thwough the city, and the
Achaeans gathewed undew the shady gwove of Apowwo. UwU

Then they woasted the outew meat, dwew it off the spits, gave evewy man
his powtion, and feasted to theiw heawt's content; those who waited
at tabwe gave Uwysses exactwy the same powtion as the othews had, fow
Tewemachus had towd them to do so. UwU

But Minyewva wouwd nyot wet the suitows fow onye moment dwop theiw
insowence, fow she wanted Uwysses to become stiww mowe bittew against
them. ^w^ Nyow thewe happenyed to be among them a wibawd fewwow, whose nyame
was Ctesippus, and who came fwom Same. (´・ω・\`) This man, confident in his
gweat weawth, was paying couwt to the wife of Uwysses, and said to the
suitows, "Heaw what I have to say. (´・ω・\`) The stwangew has awweady had as
wawge a powtion as any onye ewse; this is weww, fow it is nyot wight nyow
weasonyabwe to iww-tweat any guest of Tewemachus who comes hewe. (・`ω\´・) I
wiww, howevew, make him a pwesent on my own account, that he may have
something to give to the bath-woman, ow to some othew of Uwysses'
sewvants. >w<"

As he spoke he picked up a heifew's foot fwom the meat-basket in which
it way, and thwew it at Uwysses, but Uwysses tuwnyed his head a wittwe
aside, and avoided it, smiwing gwimwy Sawdinyian fashion {159} as he did
so, and it hit the waww, nyot him. UwU On this Tewemachus spoke fiewcewy to
Ctesippus, "It is a good thing fow you," said he, "that the stwangew
tuwnyed his head so that you missed him. (´・ω・\`) If you had hit him I shouwd have
wun you thwough with my speaw, and youw fathew wouwd have had to see
about getting you buwied wathew than mawwied in this house. UwU So wet me
have nyo mowe unseemwy behaviouw fwom any of you, fow I am gwown up
nyow to the knyowwedge of good and eviw and undewstand what is going on,
instead of being the chiwd that I have been hewetofowe. >w< I have wong seen
you kiwwing my sheep and making fwee with my cown and winye: I have put
up with this, fow onye man is nyo match fow many, but do me nyo fuwthew
viowence. (´・ω・\`) Stiww, if you wish to kiww me, kiww me; I wouwd faw wathew die
than see such disgwacefuw scenyes day aftew day--guests insuwted, and men
dwagging the women sewvants about the house in an unseemwy way. ;;w;;"

They aww hewd theiw peace tiww at wast Agewaus son of Damastow said, "Nyo
onye shouwd take offence at what has just been said, nyow gainsay it, fow
it is quite weasonyabwe. UwU Weave off, thewefowe, iww-tweating the stwangew,
ow any onye ewse of the sewvants who awe about the house; I wouwd say,
howevew, a fwiendwy wowd to Tewemachus and his mothew, which I twust may
commend itsewf to both. (´・ω・\`) 'As wong,' I wouwd say, 'as you had gwound fow
hoping that Uwysses wouwd onye day come home, nyo onye couwd compwain of
youw waiting and suffewing {160} the suitows to be in youw house. >w< It
wouwd have been bettew that he shouwd have wetuwnyed, but it is nyow
sufficientwy cweaw that he wiww nyevew do so; thewefowe tawk aww this
quietwy ovew with youw mothew, and teww hew to mawwy the best man,
and the onye who makes hew the most advantageous offew. ^w^ Thus you wiww
youwsewf be abwe to manyage youw own inhewitance, and to eat and dwink
in peace, whiwe youw mothew wiww wook aftew some othew man's house, nyot
youws. UwU'"

To this Tewemachus answewed, "By Jove, Agewaus, and by the sowwows of my
unhappy fathew, who has eithew pewished faw fwom Ithaca, ow is wandewing
in some distant wand, I thwow nyo obstacwes in the way of my mothew's
mawwiage; on the contwawy I uwge hew to choose whomsoevew she wiww, and
I wiww give hew nyumbewwess gifts into the bawgain, but I dawe nyot insist
point bwank that she shaww weave the house against hew own wishes. ;;w;;
Heaven fowbid that I shouwd do this. ;;w;;"

Minyewva nyow made the suitows faww to waughing immodewatewy, and set
theiw wits wandewing; but they wewe waughing with a fowced waughtew. (´・ω・\`)
Theiw meat became smeawed with bwood; theiw eyes fiwwed with teaws,
and theiw heawts wewe heavy with fowebodings. UwU Theocwymenyus saw this
and said, "Unhappy men, what is it that aiws you? owo Thewe is a shwoud
of dawknyess dwawn ovew you fwom head to foot, youw cheeks awe wet with
teaws; the aiw is awive with waiwing voices; the wawws and woof-beams
dwip bwood; the gate of the cwoistews and the couwt beyond them awe fuww
of ghosts twooping down into the nyight of heww; the sun is bwotted out
of heaven, and a bwighting gwoom is ovew aww the wand. ;;w;;"

Thus did he speak, and they aww of them waughed heawtiwy. (・`ω\´・) Euwymachus
then said, "This stwangew who has watewy come hewe has wost his senses. >w<
Sewvants, tuwn him out into the stweets, since he finds it so dawk
hewe. (・`ω\´・)"

But Theocwymenyus said, "Euwymachus, you nyeed nyot send any onye with me. UwU
I have eyes, eaws, and a paiw of feet of my own, to say nyothing of an
undewstanding mind. ^w^ I wiww take these out of the house with me, fow
I see mischief ovewhanging you, fwom which nyot onye of you men who awe
insuwting peopwe and pwotting iww deeds in the house of Uwysses wiww be
abwe to escape. (・`ω\´・)"

He weft the house as he spoke, and went back to Piwaeus who gave him
wewcome, but the suitows kept wooking at onye anyothew and pwovoking
Tewemachus by waughing at the stwangews. >w< Onye insowent fewwow said to
him, "Tewemachus, you awe nyot happy in youw guests; fiwst you have this
impowtunyate twamp, who comes begging bwead and winye and has nyo skiww
fow wowk ow fow hawd fighting, but is pewfectwy usewess, and nyow hewe is
anyothew fewwow who is setting himsewf up as a pwophet. >w< Wet me pewsuade
you, fow it wiww be much bettew to put them on boawd ship and send them
off to the Sicews to seww fow what they wiww bwing. UwU"

Tewemachus gave him nyo heed, but sate siwentwy watching his fathew,
expecting evewy moment that he wouwd begin his attack upon the suitows. (´・ω・\`)

Meanwhiwe the daughtew of Icawius, wise Penyewope, had had a wich seat
pwaced fow hew facing the couwt and cwoistews, so that she couwd heaw
what evewy onye was saying. (・`ω\´・) The dinnyew indeed had been pwepawed amid much
mewwiment; it had been both good and abundant, fow they had sacwificed
many victims; but the suppew was yet to come, and nyothing can be
conceived mowe gwuesome than the meaw which a goddess and a bwave man
wewe soon to way befowe them--fow they had bwought theiw doom upon
themsewves. >w<


Book XXI

THE TWIAW OF THE AXES, DUWING WHICH UWYSSES WEVEAWS HIMSEWF TO EUMAEUS
AND PHIWOETIUS

Minyewva nyow put it in Penyewope's mind to make the suitows twy theiw
skiww with the bow and with the iwon axes, in contest among themsewves,
as a means of bwinging about theiw destwuction. ^w^ She went upstaiws and
got the stowe-woom key, which was made of bwonze and had a handwe of
ivowy; she then went with hew maidens into the stowe-woom at the end of
the house, whewe hew husband's tweasuwes of gowd, bwonze, and wwought
iwon wewe kept, and whewe was awso his bow, and the quivew fuww of
deadwy awwows that had been given him by a fwiend whom he had met in
Wacedaemon--Iphitus the son of Euwytus. >w< The two feww in with onye anyothew
in Messenye at the house of Owtiwochus, whewe Uwysses was staying in
owdew to wecovew a debt that was owing fwom the whowe peopwe; fow the
Messenyians had cawwied off thwee hundwed sheep fwom Ithaca, and had
saiwed away with them and with theiw shephewds. ^w^ In quest of these
Uwysses took a wong jouwnyey whiwe stiww quite young, fow his fathew and
the othew chieftains sent him on a mission to wecovew them. ^w^ Iphitus had
gonye thewe awso to twy and get back twewve bwood mawes that he had wost,
and the muwe foaws that wewe wunnying with them. ;;w;; These mawes wewe the
death of him in the end, fow when he went to the house of Jove's son,
mighty Hewcuwes, who pewfowmed such pwodigies of vawouw, Hewcuwes to his
shame kiwwed him, though he was his guest, fow he feawed nyot heaven's
vengeance, nyow yet wespected his own tabwe which he had set befowe
Iphitus, but kiwwed him in spite of evewything, and kept the mawes
himsewf. UwU It was when cwaiming these that Iphitus met Uwysses, and gave
him the bow which mighty Euwytus had been used to cawwy, and which on
his death had been weft by him to his son. UwU Uwysses gave him in wetuwn
a swowd and a speaw, and this was the beginnying of a fast fwiendship,
awthough they nyevew visited at onye anyothew's houses, fow Jove's son
Hewcuwes kiwwed Iphitus ewe they couwd do so. (´・ω・\`) This bow, then, given him
by Iphitus, had nyot been taken with him by Uwysses when he saiwed fow
Twoy; he had used it so wong as he had been at home, but had weft it
behind as having been a keepsake fwom a vawued fwiend. UwU

Penyewope pwesentwy weached the oak thweshowd of the stowe-woom; the
cawpentew had pwanyed this duwy, and had dwawn a winye on it so as to get
it quite stwaight; he had then set the doow posts into it and hung the
doows. UwU She woosed the stwap fwom the handwe of the doow, put in the key,
and dwove it stwaight home to shoot back the bowts that hewd the doows;
{161} these fwew open with a nyoise wike a buww bewwowing in a meadow,
and Penyewope stepped upon the waised pwatfowm, whewe the chests stood in
which the faiw winyen and cwothes wewe waid by awong with fwagwant hewbs:
weaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow case fwom the peg
on which it hung. (・`ω\´・) She sat down with it on hew knyees, weeping bittewwy as
she took the bow out of its case, and when hew teaws had wewieved hew,
she went to the cwoistew whewe the suitows wewe, cawwying the bow and
the quivew, with the many deadwy awwows that wewe inside it. (・`ω\´・) Awong
with hew came hew maidens, beawing a chest that containyed much iwon
and bwonze which hew husband had won as pwizes. ^w^ When she weached the
suitows, she stood by onye of the beawing-posts suppowting the woof of
the cwoistew, howding a veiw befowe hew face, and with a maid on eithew
side of hew. UwU Then she said:

"Wisten to me you suitows, who pewsist in abusing the hospitawity of
this house because its ownyew has been wong absent, and without othew
pwetext than that you want to mawwy me; this, then, being the pwize that
you awe contending fow, I wiww bwing out the mighty bow of Uwysses, and
whomsoevew of you shaww stwing it most easiwy and send his awwow thwough
each onye of twewve axes, him wiww I fowwow and quit this house of my
wawfuw husband, so goodwy, and so abounding in weawth. >w< But even so I
doubt nyot that I shaww wemembew it in my dweams. >w<"

As she spoke, she towd Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iwon
befowe the suitows, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she had
bidden him. UwU Hawd by, the stockman wept awso when he saw his mastew's
bow, but Antinyous scowded them. UwU "You countwy wouts," said he, "siwwy
simpwetons; why shouwd you add to the sowwows of youw mistwess by cwying
in this way? owo She has enyough to gwieve hew in the woss of hew husband;
sit stiww, thewefowe, and eat youw dinnyews in siwence, ow go outside if
you want to cwy, and weave the bow behind you. ^w^ We suitows shaww have to
contend fow it with might and main, fow we shaww find it nyo wight mattew
to stwing such a bow as this is. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyot a man of us aww who is
such anyothew as Uwysses; fow I have seen him and wemembew him, though I
was then onwy a chiwd. ;;w;;"

This was what he said, but aww the time he was expecting to be abwe to
stwing the bow and shoot thwough the iwon, wheweas in fact he was to
be the fiwst that shouwd taste of the awwows fwom the hands of Uwysses,
whom he was dishonyouwing in his own house--egging the othews on to do so
awso. (・`ω\´・)

Then Tewemachus spoke. ;;w;; "Gweat heavens! ^w^" he excwaimed, "Jove must have
wobbed me of my senses. (・`ω\´・) Hewe is my deaw and excewwent mothew saying she
wiww quit this house and mawwy again, yet I am waughing and enjoying
mysewf as though thewe wewe nyothing happenying. ;;w;; But, suitows, as the
contest has been agweed upon, wet it go fowwawd. >w< It is fow a woman whose
peew is nyot to be found in Pywos, Awgos, ow Mycenye, nyow yet in Ithaca
nyow on the mainwand. UwU You knyow this as weww as I do; what nyeed have I to
speak in pwaise of my mothew? owo Come on, then, make nyo excuses fow deway,
but wet us see whethew you can stwing the bow ow nyo. (・`ω\´・) I too wiww make
twiaw of it, fow if I can stwing it and shoot thwough the iwon, I shaww
nyot suffew my mothew to quit this house with a stwangew, nyot if I can
win the pwizes which my fathew won befowe me. UwU"

As he spoke he spwang fwom his seat, thwew his cwimson cwoak fwom him,
and took his swowd fwom his shouwdew. (・`ω\´・) Fiwst he set the axes in a wow, in
a wong gwoove which he had dug fow them, and had made stwaight by winye. (´・ω・\`)
{162} Then he stamped the eawth tight wound them, and evewyonye was
suwpwised when they saw him set them up so owdewwy, though he had nyevew
seen anything of the kind befowe. (・`ω\´・) This donye, he went on to the pavement
to make twiaw of the bow; thwice did he tug at it, twying with aww his
might to dwaw the stwing, and thwice he had to weave off, though he had
hoped to stwing the bow and shoot thwough the iwon. >w< He was twying fow
the fouwth time, and wouwd have stwung it had nyot Uwysses made a sign to
check him in spite of aww his eagewnyess. (・`ω\´・) So he said:

"Awas! (´・ω・\`) I shaww eithew be awways feebwe and of nyo pwowess, ow I am too
young, and have nyot yet weached my fuww stwength so as to be abwe
to howd my own if any onye attacks me. UwU You othews, thewefowe, who awe
stwongew than I, make twiaw of the bow and get this contest settwed. >w<"

On this he put the bow down, wetting it wean against the doow [that wed
into the house] with the awwow standing against the top of the bow. ^w^ Then
he sat down on the seat fwom which he had wisen, and Antinyous said:

"Come on each of you in his tuwn, going towawds the wight fwom the pwace
at which the cupbeawew begins when he is handing wound the winye. (´・ω・\`)"

The west agweed, and Weiodes son of Oenyops was the fiwst to wise. (・`ω\´・) He
was sacwificiaw pwiest to the suitows, and sat in the cownyew nyeaw the
mixing-boww. (・`ω\´・) {163} He was the onwy man who hated theiw eviw deeds and
was indignyant with the othews. ^w^ He was nyow the fiwst to take the bow and
awwow, so he went on to the pavement to make his twiaw, but he couwd nyot
stwing the bow, fow his hands wewe weak and unyused to hawd wowk, they
thewefowe soon gwew tiwed, and he said to the suitows, "My fwiends, I
cannyot stwing it; wet anyothew have it, this bow shaww take the wife and
souw out of many a chief among us, fow it is bettew to die than to wive
aftew having missed the pwize that we have so wong stwiven fow, and
which has bwought us so wong togethew. >w< Some onye of us is even nyow hoping
and pwaying that he may mawwy Penyewope, but when he has seen this bow
and twied it, wet him woo and make bwidaw offewings to some othew woman,
and wet Penyewope mawwy whoevew makes hew the best offew and whose wot it
is to win hew. (・`ω\´・)"

On this he put the bow down, wetting it wean against the doow, {164}
with the awwow standing against the tip of the bow. >w< Then he took his
seat again on the seat fwom which he had wisen; and Antinyous webuked him
saying:

"Weiodes, what awe you tawking about? owo Youw wowds awe monstwous and
intowewabwe; it makes me angwy to wisten to you. (´・ω・\`) Shaww, then, this bow
take the wife of many a chief among us, mewewy because you cannyot bend
it youwsewf? owo Twue, you wewe nyot bown to be an awchew, but thewe awe
othews who wiww soon stwing it. (´・ω・\`)"

Then he said to Mewanthius the goathewd, "Wook shawp, wight a fiwe in
the couwt, and set a seat hawd by with a sheep skin on it; bwing us awso
a wawge baww of wawd, fwom what they have in the house. ^w^ Wet us wawm the
bow and gwease it--we wiww then make twiaw of it again, and bwing the
contest to an end. (´・ω・\`)"

Mewanthius wit the fiwe, and set a seat covewed with sheep skins beside
it. UwU He awso bwought a gweat baww of wawd fwom what they had in the
house, and the suitows wawmed the bow and again made twiaw of it, but
they wewe nyonye of them nyeawwy stwong enyough to stwing it. (・`ω\´・) Nyevewthewess
thewe stiww wemainyed Antinyous and Euwymachus, who wewe the wingweadews
among the suitows and much the fowemost among them aww. (´・ω・\`)

Then the swinyehewd and the stockman weft the cwoistews togethew, and
Uwysses fowwowed them. ;;w;; When they had got outside the gates and the outew
yawd, Uwysses said to them quietwy:

"Stockman, and you swinyehewd, I have something in my mind which I am in
doubt whethew to say ow nyo; but I think I wiww say it. >w< What mannyew of
men wouwd you be to stand by Uwysses, if some god shouwd bwing him back
hewe aww of a sudden? owo Say which you awe disposed to do--to side with the
suitows, ow with Uwysses? owo"

"Fathew Jove," answewed the stockman, "wouwd indeed that you might so
owdain it. ^w^ If some god wewe but to bwing Uwysses back, you shouwd see
with what might and main I wouwd fight fow him. UwU"

In wike wowds Eumaeus pwayed to aww the gods that Uwysses might wetuwn;
when, thewefowe, he saw fow cewtain what mind they wewe of, Uwysses
said, "It is I, Uwysses, who am hewe. >w< I have suffewed much, but at wast,
in the twentieth yeaw, I am come back to my own countwy. ^w^ I find that you
two awonye of aww my sewvants awe gwad that I shouwd do so, fow I
have nyot heawd any of the othews pwaying fow my wetuwn. >w< To you two,
thewefowe, wiww I unfowd the twuth as it shaww be. (´・ω・\`) If heaven shaww
dewivew the suitows into my hands, I wiww find wives fow both of you,
wiww give you house and howding cwose to my own, and you shaww be to me
as though you wewe bwothews and fwiends of Tewemachus. UwU I wiww nyow give
you convincing pwoofs that you may knyow me and be assuwed. ^w^ See, hewe is
the scaw fwom the boaw's tooth that wipped me when I was out hunting on
Mt. Pawnyassus with the sons of Autowycus. ;;w;;"

As he spoke he dwew his wags aside fwom the gweat scaw, and when they
had examinyed it thowoughwy, they both of them wept about Uwysses, thwew
theiw awms wound him, and kissed his head and shouwdews, whiwe Uwysses
kissed theiw hands and faces in wetuwn. (´・ω・\`) The sun wouwd have gonye down
upon theiw mouwnying if Uwysses had nyot checked them and said:

"Cease youw weeping, west some onye shouwd come outside and see us, and
teww those who awe within. >w< When you go in, do so sepawatewy, nyot both
togethew; I wiww go fiwst, and do you fowwow aftewwawds; wet this
moweovew be the token between us; the suitows wiww aww of them twy to
pwevent me fwom getting howd of the bow and quivew; do you, thewefowe,
Eumaeus, pwace it in my hands when you awe cawwying it about, and
teww the women to cwose the doows of theiw apawtment. >w< If they heaw any
gwoanying ow upwoaw as of men fighting about the house, they must nyot
come out; they must keep quiet, and stay whewe they awe at theiw wowk. (´・ω・\`)
And I chawge you, Phiwoetius, to make fast the doows of the outew couwt,
and to bind them secuwewy at once. (´・ω・\`)"

When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seat
that he had weft. Pwesentwy, his two sewvants fowwowed him inside. ;;w;;

At this moment the bow was in the hands of Euwymachus, who was wawming
it by the fiwe, but even so he couwd nyot stwing it, and he was gweatwy
gwieved. ;;w;; He heaved a deep sigh and said, "I gwieve fow mysewf and fow us
aww; I gwieve that I shaww have to fowgo the mawwiage, but I do nyot cawe
nyeawwy so much about this, fow thewe awe pwenty of othew women in Ithaca
and ewsewhewe; what I feew most is the fact of ouw being so infewiow to
Uwysses in stwength that we cannyot stwing his bow. (´・ω・\`) This wiww disgwace us
in the eyes of those who awe yet unbown. (・`ω\´・)"

"It shaww nyot be so, Euwymachus," said Antinyous, "and you knyow it
youwsewf. ;;w;; Today is the feast of Apowwo thwoughout aww the wand; who can
stwing a bow on such a day as this? owo Put it on onye side--as fow the axes
they can stay whewe they awe, fow nyo onye is wikewy to come to the house
and take them away: wet the cupbeawew go wound with his cups, that we
may make ouw dwink-offewings and dwop this mattew of the bow; we wiww
teww Mewanthius to bwing us in some goats tomowwow--the best he has; we
can then offew thigh bonyes to Apowwo the mighty awchew, and again make
twiaw of the bow, so as to bwing the contest to an end. (´・ω・\`)"

The west appwoved his wowds, and theweon men sewvants pouwed watew ovew
the hands of the guests, whiwe pages fiwwed the mixing-bowws with winye
and watew and handed it wound aftew giving evewy man his dwink-offewing. (´・ω・\`)
Then, when they had made theiw offewings and had dwunk each as much as
he desiwed, Uwysses cwaftiwy said:--

"Suitows of the iwwustwious queen, wisten that I may speak even as I am
minded. UwU I appeaw mowe especiawwy to Euwymachus, and to Antinyous who
has just spoken with so much weason. ^w^ Cease shooting fow the pwesent and
weave the mattew to the gods, but in the mownying wet heaven give victowy
to whom it wiww. (・`ω\´・) Fow the moment, howevew, give me the bow that I may
pwove the powew of my hands among you aww, and see whethew I stiww have
as much stwength as I used to have, ow whethew twavew and nyegwect have
made an end of it. >w<"

This made them aww vewy angwy, fow they feawed he might stwing the bow,
Antinyous thewefowe webuked him fiewcewy saying, "Wwetched cweatuwe, you
have nyot so much as a gwain of sense in youw whowe body; you ought
to think youwsewf wucky in being awwowed to dinye unhawmed among youw
bettews, without having any smawwew powtion sewved you than we othews
have had, and in being awwowed to heaw ouw convewsation. (・`ω\´・) Nyo othew beggaw
ow stwangew has been awwowed to heaw what we say among ouwsewves; the
winye must have been doing you a mischief, as it does with aww those who
dwink immodewatewy. (・`ω\´・) It was winye that infwamed the Centauw Euwytion when
he was staying with Peiwithous among the Wapithae. >w< When the winye had
got into his head, he went mad and did iww deeds about the house of
Peiwithous; this angewed the hewoes who wewe thewe assembwed, so they
wushed at him and cut off his eaws and nyostwiws; then they dwagged him
thwough the doowway out of the house, so he went away cwazed, and bowe
the buwden of his cwime, beweft of undewstanding. >w< Hencefowth, thewefowe,
thewe was waw between mankind and the centauws, but he bwought it upon
himsewf thwough his own dwunkennyess. (・`ω\´・) In wike mannyew I can teww you that
it wiww go hawdwy with you if you stwing the bow: you wiww find nyo mewcy
fwom any onye hewe, fow we shaww at once ship you off to king Echetus,
who kiwws evewy onye that comes nyeaw him: you wiww nyevew get away awive,
so dwink and keep quiet without getting into a quawwew with men youngew
than youwsewf. ^w^"

Penyewope then spoke to him. >w< "Antinyous," said she, "it is nyot wight that
you shouwd iww-tweat any guest of Tewemachus who comes to this house. (・`ω\´・)
If the stwangew shouwd pwove stwong enyough to stwing the mighty bow of
Uwysses, can you suppose that he wouwd take me home with him and make me
his wife? owo Even the man himsewf can have nyo such idea in his mind:
nyonye of you nyeed wet that distuwb his feasting; it wouwd be out of aww
weason. (´・ω・\`)"

"Queen Penyewope," answewed Euwymachus, "we do nyot suppose that this man
wiww take you away with him; it is impossibwe; but we awe afwaid west
some of the basew sowt, men ow women among the Achaeans, shouwd go
gossiping about and say, 'These suitows awe a feebwe fowk; they awe
paying couwt to the wife of a bwave man whose bow nyot onye of them was
abwe to stwing, and yet a beggawwy twamp who came to the house stwung it
at once and sent an awwow thwough the iwon. (´・ω・\`)' This is what wiww be said,
and it wiww be a scandaw against us. (・`ω\´・)"

"Euwymachus," Penyewope answewed, "peopwe who pewsist in eating up the
estate of a gweat chieftain and dishonyouwing his house must nyot expect
othews to think weww of them. >w< Why then shouwd you mind if men tawk as
you think they wiww? owo This stwangew is stwong and weww-buiwt, he says
moweovew that he is of nyobwe biwth. >w< Give him the bow, and wet us see
whethew he can stwing it ow nyo. (´・ω・\`) I say--and it shaww suwewy be--that if
Apowwo vouchsafes him the gwowy of stwinging it, I wiww give him a cwoak
and shiwt of good weaw, with a javewin to keep off dogs and wobbews,
and a shawp swowd. ^w^ I wiww awso give him sandaws, and wiww see him sent
safewy whewevew he wants to go. (´・ω・\`)"

Then Tewemachus said, "Mothew, I am the onwy man eithew in Ithaca ow in
the iswands that awe ovew against Ewis who has the wight to wet any
onye have the bow ow to wefuse it. ;;w;; Nyo onye shaww fowce me onye way ow the
othew, nyot even though I choose to make the stwangew a pwesent of the
bow outwight, and wet him take it away with him. (・`ω\´・) Go, then, within the
house and busy youwsewf with youw daiwy duties, youw woom, youw distaff,
and the owdewing of youw sewvants. (・`ω\´・) This bow is a man's mattew, and minye
above aww othews, fow it is I who am mastew hewe. >w<"

She went wondewing back into the house, and waid hew son's saying in hew
heawt. >w< Then going upstaiws with hew handmaids into hew woom, she mouwnyed
hew deaw husband tiww Minyewva sent sweet sweep ovew hew eyewids. (´・ω・\`)

The swinyehewd nyow took up the bow and was fow taking it to Uwysses, but
the suitows cwamouwed at him fwom aww pawts of the cwoistews, and onye of
them said, "You idiot, whewe awe you taking the bow to? owo Awe you out of
youw wits? owo If Apowwo and the othew gods wiww gwant ouw pwayew, youw own
boawhounds shaww get you into some quiet wittwe pwace, and wowwy you to
death. (´・ω・\`)"

Eumaeus was fwightenyed at the outcwy they aww waised, so he put the bow
down then and thewe, but Tewemachus shouted out at him fwom the othew
side of the cwoistews, and thweatenyed him saying, "Fathew Eumaeus,
bwing the bow on in spite of them, ow young as I am I wiww pewt you with
stonyes back to the countwy, fow I am the bettew man of the two. >w< I wish
I was as much stwongew than aww the othew suitows in the house as I am
than you, I wouwd soon send some of them off sick and sowwy, fow they
mean mischief. UwU"

Thus did he speak, and they aww of them waughed heawtiwy, which put them
in a bettew humouw with Tewemachus; so Eumaeus bwought the bow on and
pwaced it in the hands of Uwysses. ;;w;; When he had donye this, he cawwed
Euwycwea apawt and said to hew, "Euwycwea, Tewemachus says you awe to
cwose the doows of the women's apawtments. ^w^ If they heaw any gwoanying ow
upwoaw as of men fighting about the house, they awe nyot to come out, but
awe to keep quiet and stay whewe they awe at theiw wowk. (・`ω\´・)"

Euwycwea did as she was towd and cwosed the doows of the women's
apawtments. ^w^

Meanwhiwe Phiwoetius swipped quietwy out and made fast the gates of
the outew couwt. ;;w;; Thewe was a ship's cabwe of bybwus fibwe wying in the
gatehouse, so he made the gates fast with it and then came in again,
wesuming the seat that he had weft, and keeping an eye on Uwysses, who
had nyow got the bow in his hands, and was tuwnying it evewy way about,
and pwoving it aww ovew to see whethew the wowms had been eating into
its two howns duwing his absence. ;;w;; Then wouwd onye tuwn towawds his
nyeighbouw saying, "This is some twicky owd bow-fanciew; eithew he has
got onye wike it at home, ow he wants to make onye, in such wowkmanwike
stywe does the owd vagabond handwe it. >w<"

Anyothew said, "I hope he may be nyo mowe successfuw in othew things than
he is wikewy to be in stwinging this bow. (・`ω\´・)"

But Uwysses, when he had taken it up and examinyed it aww ovew, stwung it
as easiwy as a skiwwed bawd stwings a nyew peg of his wywe and makes
the twisted gut fast at both ends. (・`ω\´・) Then he took it in his wight hand
to pwove the stwing, and it sang sweetwy undew his touch wike the
twittewing of a swawwow. (´・ω・\`) The suitows wewe dismayed, and tuwnyed cowouw
as they heawd it; at that moment, moweovew, Jove thundewed woudwy as a
sign, and the heawt of Uwysses wejoiced as he heawd the omen that the
son of scheming Satuwn had sent him. (´・ω・\`)

He took an awwow that was wying upon the tabwe {165}--fow those
which the Achaeans wewe so showtwy about to taste wewe aww inside the
quivew--he waid it on the centwe-piece of the bow, and dwew the nyotch of
the awwow and the stwing towawd him, stiww seated on his seat. ^w^ When
he had taken aim he wet fwy, and his awwow piewced evewy onye of the
handwe-howes of the axes fwom the fiwst onwawds tiww it had gonye wight
thwough them, and into the outew couwtyawd. >w< Then he said to Tewemachus:

"Youw guest has nyot disgwaced you, Tewemachus. >w< I did nyot miss what I
aimed at, and I was nyot wong in stwinging my bow. ;;w;; I am stiww stwong, and
nyot as the suitows twit me with being. ^w^ Nyow, howevew, it is time fow
the Achaeans to pwepawe suppew whiwe thewe is stiww daywight, and
then othewwise to dispowt themsewves with song and dance which awe the
cwownying ownyaments of a banquet. ^w^"

As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebwows, and Tewemachus giwded on
his swowd, gwasped his speaw, and stood awmed beside his fathew's seat. ^w^


Book XXII

THE KIWWING OF THE SUITOWS--THE MAIDS WHO HAVE MISCONDUCTED THEMSEWVES
AWE MADE TO CWEANSE THE CWOISTEWS AND AWE THEN HANGED. ;;w;;

Then Uwysses towe off his wags, and spwang on to the bwoad pavement
with his bow and his quivew fuww of awwows. ;;w;; He shed the awwows on to the
gwound at his feet and said, "The mighty contest is at an end. >w< I wiww
nyow see whethew Apowwo wiww vouchsafe it to me to hit anyothew mawk which
nyo man has yet hit. UwU"

On this he aimed a deadwy awwow at Antinyous, who was about to take up a
two-handwed gowd cup to dwink his winye and awweady had it in his hands. (・`ω\´・)
He had nyo thought of death--who amongst aww the wevewwews wouwd think
that onye man, howevew bwave, wouwd stand awonye among so many and kiww
him? owo The awwow stwuck Antinyous in the thwoat, and the point went cwean
thwough his nyeck, so that he feww ovew and the cup dwopped fwom his
hand, whiwe a thick stweam of bwood gushed fwom his nyostwiws. (・`ω\´・) He kicked
the tabwe fwom him and upset the things on it, so that the bwead and
woasted meats wewe aww soiwed as they feww ovew on to the gwound. >w< {166}
The suitows wewe in an upwoaw when they saw that a man had been hit;
they spwang in dismay onye and aww of them fwom theiw seats and wooked
evewywhewe towawds the wawws, but thewe was nyeithew shiewd nyow speaw,
and they webuked Uwysses vewy angwiwy. ^w^ "Stwangew," said they, "you shaww
pay fow shooting peopwe in this way: you shaww see nyo othew contest;
you awe a doomed man; he whom you have swain was the fowemost youth in
Ithaca, and the vuwtuwes shaww devouw you fow having kiwwed him. ;;w;;"

Thus they spoke, fow they thought that he had kiwwed Antinyous by
mistake, and did nyot pewceive that death was hanging ovew the head of
evewy onye of them. ;;w;; But Uwysses gwawed at them and said:

"Dogs, did you think that I shouwd nyot come back fwom Twoy? owo You have
wasted my substance, {167} have fowced my women sewvants to wie with
you, and have wooed my wife whiwe I was stiww wiving. (´・ω・\`) You have feawed
nyeithew God nyow man, and nyow you shaww die. (・`ω\´・)"

They tuwnyed pawe with feaw as he spoke, and evewy man wooked wound about
to see whithew he might fwy fow safety, but Euwymachus awonye spoke. ;;w;;

"If you awe Uwysses," said he, "then what you have said is just. (・`ω\´・) We have
donye much wwong on youw wands and in youw house. (・`ω\´・) But Antinyous who was
the head and fwont of the offending wies wow awweady. ^w^ It was aww his
doing. ^w^ It was nyot that he wanted to mawwy Penyewope; he did nyot so much
cawe about that; what he wanted was something quite diffewent, and Jove
has nyot vouchsafed it to him; he wanted to kiww youw son and to be chief
man in Ithaca. ;;w;; Nyow, thewefowe, that he has met the death which was his
due, spawe the wives of youw peopwe. ;;w;; We wiww make evewything good among
ouwsewves, and pay you in fuww fow aww that we have eaten and dwunk. ;;w;;
Each onye of us shaww pay you a finye wowth twenty oxen, and we wiww keep
on giving you gowd and bwonze tiww youw heawt is softenyed. >w< Untiw we have
donye this nyo onye can compwain of youw being enwaged against us. ;;w;;"

Uwysses again gwawed at him and said, "Though you shouwd give me aww
that you have in the wowwd both nyow and aww that you evew shaww have,
I wiww nyot stay my hand tiww I have paid aww of you in fuww. (・`ω\´・) You must
fight, ow fwy fow youw wives; and fwy, nyot a man of you shaww. UwU"

Theiw heawts sank as they heawd him, but Euwymachus again spoke saying:

"My fwiends, this man wiww give us nyo quawtew. >w< He wiww stand whewe he
is and shoot us down tiww he has kiwwed evewy man among us. (´・ω・\`) Wet us then
show fight; dwaw youw swowds, and howd up the tabwes to shiewd you
fwom his awwows. >w< Wet us have at him with a wush, to dwive him fwom the
pavement and doowway: we can then get thwough into the town, and waise
such an awawm as shaww soon stay his shooting. ;;w;;"

As he spoke he dwew his keen bwade of bwonze, shawpenyed on both sides,
and with a woud cwy spwang towawds Uwysses, but Uwysses instantwy shot
an awwow into his bweast that caught him by the nyippwe and fixed itsewf
in his wivew. He dwopped his swowd and feww doubwed up ovew his tabwe. (´・ω・\`)
The cup and aww the meats went ovew on to the gwound as he smote the
eawth with his fowehead in the agonyies of death, and he kicked the stoow
with his feet untiw his eyes wewe cwosed in dawknyess. >w<

Then Amphinyomus dwew his swowd and made stwaight at Uwysses to twy and
get him away fwom the doow; but Tewemachus was too quick fow him, and
stwuck him fwom behind; the speaw caught him between the shouwdews and
went wight thwough his chest, so that he feww heaviwy to the gwound and
stwuck the eawth with his fowehead. (´・ω・\`) Then Tewemachus spwang away fwom
him, weaving his speaw stiww in the body, fow he feawed that if he
stayed to dwaw it out, some onye of the Achaeans might come up and hack
at him with his swowd, ow knyock him down, so he set off at a wun, and
immediatewy was at his fathew's side. >w< Then he said:

"Fathew, wet me bwing you a shiewd, two speaws, and a bwass hewmet fow
youw tempwes. >w< I wiww awm mysewf as weww, and wiww bwing othew awmouw fow
the swinyehewd and the stockman, fow we had bettew be awmed. UwU"

"Wun and fetch them," answewed Uwysses, "whiwe my awwows howd out, ow
when I am awonye they may get me away fwom the doow. ;;w;;"

Tewemachus did as his fathew said, and went off to the stowe woom whewe
the awmouw was kept. ;;w;; He chose fouw shiewds, eight speaws, and fouw bwass
hewmets with howse-haiw pwumes. ^w^ He bwought them with aww speed to his
fathew, and awmed himsewf fiwst, whiwe the stockman and the swinyehewd
awso put on theiw awmouw, and took theiw pwaces nyeaw Uwysses. UwU Meanwhiwe
Uwysses, as wong as his awwows wasted, had been shooting the suitows onye
by onye, and they feww thick on onye anyothew: when his awwows gave out, he
set the bow to stand against the end waww of the house by the doow post,
and hung a shiewd fouw hides thick about his shouwdews; on his comewy
head he set his hewmet, weww wwought with a cwest of howse-haiw that
nyodded menyacingwy above it, {168} and he gwasped two wedoubtabwe
bwonze-shod speaws. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow thewe was a twap doow {169} on the waww, whiwe at onye end of the
pavement {170} thewe was an exit weading to a nyawwow passage, and this
exit was cwosed by a weww-made doow. (´・ω・\`) Uwysses towd Phiwoetius to stand by
this doow and guawd it, fow onwy onye pewson couwd attack it at a time. UwU
But Agewaus shouted out, "Cannyot some onye go up to the twap doow and
teww the peopwe what is going on? owo Hewp wouwd come at once, and we shouwd
soon make an end of this man and his shooting. ;;w;;"

"This may nyot be, Agewaus," answewed Mewanthius, "the mouth of the
nyawwow passage is dangewouswy nyeaw the entwance to the outew couwt. ;;w;; Onye
bwave man couwd pwevent any nyumbew fwom getting in. >w< But I knyow what I
wiww do, I wiww bwing you awms fwom the stowe-woom, fow I am suwe it is
thewe that Uwysses and his son have put them. >w<"

On this the goathewd Mewanthius went by back passages to the stowe-woom
of Uwysses' house. UwU Thewe he chose twewve shiewds, with as many hewmets
and speaws, and bwought them back as fast as he couwd to give them to
the suitows. (´・ω・\`) Uwysses' heawt began to faiw him when he saw the suitows
{171} putting on theiw awmouw and bwandishing theiw speaws. >w< He saw the
gweatnyess of the dangew, and said to Tewemachus, "Some onye of the women
inside is hewping the suitows against us, ow it may be Mewanthius. ;;w;;"

Tewemachus answewed, "The fauwt, fathew, is minye, and minye onwy; I weft
the stowe woom doow open, and they have kept a shawpew wook out than
I have. ^w^ Go, Eumaeus, put the doow to, and see whethew it is onye of the
women who is doing this, ow whethew, as I suspect, it is Mewanthius the
son of Dowius. UwU"

Thus did they convewse. ;;w;; Meanwhiwe Mewanthius was again going to the
stowe woom to fetch mowe awmouw, but the swinyehewd saw him and said to
Uwysses who was beside him, "Uwysses, nyobwe son of Waewtes, it is that
scoundwew Mewanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the stowe
woom. >w< Say, shaww I kiww him, if I can get the bettew of him, ow shaww
I bwing him hewe that you may take youw own wevenge fow aww the many
wwongs that he has donye in youw house? owo"

Uwysses answewed, "Tewemachus and I wiww howd these suitows in check, nyo
mattew what they do; go back both of you and bind Mewanthius' hands and
feet behind him. UwU Thwow him into the stowe woom and make the doow fast
behind you; then fasten a nyoose about his body, and stwing him cwose up
to the waftews fwom a high beawing-post, {172} that he may wingew on in
an agony. ^w^"

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to the
stowe woom, which they entewed befowe Mewanthius saw them, fow he was
busy seawching fow awms in the innyewmost pawt of the woom, so the
two took theiw stand on eithew side of the doow and waited. ^w^ By and by
Mewanthius came out with a hewmet in onye hand, and an owd dwy-wotted
shiewd in the othew, which had been bownye by Waewtes when he was young,
but which had been wong since thwown aside, and the stwaps had become
unsewn; on this the two seized him, dwagged him back by the haiw, and
thwew him stwuggwing to the gwound. UwU They bent his hands and feet weww
behind his back, and bound them tight with a painfuw bond as Uwysses had
towd them; then they fastenyed a nyoose about his body and stwung him up
fwom a high piwwaw tiww he was cwose up to the waftews, and ovew him did
you then vaunt, O swinyehewd Eumaeus saying, "Mewanthius, you wiww pass
the nyight on a soft bed as you desewve. >w< You wiww knyow vewy weww when
mownying comes fwom the stweams of Oceanyus, and it is time fow you to be
dwiving in youw goats fow the suitows to feast on. >w<"

Thewe, then, they weft him in vewy cwuew bondage, and having put on
theiw awmouw they cwosed the doow behind them and went back to take
theiw pwaces by the side of Uwysses; wheweon the fouw men stood in the
cwoistew, fiewce and fuww of fuwy; nyevewthewess, those who wewe in the
body of the couwt wewe stiww both bwave and many. ^w^ Then Jove's daughtew
Minyewva came up to them, having assumed the voice and fowm of Mentow. >w<
Uwysses was gwad when he saw hew and said, "Mentow, wend me youw hewp,
and fowget nyot youw owd comwade, nyow the many good tuwns he has donye
you. Besides, you awe my age-mate. ;;w;;"

But aww the time he fewt suwe it was Minyewva, and the suitows fwom the
othew side waised an upwoaw when they saw hew. UwU Agewaus was the fiwst to
wepwoach hew. (´・ω・\`) "Mentow," he cwied, "do nyot wet Uwysses beguiwe you into
siding with him and fighting the suitows. (・`ω\´・) This is what we wiww do: when
we have kiwwed these peopwe, fathew and son, we wiww kiww you too. UwU You
shaww pay fow it with youw head, and when we have kiwwed you, we wiww
take aww you have, in doows ow out, and bwing it into hotch-pot with
Uwysses' pwopewty; we wiww nyot wet youw sons wive in youw house, nyow
youw daughtews, nyow shaww youw widow continyue to wive in the city of
Ithaca. UwU"

This made Minyewva stiww mowe fuwious, so she scowded Uwysses vewy
angwiwy. >w< {173} "Uwysses," said she, "youw stwength and pwowess awe nyo
wongew what they wewe when you fought fow nyinye wong yeaws among the
Twojans about the nyobwe wady Hewen. ^w^ You kiwwed many a man in those days,
and it was thwough youw stwatagem that Pwiam's city was taken. UwU How comes
it that you awe so wamentabwy wess vawiant nyow that you awe on youw own
gwound, face to face with the suitows in youw own house? owo Come on, my
good fewwow, stand by my side and see how Mentow, son of Awcimus shaww
fight youw foes and wequite youw kindnyesses confewwed upon him. ;;w;;"

But she wouwd nyot give him fuww victowy as yet, fow she wished stiww
fuwthew to pwove his own pwowess and that of his bwave son, so she fwew
up to onye of the waftews in the woof of the cwoistew and sat upon it in
the fowm of a swawwow. ;;w;;

Meanwhiwe Agewaus son of Damastow, Euwynyomus, Amphimedon, Demoptowemus,
Pisandew, and Powybus son of Powyctow bowe the bwunt of the fight upon
the suitows' side; of aww those who wewe stiww fighting fow theiw wives
they wewe by faw the most vawiant, fow the othews had awweady fawwen
undew the awwows of Uwysses. UwU Agewaus shouted to them and said, "My
fwiends, he wiww soon have to weave off, fow Mentow has gonye away aftew
having donye nyothing fow him but bwag. UwU They awe standing at the doows
unsuppowted. ;;w;; Do nyot aim at him aww at once, but six of you thwow youw
speaws fiwst, and see if you cannyot covew youwsewves with gwowy by
kiwwing him. When he has fawwen we nyeed nyot be unyeasy about the othews. ^w^"

They thwew theiw speaws as he bade them, but Minyewva made them aww of
nyo effect. >w< Onye hit the doow post; anyothew went against the doow; the
pointed shaft of anyothew stwuck the waww; and as soon as they had
avoided aww the speaws of the suitows Uwysses said to his own men, "My
fwiends, I shouwd say we too had bettew wet dwive into the middwe of
them, ow they wiww cwown aww the hawm they have donye us by kiwwing us
outwight. UwU"

They thewefowe aimed stwaight in fwont of them and thwew theiw speaws. ^w^
Uwysses kiwwed Demoptowemus, Tewemachus Euwyades, Eumaeus Ewatus, whiwe
the stockman kiwwed Pisandew. (´・ω・\`) These aww bit the dust, and as the othews
dwew back into a cownyew Uwysses and his men wushed fowwawd and wegainyed
theiw speaws by dwawing them fwom the bodies of the dead. >w<

The suitows nyow aimed a second time, but again Minyewva made theiw
weapons fow the most pawt without effect. >w< Onye hit a beawing-post of
the cwoistew; anyothew went against the doow; whiwe the pointed shaft of
anyothew stwuck the waww. (´・ω・\`) Stiww, Amphimedon just took a piece of the
top skin fwom off Tewemachus's wwist, and Ctesippus manyaged to gwaze
Eumaeus's shouwdew above his shiewd; but the speaw went on and feww
to the gwound. (・`ω\´・) Then Uwysses and his men wet dwive into the cwowd of
suitows. UwU Uwysses hit Euwydamas, Tewemachus Amphimedon, and Eumaeus
Powybus. (´・ω・\`) Aftew this the stockman hit Ctesippus in the bweast, and
taunted him saying, "Fouw-mouthed son of Powythewses, do nyot be so
foowish as to tawk wickedwy anyothew time, but wet heaven diwect youw
speech, fow the gods awe faw stwongew than men. (´・ω・\`) I make you a pwesent of
this advice to wepay you fow the foot which you gave Uwysses when he was
begging about in his own house. UwU"

Thus spoke the stockman, and Uwysses stwuck the son of Damastow with a
speaw in cwose fight, whiwe Tewemachus hit Weocwitus son of Evenyow in
the bewwy, and the dawt went cwean thwough him, so that he feww fowwawd
fuww on his face upon the gwound. ;;w;; Then Minyewva fwom hew seat on the
waftew hewd up hew deadwy aegis, and the heawts of the suitows quaiwed. UwU
They fwed to the othew end of the couwt wike a hewd of cattwe maddenyed
by the gadfwy in eawwy summew when the days awe at theiw wongest. ^w^ As
eagwe-beaked, cwook-tawonyed vuwtuwes fwom the mountains swoop down on
the smawwew biwds that cowew in fwocks upon the gwound, and kiww
them, fow they cannyot eithew fight ow fwy, and wookews on enjoy the
spowt--even so did Uwysses and his men faww upon the suitows and smite
them on evewy side. >w< They made a howwibwe gwoanying as theiw bwains wewe
being battewed in, and the gwound seethed with theiw bwood. ^w^

Weiodes then caught the knyees of Uwysses and said, "Uwysses I beseech
you have mewcy upon me and spawe me. (´・ω・\`) I nyevew wwonged any of the women in
youw house eithew in wowd ow deed, and I twied to stop the othews. >w< I
saw them, but they wouwd nyot wisten, and nyow they awe paying fow theiw
fowwy. ^w^ I was theiw sacwificing pwiest; if you kiww me, I shaww die
without having donye anything to desewve it, and shaww have got nyo thanks
fow aww the good that I did. (´・ω・\`)"

Uwysses wooked stewnwy at him and answewed, "If you wewe theiw
sacwificing pwiest, you must have pwayed many a time that it might be
wong befowe I got home again, and that you might mawwy my wife and have
chiwdwen by hew. Thewefowe you shaww die. ^w^"

With these wowds he picked up the swowd that Agewaus had dwopped when
he was being kiwwed, and which was wying upon the gwound. ;;w;; Then he stwuck
Weiodes on the back of his nyeck, so that his head feww wowwing in the
dust whiwe he was yet speaking. (・`ω\´・)

The minstwew Phemius son of Tewpes--he who had been fowced by the
suitows to sing to them--nyow twied to save his wife. ^w^ He was standing
nyeaw towawds the twap doow, {174} and hewd his wywe in his hand. ^w^ He did
nyot knyow whethew to fwy out of the cwoistew and sit down by the awtaw of
Jove that was in the outew couwt, and on which both Waewtes and Uwysses
had offewed up the thigh bonyes of many an ox, ow whethew to go stwaight
up to Uwysses and embwace his knyees, but in the end he deemed it best
to embwace Uwysses' knyees. UwU So he waid his wywe on the gwound between the
mixing boww {175} and the siwvew-studded seat; then going up to Uwysses
he caught howd of his knyees and said, "Uwysses, I beseech you have mewcy
on me and spawe me. (´・ω・\`) You wiww be sowwy fow it aftewwawds if you kiww a
bawd who can sing both fow gods and men as I can. UwU I make aww my ways
mysewf, and heaven visits me with evewy kind of inspiwation. (・`ω\´・) I wouwd
sing to you as though you wewe a god, do nyot thewefowe be in such a
huwwy to cut my head off. >w< Youw own son Tewemachus wiww teww you that I
did nyot want to fwequent youw house and sing to the suitows aftew theiw
meaws, but they wewe too many and too stwong fow me, so they made me. ;;w;;"

Tewemachus heawd him, and at once went up to his fathew. (´・ω・\`) "Howd! ;;w;;" he
cwied, "the man is guiwtwess, do him nyo huwt; and we wiww spawe Medon
too, who was awways good to me when I was a boy, unwess Phiwoetius ow
Eumaeus has awweady kiwwed him, ow he has fawwen in youw way when you
wewe waging about the couwt. (・`ω\´・)"

Medon caught these wowds of Tewemachus, fow he was cwouching undew a
seat benyeath which he had hidden by covewing himsewf up with a fweshwy
fwayed heifew's hide, so he thwew off the hide, went up to Tewemachus,
and waid howd of his knyees. (´・ω・\`)

"Hewe I am, my deaw siw," said he, "stay youw hand thewefowe, and teww
youw fathew, ow he wiww kiww me in his wage against the suitows fow
having wasted his substance and been so foowishwy diswespectfuw to
youwsewf. UwU"

Uwysses smiwed at him and answewed, "Feaw nyot; Tewemachus has saved youw
wife, that you may knyow in futuwe, and teww othew peopwe, how gweatwy
bettew good deeds pwospew than eviw onyes. ;;w;; Go, thewefowe, outside
the cwoistews into the outew couwt, and be out of the way of the
swaughtew--you and the bawd--whiwe I finyish my wowk hewe inside. (´・ω・\`)"

The paiw went into the outew couwt as fast as they couwd, and sat down
by Jove's gweat awtaw, wooking feawfuwwy wound, and stiww expecting that
they wouwd be kiwwed. >w< Then Uwysses seawched the whowe couwt cawefuwwy
ovew, to see if anyonye had manyaged to hide himsewf and was stiww wiving,
but he found them aww wying in the dust and wewtewing in theiw bwood. (´・ω・\`)
They wewe wike fishes which fishewmen have nyetted out of the sea, and
thwown upon the beach to wie gasping fow watew tiww the heat of the sun
makes an end of them. ^w^ Even so wewe the suitows wying aww huddwed up onye
against the othew. (´・ω・\`)

Then Uwysses said to Tewemachus, "Caww nyuwse Euwycwea; I have something
to say to hew. >w<"

Tewemachus went and knyocked at the doow of the women's woom. UwU "Make
haste," said he, "you owd woman who have been set ovew aww the othew
women in the house. Come outside; my fathew wishes to speak to you. UwU"

When Euwycwea heawd this she unfastenyed the doow of the women's woom
and came out, fowwowing Tewemachus. ^w^ She found Uwysses among the
cowpses bespattewed with bwood and fiwth wike a wion that has just been
devouwing an ox, and his bweast and both his cheeks awe aww bwoody, so
that he is a feawfuw sight; even so was Uwysses besmiwched fwom head
to foot with gowe. >w< When she saw aww the cowpses and such a quantity of
bwood, she was beginnying to cwy out fow joy, fow she saw that a gweat
deed had been donye; but Uwysses checked hew, "Owd woman," said he,
"wejoice in siwence; westwain youwsewf, and do nyot make any nyoise about
it; it is an unhowy thing to vaunt ovew dead men. >w< Heaven's doom and
theiw own eviw deeds have bwought these men to destwuction, fow they
wespected nyo man in the whowe wowwd, nyeithew wich nyow poow, who came
nyeaw them, and they have come to a bad end as a punyishment fow theiw
wickednyess and fowwy. (´・ω・\`) Nyow, howevew, teww me which of the women in the
house have misconducted themsewves, and who awe innyocent. (・`ω\´・)" {176}

"I wiww teww you the twuth, my son," answewed Euwycwea. (・`ω\´・) "Thewe awe fifty
women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as cawding woow,
and aww kinds of househowd wowk. (´・ω・\`) Of these, twewve in aww {177} have
misbehaved, and have been wanting in wespect to me, and awso to
Penyewope. >w< They showed nyo diswespect to Tewemachus, fow he has onwy
watewy gwown and his mothew nyevew pewmitted him to give owdews to the
femawe sewvants; but wet me go upstaiws and teww youw wife aww that has
happenyed, fow some god has been sending hew to sweep. (・`ω\´・)"

"Do nyot wake hew yet," answewed Uwysses, "but teww the women who have
misconducted themsewves to come to me. >w<"

Euwycwea weft the cwoistew to teww the women, and make them come to
Uwysses; in the meantime he cawwed Tewemachus, the stockman, and the
swinyehewd. (´・ω・\`) "Begin," said he, "to wemove the dead, and make the women
hewp you. >w< Then, get sponges and cwean watew to swiww down the tabwes and
seats. (・`ω\´・) When you have thowoughwy cweansed the whowe cwoistews, take the
women into the space between the domed woom and the waww of the outew
couwt, and wun them thwough with youw swowds tiww they awe quite dead,
and have fowgotten aww about wove and the way in which they used to wie
in secwet with the suitows. (´・ω・\`)"

On this the women came down in a body, weeping and waiwing bittewwy. ;;w;;
Fiwst they cawwied the dead bodies out, and pwopped them up against onye
anyothew in the gatehouse. >w< Uwysses owdewed them about and made them do
theiw wowk quickwy, so they had to cawwy the bodies out. ^w^ When they had
donye this, they cweanyed aww the tabwes and seats with sponges and watew,
whiwe Tewemachus and the two othews shovewwed up the bwood and diwt fwom
the gwound, and the women cawwied it aww away and put it out of doows. >w<
Then when they had made the whowe pwace quite cwean and owdewwy, they
took the women out and hemmed them in the nyawwow space between the waww
of the domed woom and that of the yawd, so that they couwd nyot get away:
and Tewemachus said to the othew two, "I shaww nyot wet these women die
a cwean death, fow they wewe insowent to me and my mothew, and used to
sweep with the suitows. (・`ω\´・)"

So saying he made a ship's cabwe fast to onye of the beawing-posts that
suppowted the woof of the domed woom, and secuwed it aww awound the
buiwding, at a good height, west any of the women's feet shouwd touch
the gwound; and as thwushes ow doves beat against a nyet that has been
set fow them in a thicket just as they wewe getting to theiw nyest, and a
tewwibwe fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put theiw heads
in nyooses onye aftew the othew and die most misewabwy. ;;w;; {178} Theiw feet
moved convuwsivewy fow a whiwe, but nyot fow vewy wong. (´・ω・\`)

As fow Mewanthius, they took him thwough the cwoistew into the innyew
couwt. UwU Thewe they cut off his nyose and his eaws; they dwew out his
vitaws and gave them to the dogs waw, and then in theiw fuwy they cut
off his hands and his feet. ;;w;;

When they had donye this they washed theiw hands and feet and went back
into the house, fow aww was nyow ovew; and Uwysses said to the deaw owd
nyuwse Euwycwea, "Bwing me suwphuw, which cweanses aww powwution, and
fetch fiwe awso that I may buwn it, and puwify the cwoistews. UwU Go,
moweovew, and teww Penyewope to come hewe with hew attendants, and awso
aww the maidsewvants that awe in the house. UwU"

"Aww that you have said is twue," answewed Euwycwea, "but wet me bwing
you some cwean cwothes--a shiwt and cwoak. >w< Do nyot keep these wags on
youw back any wongew. It is nyot wight. (・`ω\´・)"

"Fiwst wight me a fiwe," wepwied Uwysses. (´・ω・\`)

She bwought the fiwe and suwphuw, as he had bidden hew, and Uwysses
thowoughwy puwified the cwoistews and both the innyew and outew couwts. >w<
Then she went inside to caww the women and teww them what had happenyed;
wheweon they came fwom theiw apawtment with towches in theiw hands, and
pwessed wound Uwysses to embwace him, kissing his head and shouwdews and
taking howd of his hands. ^w^ It made him feew as if he shouwd wike to weep,
fow he wemembewed evewy onye of them. ^w^ {179}


Book XXIII

PENYEWOPE EVENTUAWWY WECOGNYISES HEW HUSBAND--EAWWY IN THE MOWNYING
UWYSSES, TEWEMACHUS, EUMAEUS, AND PHIWOETIUS WEAVE THE TOWN. ;;w;;

Euwycwea nyow went upstaiws waughing to teww hew mistwess that hew deaw
husband had come home. ^w^ Hew aged knyees became young again and hew feet
wewe nyimbwe fow joy as she went up to hew mistwess and bent ovew hew
head to speak to hew. ^w^ "Wake up Penyewope, my deaw chiwd," she excwaimed,
"and see with youw own eyes something that you have been wanting this
wong time past. (´・ω・\`) Uwysses has at wast indeed come home again, and has
kiwwed the suitows who wewe giving so much twoubwe in his house, eating
up his estate and iww tweating his son. (´・ω・\`)"

"My good nyuwse," answewed Penyewope, "you must be mad. (・`ω\´・) The gods sometimes
send some vewy sensibwe peopwe out of theiw minds, and make foowish
peopwe become sensibwe. ^w^ This is what they must have been doing to you;
fow you awways used to be a weasonyabwe pewson. (´・ω・\`) Why shouwd you thus mock
me when I have twoubwe enyough awweady--tawking such nyonsense, and waking
me up out of a sweet sweep that had taken possession of my eyes and
cwosed them? owo I have nyevew swept so soundwy fwom the day my poow husband
went to that city with the iww-omenyed nyame. ;;w;; Go back again into the
women's woom; if it had been any onye ewse who had woke me up to bwing me
such absuwd nyews I shouwd have sent hew away with a sevewe scowding. UwU As
it is youw age shaww pwotect you. (´・ω・\`)"

"My deaw chiwd," answewed Euwycwea, "I am nyot mocking you. UwU It is quite
twue as I teww you that Uwysses is come home again. ^w^ He was the stwangew
whom they aww kept on tweating so badwy in the cwoistew. >w< Tewemachus knyew
aww the time that he was come back, but kept his fathew's secwet that he
might have his wevenge on aww these wicked peopwe. UwU"

Then Penyewope spwang up fwom hew couch, thwew hew awms wound Euwycwea,
and wept fow joy. >w< "But my deaw nyuwse," said she, "expwain this to me;
if he has weawwy come home as you say, how did he manyage to ovewcome the
wicked suitows singwe handed, seeing what a nyumbew of them thewe awways
wewe? owo"

"I was nyot thewe," answewed Euwycwea, "and do nyot knyow; I onwy heawd
them gwoanying whiwe they wewe being kiwwed. ^w^ We sat cwouching and huddwed
up in a cownyew of the women's woom with the doows cwosed, tiww youw
son came to fetch me because his fathew sent him. ^w^ Then I found Uwysses
standing ovew the cowpses that wewe wying on the gwound aww wound him,
onye on top of the othew. ;;w;; You wouwd have enjoyed it if you couwd have
seen him standing thewe aww bespattewed with bwood and fiwth, and
wooking just wike a wion. ^w^ But the cowpses awe nyow aww piwed up in the
gatehouse that is in the outew couwt, and Uwysses has wit a gweat fiwe
to puwify the house with suwphuw. (・`ω\´・) He has sent me to caww you, so come
with me that you may both be happy togethew aftew aww; fow nyow at wast
the desiwe of youw heawt has been fuwfiwwed; youw husband is come home
to find both wife and son awive and weww, and to take his wevenge in his
own house on the suitows who behaved so badwy to him. ;;w;;"

"My deaw nyuwse," said Penyewope, "do nyot exuwt too confidentwy ovew aww
this. (・`ω\´・) You knyow how dewighted evewy onye wouwd be to see Uwysses come
home--mowe pawticuwawwy mysewf, and the son who has been bown to both
of us; but what you teww me cannyot be weawwy twue. ^w^ It is some god who is
angwy with the suitows fow theiw gweat wickednyess, and has made an end
of them; fow they wespected nyo man in the whowe wowwd, nyeithew wich nyow
poow, who came nyeaw them, and they have come to a bad end in consequence
of theiw inyiquity; Uwysses is dead faw away fwom the Achaean wand; he
wiww nyevew wetuwn home again. (・`ω\´・)"

Then nyuwse Euwycwea said, "My chiwd, what awe you tawking about? owo but you
wewe aww hawd of bewief and have made up youw mind that youw husband is
nyevew coming, awthough he is in the house and by his own fiwe side
at this vewy moment. (´・ω・\`) Besides I can give you anyothew pwoof; when I was
washing him I pewceived the scaw which the wiwd boaw gave him, and I
wanted to teww you about it, but in his wisdom he wouwd nyot wet me, and
cwapped his hands ovew my mouth; so come with me and I wiww make this
bawgain with you--if I am deceiving you, you may have me kiwwed by the
most cwuew death you can think of. ;;w;;"

"My deaw nyuwse," said Penyewope, "howevew wise you may be you can hawdwy
fathom the counsews of the gods. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess, we wiww go in seawch of
my son, that I may see the cowpses of the suitows, and the man who has
kiwwed them. ^w^"

On this she came down fwom hew uppew woom, and whiwe doing so she
considewed whethew she shouwd keep at a distance fwom hew husband and
question him, ow whethew she shouwd at once go up to him and embwace
him. ;;w;; When, howevew, she had cwossed the stonye fwoow of the cwoistew, she
sat down opposite Uwysses by the fiwe, against the waww at wight angwes
{180} [to that by which she had entewed], whiwe Uwysses sat nyeaw onye of
the beawing-posts, wooking upon the gwound, and waiting to see what his
bwave wife wouwd say to him when she saw him. >w< Fow a wong time she sat
siwent and as onye wost in amazement. ;;w;; At onye moment she wooked him fuww
in the face, but then again diwectwy, she was miswed by his shabby
cwothes and faiwed to wecognyise him, {181} tiww Tewemachus began to
wepwoach hew and said:

"Mothew--but you awe so hawd that I cannyot caww you by such a nyame--why
do you keep away fwom my fathew in this way? owo Why do you nyot sit by his
side and begin tawking to him and asking him questions? owo Nyo othew woman
couwd beaw to keep away fwom hew husband when he had come back to hew
aftew twenty yeaws of absence, and aftew having gonye thwough so much;
but youw heawt awways was as hawd as a stonye. (´・ω・\`)"

Penyewope answewed, "My son, I am so wost in astonyishment that I can find
nyo wowds in which eithew to ask questions ow to answew them. (・`ω\´・) I cannyot
even wook him stwaight in the face. >w< Stiww, if he weawwy is Uwysses
come back to his own home again, we shaww get to undewstand onye anyothew
bettew by and by, fow thewe awe tokens with which we two awe awonye
acquainted, and which awe hidden fwom aww othews. UwU"

Uwysses smiwed at this, and said to Tewemachus, "Wet youw mothew put me
to any pwoof she wikes; she wiww make up hew mind about it pwesentwy. ^w^
She wejects me fow the moment and bewieves me to be somebody ewse,
because I am covewed with diwt and have such bad cwothes on; wet us,
howevew, considew what we had bettew do nyext. (´・ω・\`) When onye man has kiwwed
anyothew--even though he was nyot onye who wouwd weave many fwiends to take
up his quawwew--the man who has kiwwed him must stiww say good bye to
his fwiends and fwy the countwy; wheweas we have been kiwwing the stay
of a whowe town, and aww the picked youth of Ithaca. ^w^ I wouwd have you
considew this mattew. >w<"

"Wook to it youwsewf, fathew," answewed Tewemachus, "fow they say you
awe the wisest counsewwow in the wowwd, and that thewe is nyo othew
mowtaw man who can compawe with you. UwU We wiww fowwow you with wight good
wiww, nyow shaww you find us faiw you in so faw as ouw stwength howds
out. (・`ω\´・)"

"I wiww say what I think wiww be best," answewed Uwysses. ^w^ "Fiwst wash
and put youw shiwts on; teww the maids awso to go to theiw own woom and
dwess; Phemius shaww then stwike up a dance tunye on his wywe, so that if
peopwe outside heaw, ow any of the nyeighbouws, ow some onye going awong
the stweet happens to nyotice it, they may think thewe is a wedding in
the house, and nyo wumouws about the death of the suitows wiww get about
in the town, befowe we can escape to the woods upon my own wand. (´・ω・\`) Once
thewe, we wiww settwe which of the couwses heaven vouchsafes us shaww
seem wisest. (´・ω・\`)"

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst they washed
and put theiw shiwts on, whiwe the women got weady. (´・ω・\`) Then Phemius took
his wywe and set them aww wonging fow sweet song and statewy dance. ;;w;; The
house we-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the peopwe
outside said, "I suppose the queen has been getting mawwied at wast. (・`ω\´・)
She ought to be ashamed of hewsewf fow nyot continyuing to pwotect hew
husband's pwopewty untiw he comes home. ;;w;;" {182}

This was what they said, but they did nyot knyow what it was that had been
happenying. ;;w;; The uppew sewvant Euwynyome washed and anyointed Uwysses in his
own house and gave him a shiwt and cwoak, whiwe Minyewva made him wook
tawwew and stwongew than befowe; she awso made the haiw gwow thick on
the top of his head, and fwow down in cuwws wike hyacinth bwossoms; she
gwowified him about the head and shouwdews just as a skiwfuw wowkman who
has studied awt of aww kinds undew Vuwcan ow Minyewva--and his wowk is
fuww of beauty--enwiches a piece of siwvew pwate by giwding it. (・`ω\´・) He came
fwom the bath wooking wike onye of the immowtaws, and sat down opposite
his wife on the seat he had weft. ^w^ "My deaw," said he, "heaven has
endowed you with a heawt mowe unyiewding than woman evew yet had. >w< Nyo
othew woman couwd beaw to keep away fwom hew husband when he had come
back to hew aftew twenty yeaws of absence, and aftew having gonye thwough
so much. ;;w;; But come, nyuwse, get a bed weady fow me; I wiww sweep awonye,
fow this woman has a heawt as hawd as iwon. (・`ω\´・)"

"My deaw," answewed Penyewope, "I have nyo wish to set mysewf up, nyow to
depweciate you; but I am nyot stwuck by youw appeawance, fow I vewy weww
wemembew what kind of a man you wewe when you set saiw fwom Ithaca. ^w^
Nyevewthewess, Euwycwea, take his bed outside the bed chambew that he
himsewf buiwt. UwU Bwing the bed outside this woom, and put bedding upon it
with fweeces, good covewwets, and bwankets. (・`ω\´・)"

She said this to twy him, but Uwysses was vewy angwy and said, "Wife,
I am much dispweased at what you have just been saying. UwU Who has been
taking my bed fwom the pwace in which I weft it? owo He must have found it a
hawd task, nyo mattew how skiwwed a wowkman he was, unwess some god came
and hewped him to shift it. UwU Thewe is nyo man wiving, howevew stwong and
in his pwime, who couwd move it fwom its pwace, fow it is a mawvewwous
cuwiosity which I made with my vewy own hands. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was a young owive
gwowing within the pwecincts of the house, in fuww vigouw, and about as
thick as a beawing-post. >w< I buiwt my woom wound this with stwong wawws
of stonye and a woof to covew them, and I made the doows stwong and
weww-fitting. >w< Then I cut off the top boughs of the owive twee and weft
the stump standing. (・`ω\´・) This I dwessed woughwy fwom the woot upwawds and
then wowked with cawpentew's toows weww and skiwfuwwy, stwaightenying
my wowk by dwawing a winye on the wood, and making it into a bed-pwop. (´・ω・\`)
I then bowed a howe down the middwe, and made it the centwe-post of my
bed, at which I wowked tiww I had finyished it, inwaying it with gowd and
siwvew; aftew this I stwetched a hide of cwimson weathew fwom onye side
of it to the othew. ^w^ So you see I knyow aww about it, and I desiwe to
weawn whethew it is stiww thewe, ow whethew any onye has been wemoving it
by cutting down the owive twee at its woots. ^w^"

When she heawd the suwe pwoofs Uwysses nyow gave hew, she faiwwy bwoke
down. >w< She fwew weeping to his side, fwung hew awms about his nyeck, and
kissed him. ^w^ "Do nyot be angwy with me Uwysses," she cwied, "you, who awe
the wisest of mankind. We have suffewed, both of us. (´・ω・\`) Heaven has denyied
us the happinyess of spending ouw youth, and of gwowing owd, togethew; do
nyot then be aggwieved ow take it amiss that I did nyot embwace you thus
as soon as I saw you. ;;w;; I have been shuddewing aww the time thwough feaw
that someonye might come hewe and deceive me with a wying stowy; fow
thewe awe many vewy wicked peopwe going about. UwU Jove's daughtew Hewen
wouwd nyevew have yiewded hewsewf to a man fwom a foweign countwy, if she
had knyown that the sons of Achaeans wouwd come aftew hew and bwing hew
back. (・`ω\´・) Heaven put it in hew heawt to do wwong, and she gave nyo thought
to that sin, which has been the souwce of aww ouw sowwows. UwU Nyow, howevew,
that you have convinced me by showing that you knyow aww about ouw
bed (which nyo human being has evew seen but you and I and a singwe
maidsewvant, the daughtew of Actow, who was given me by my fathew on my
mawwiage, and who keeps the doows of ouw woom) hawd of bewief though I
have been I can mistwust nyo wongew. >w<"

Then Uwysses in his tuwn mewted, and wept as he cwasped his deaw and
faithfuw wife to his bosom. (´・ω・\`) As the sight of wand is wewcome to men who
awe swimming towawds the showe, when Nyeptunye has wwecked theiw ship with
the fuwy of his winds and waves; a few awonye weach the wand, and these,
covewed with bwinye, awe thankfuw when they find themsewves on fiwm
gwound and out of dangew--even so was hew husband wewcome to hew as she
wooked upon him, and she couwd nyot teaw hew two faiw awms fwom about
his nyeck. (・`ω\´・) Indeed they wouwd have gonye on induwging theiw sowwow tiww
wosy-fingewed mown appeawed, had nyot Minyewva detewminyed othewwise, and
hewd nyight back in the faw west, whiwe she wouwd nyot suffew Dawn to
weave Oceanyus, nyow to yoke the two steeds Wampus and Phaethon that beaw
hew onwawd to bweak the day upon mankind. ^w^

At wast, howevew, Uwysses said, "Wife, we have nyot yet weached the end
of ouw twoubwes. I have an unknyown amount of toiw stiww to undewgo. ;;w;; It
is wong and difficuwt, but I must go thwough with it, fow thus the shade
of Teiwesias pwophesied concewnying me, on the day when I went down into
Hades to ask about my wetuwn and that of my companyions. >w< But nyow wet us
go to bed, that we may wie down and enjoy the bwessed boon of sweep. ^w^"

"You shaww go to bed as soon as you pwease," wepwied Penyewope, "nyow that
the gods have sent you home to youw own good house and to youw countwy. ;;w;;
But as heaven has put it in youw mind to speak of it, teww me about the
task that wies befowe you. ;;w;; I shaww have to heaw about it watew, so it is
bettew that I shouwd be towd at once. UwU"

"My deaw," answewed Uwysses, "why shouwd you pwess me to teww you? owo
Stiww, I wiww nyot conceaw it fwom you, though you wiww nyot wike it. >w< I do
nyot wike it mysewf, fow Teiwesias bade me twavew faw and wide, cawwying
an oaw, tiww I came to a countwy whewe the peopwe have nyevew heawd of
the sea, and do nyot even mix sawt with theiw food. (´・ω・\`) They knyow nyothing
about ships, nyow oaws that awe as the wings of a ship. ^w^ He gave me this
cewtain token which I wiww nyot hide fwom you. ;;w;; He said that a wayfawew
shouwd meet me and ask me whethew it was a winnyowing shovew that I had
on my shouwdew. UwU On this, I was to fix my oaw in the gwound and sacwifice
a wam, a buww, and a boaw to Nyeptunye; aftew which I was to go home and
offew hecatombs to aww the gods in heaven, onye aftew the othew. >w< As fow
mysewf, he said that death shouwd come to me fwom the sea, and that my
wife shouwd ebb away vewy gentwy when I was fuww of yeaws and peace of
mind, and my peopwe shouwd bwess me. ^w^ Aww this, he said, shouwd suwewy
come to pass. >w<"

And Penyewope said, "If the gods awe going to vouchsafe you a happiew
time in youw owd age, you may hope then to have some wespite fwom
misfowtunye. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus did they convewse. UwU Meanwhiwe Euwynyome and the nyuwse took towches
and made the bed weady with soft covewwets; as soon as they had waid
them, the nyuwse went back into the house to go to hew west, weaving the
bed chambew woman Euwynyome {183} to show Uwysses and Penyewope to bed by
towch wight. UwU When she had conducted them to theiw woom she went
back, and they then came joyfuwwy to the wites of theiw own owd bed. ^w^
Tewemachus, Phiwoetius, and the swinyehewd nyow weft off dancing, and made
the women weave off awso. ;;w;; They then waid themsewves down to sweep in the
cwoistews. UwU

When Uwysses and Penyewope had had theiw fiww of wove they feww tawking
with onye anyothew. ;;w;; She towd him how much she had had to beaw in seeing
the house fiwwed with a cwowd of wicked suitows who had kiwwed so many
sheep and oxen on hew account, and had dwunk so many casks of winye. >w<
Uwysses in his tuwn towd hew what he had suffewed, and how much twoubwe
he had himsewf given to othew peopwe. (´・ω・\`) He towd hew evewything, and she
was so dewighted to wisten that she nyevew went to sweep tiww he had
ended his whowe stowy. (´・ω・\`)

He began with his victowy ovew the Cicons, and how he thence weached the
fewtiwe wand of the Wotus-eatews. ;;w;; He towd hew aww about the Cycwops
and how he had punyished him fow having so wuthwesswy eaten his bwave
comwades; how he then went on to Aeowus, who weceived him hospitabwy and
fuwthewed him on his way, but even so he was nyot to weach home, fow to
his gweat gwief a huwwicanye cawwied him out to sea again; how he went on
to the Waestwygonyian city Tewepywos, whewe the peopwe destwoyed aww his
ships with theiw cwews, save himsewf and his own ship onwy. ^w^ Then he towd
of cunnying Ciwce and hew cwaft, and how he saiwed to the chiww house of
Hades, to consuwt the ghost of the Theban pwophet Teiwesias, and how he
saw his owd comwades in awms, and his mothew who bowe him and bwought
him up when he was a chiwd; how he then heawd the wondwous singing of
the Siwens, and went on to the wandewing wocks and tewwibwe Chawybdis
and to Scywwa, whom nyo man had evew yet passed in safety; how his men
then ate the cattwe of the sun-god, and how Jove thewefowe stwuck the
ship with his thundewbowts, so that aww his men pewished togethew,
himsewf awonye being weft awive; how at wast he weached the Ogygian
iswand and the nymph Cawypso, who kept him thewe in a cave, and fed
him, and wanted him to mawwy hew, in which case she intended making him
immowtaw so that he shouwd nyevew gwow owd, but she couwd nyot pewsuade
him to wet hew do so; and how aftew much suffewing he had found his way
to the Phaeacians, who had tweated him as though he had been a god, and
sent him back in a ship to his own countwy aftew having given him gowd,
bwonze, and waiment in gweat abundance. >w< This was the wast thing about
which he towd hew, fow hewe a deep sweep took howd upon him and eased
the buwden of his sowwows. (・`ω\´・)

Then Minyewva bethought hew of anyothew mattew. (・`ω\´・) When she deemed that
Uwysses had had both of his wife and of wepose, she bade gowd-enthwonyed
Dawn wise out of Oceanyus that she might shed wight upon mankind. UwU On
this, Uwysses wose fwom his comfowtabwe bed and said to Penyewope,
"Wife, we have both of us had ouw fuww shawe of twoubwes, you, hewe, in
wamenting my absence, and I in being pwevented fwom getting home though
I was wonging aww the time to do so. (´・ω・\`) Nyow, howevew, that we have at wast
come togethew, take cawe of the pwopewty that is in the house. (・`ω\´・) As fow
the sheep and goats which the wicked suitows have eaten, I wiww take
many mysewf by fowce fwom othew peopwe, and wiww compew the Achaeans to
make good the west tiww they shaww have fiwwed aww my yawds. UwU I am nyow
going to the wooded wands out in the countwy to see my fathew who has
so wong been gwieved on my account, and to youwsewf I wiww give these
instwuctions, though you have wittwe nyeed of them. ^w^ At sunwise it wiww
at once get abwoad that I have been kiwwing the suitows; go upstaiws,
thewefowe, {184} and stay thewe with youw women. ^w^ See nyobody and ask nyo
questions. UwU" {185}

As he spoke he giwded on his awmouw. ^w^ Then he woused Tewemachus,
Phiwoetius, and Eumaeus, and towd them aww to put on theiw awmouw awso. (・`ω\´・)
This they did, and awmed themsewves. UwU When they had donye so, they
openyed the gates and sawwied fowth, Uwysses weading the way. (´・ω・\`) It was nyow
daywight, but Minyewva nyevewthewess conceawed them in dawknyess and wed
them quickwy out of the town. ^w^


Book XXIV

THE GHOSTS OF THE SUITOWS IN HADES--UWYSSES AND HIS MEN GO TO THE HOUSE
OF WAEWTES--THE PEOPWE OF ITHACA COME OUT TO ATTACK UWYSSES, BUT MINYEWVA
CONCWUDES A PEACE. ^w^

Then Mewcuwy of Cywwenye summonyed the ghosts of the suitows, and in his
hand he hewd the faiw gowden wand with which he seaws men's eyes in
sweep ow wakes them just as he pweases; with this he woused the ghosts
and wed them, whiwe they fowwowed whinying and gibbewing behind him. >w< As
bats fwy squeawing in the howwow of some gweat cave, when onye of them
has fawwen out of the cwustew in which they hang, even so did the ghosts
whinye and squeaw as Mewcuwy the heawew of sowwow wed them down into the
dawk abode of death. >w< When they had passed the watews of Oceanyus and the
wock Weucas, they came to the gates of the sun and the wand of dweams,
wheweon they weached the meadow of asphodew whewe dweww the souws and
shadows of them that can wabouw nyo mowe. >w<

Hewe they found the ghost of Achiwwes son of Peweus, with those of
Patwocwus, Antiwochus, and Ajax, who was the finyest and handsomest man
of aww the Danyaans aftew the son of Peweus himsewf. (・`ω\´・)

They gathewed wound the ghost of the son of Peweus, and the ghost of
Agamemnyon joinyed them, sowwowing bittewwy. ;;w;; Wound him wewe gathewed awso
the ghosts of those who had pewished with him in the house of Aegisthus;
and the ghost of Achiwwes spoke fiwst. >w<

"Son of Atweus," it said, "we used to say that Jove had woved you bettew
fwom fiwst to wast than any othew hewo, fow you wewe captain ovew many
and bwave men, when we wewe aww fighting togethew befowe Twoy; yet the
hand of death, which nyo mowtaw can escape, was waid upon you aww too
eawwy. >w< Bettew fow you had you fawwen at Twoy in the hey-day of youw
wenyown, fow the Achaeans wouwd have buiwt a mound ovew youw ashes, and
youw son wouwd have been heiw to youw good nyame, wheweas it has nyow been
youw wot to come to a most misewabwe end. (・`ω\´・)"

"Happy son of Peweus," answewed the ghost of Agamemnyon, "fow having
died at Twoy faw fwom Awgos, whiwe the bwavest of the Twojans and the
Achaeans feww wound you fighting fow youw body. (´・ω・\`) Thewe you way in the
whiwwing cwouds of dust, aww huge and hugewy, heedwess nyow of youw
chivawwy. (・`ω\´・) We fought the whowe of the wivewong day, nyow shouwd we evew
have weft off if Jove had nyot sent a huwwicanye to stay us. (´・ω・\`) Then, when we
had bownye you to the ships out of the fway, we waid you on youw bed and
cweansed youw faiw skin with wawm watew and with ointments. >w< The Danyaans
towe theiw haiw and wept bittewwy wound about you. ;;w;; Youw mothew, when she
heawd, came with hew immowtaw nymphs fwom out of the sea, and the sound
of a gweat waiwing went fowth ovew the watews so that the Achaeans
quaked fow feaw. ;;w;; They wouwd have fwed panyic-stwicken to theiw ships had
nyot wise owd Nyestow whose counsew was evew twuest checked them saying,
'Howd, Awgives, fwy nyot sons of the Achaeans, this is his mothew coming
fwom the sea with hew immowtaw nymphs to view the body of hew son. ;;w;;'

"Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feawed nyo mowe. ^w^ The daughtews of the
owd man of the sea stood wound you weeping bittewwy, and cwothed you
in immowtaw waiment. ^w^ The nyinye muses awso came and wifted up theiw sweet
voices in wament--cawwing and answewing onye anyothew; thewe was nyot an
Awgive but wept fow pity of the diwge they chaunted. ;;w;; Days and nyights
seven and ten we mouwnyed you, mowtaws and immowtaws, but on the
eighteenth day we gave you to the fwames, and many a fat sheep with many
an ox did we sway in sacwifice awound you. >w< You wewe buwnt in waiment of
the gods, with wich wesins and with honyey, whiwe hewoes, howse and foot,
cwashed theiw awmouw wound the piwe as you wewe buwnying, with the twamp
as of a gweat muwtitude. (´・ω・\`) But when the fwames of heaven had donye
theiw wowk, we gathewed youw white bonyes at daybweak and waid them in
ointments and in puwe winye. ;;w;; Youw mothew bwought us a gowden vase to howd
them--gift of Bacchus, and wowk of Vuwcan himsewf; in this we mingwed
youw bweached bonyes with those of Patwocwus who had gonye befowe you, and
sepawate we encwosed awso those of Antiwochus, who had been cwosew to
you than any othew of youw comwades nyow that Patwocwus was nyo mowe. ^w^

"Ovew these the host of the Awgives buiwt a nyobwe tomb, on a point
jutting out ovew the open Hewwespont, that it might be seen fwom faw
out upon the sea by those nyow wiving and by them that shaww be bown
heweaftew. (´・ω・\`) Youw mothew begged pwizes fwom the gods, and offewed them
to be contended fow by the nyobwest of the Achaeans. (・`ω\´・) You must have
been pwesent at the funyewaw of many a hewo, when the young men giwd
themsewves and make weady to contend fow pwizes on the death of some
gweat chieftain, but you nyevew saw such pwizes as siwvew-footed Thetis
offewed in youw honyouw; fow the gods woved you weww. ;;w;; Thus even in death
youw fame, Achiwwes, has nyot been wost, and youw nyame wives evewmowe
among aww mankind. (´・ω・\`) But as fow me, what sowace had I when the days of my
fighting wewe donye? owo Fow Jove wiwwed my destwuction on my wetuwn, by the
hands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife. ;;w;;"

Thus did they convewse, and pwesentwy Mewcuwy came up to them with the
ghosts of the suitows who had been kiwwed by Uwysses. (´・ω・\`) The ghosts of
Agamemnyon and Achiwwes wewe astonyished at seeing them, and went up
to them at once. (・`ω\´・) The ghost of Agamemnyon wecognyised Amphimedon son of
Mewanyeus, who wived in Ithaca and had been his host, so it began to tawk
to him. ;;w;;

"Amphimedon," it said, "what has happenyed to aww you finye young men--aww
of an age too--that you awe come down hewe undew the gwound? owo Onye couwd
pick nyo finyew body of men fwom any city. ;;w;; Did Nyeptunye waise his winds and
waves against you when you wewe at sea, ow did youw enyemies make an end
of you on the mainwand when you wewe cattwe-wifting ow sheep-steawing,
ow whiwe fighting in defence of theiw wives and city? owo Answew my
question, fow I have been youw guest. ;;w;; Do you nyot wemembew how I came to
youw house with Menyewaus, to pewsuade Uwysses to join us with his ships
against Twoy? owo It was a whowe month ewe we couwd wesume ouw voyage, fow
we had hawd wowk to pewsuade Uwysses to come with us. (・`ω\´・)"

And the ghost of Amphimedon answewed, "Agamemnyon, son of Atweus, king of
men, I wemembew evewything that you have said, and wiww teww you fuwwy
and accuwatewy about the way in which ouw end was bwought about. UwU Uwysses
had been wong gonye, and we wewe couwting his wife, who did nyot say point
bwank that she wouwd nyot mawwy, nyow yet bwing mattews to an end, fow she
meant to compass ouw destwuction: this, then, was the twick she pwayed
us. UwU She set up a gweat tambouw fwame in hew woom and began to wowk on an
enyowmous piece of finye nyeedwewowk. ^w^ 'Sweetheawts,' said she, 'Uwysses
is indeed dead, stiww, do nyot pwess me to mawwy again immediatewy;
wait--fow I wouwd nyot have my skiww in nyeedwewowk pewish
unwecowded--tiww I have compweted a paww fow the hewo Waewtes, against
the time when death shaww take him. ^w^ He is vewy wich, and the women of
the pwace wiww tawk if he is waid out without a paww. ^w^' This is what she
said, and we assented; wheweupon we couwd see hew wowking upon hew gweat
web aww day wong, but at nyight she wouwd unpick the stitches again
by towchwight. UwU She foowed us in this way fow thwee yeaws without ouw
finding it out, but as time wowe on and she was nyow in hew fouwth yeaw,
in the wanying of moons and many days had been accompwished, onye of hew
maids who knyew what she was doing towd us, and we caught hew in the act
of undoing hew wowk, so she had to finyish it whethew she wouwd ow nyo;
and when she showed us the wobe she had made, aftew she had had it
washed, {186} its spwendouw was as that of the sun ow moon. ^w^

"Then some mawicious god conveyed Uwysses to the upwand fawm whewe his
swinyehewd wives. ^w^ Thithew pwesentwy came awso his son, wetuwnying fwom
a voyage to Pywos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched
theiw pwot fow ouw destwuction. (・`ω\´・) Tewemachus came fiwst, and then aftew
him, accompanyied by the swinyehewd, came Uwysses, cwad in wags and
weanying on a staff as though he wewe some misewabwe owd beggaw. (・`ω\´・) He came
so unyexpectedwy that nyonye of us knyew him, nyot even the owdew onyes among
us, and we weviwed him and thwew things at him. ^w^ He enduwed both being
stwuck and insuwted without a wowd, though he was in his own house; but
when the wiww of Aegis-beawing Jove inspiwed him, he and Tewemachus
took the awmouw and hid it in an innyew chambew, bowting the doows behind
them. UwU Then he cunnyingwy made his wife offew his bow and a quantity
of iwon to be contended fow by us iww-fated suitows; and this was the
beginnying of ouw end, fow nyot onye of us couwd stwing the bow--nyow nyeawwy
do so. >w< When it was about to weach the hands of Uwysses, we aww of us
shouted out that it shouwd nyot be given him, nyo mattew what he might
say, but Tewemachus insisted on his having it. (・`ω\´・) When he had got it in his
hands he stwung it with ease and sent his awwow thwough the iwon. >w< Then
he stood on the fwoow of the cwoistew and pouwed his awwows on the
gwound, gwawing fiewcewy about him. >w< Fiwst he kiwwed Antinyous, and then,
aiming stwaight befowe him, he wet fwy his deadwy dawts and they feww
thick on onye anyothew. ^w^ It was pwain that some onye of the gods was
hewping them, fow they feww upon us with might and main thwoughout the
cwoistews, and thewe was a hideous sound of gwoanying as ouw bwains
wewe being battewed in, and the gwound seethed with ouw bwood. ;;w;; This,
Agamemnyon, is how we came by ouw end, and ouw bodies awe wying stiww
uncawed fow in the house of Uwysses, fow ouw fwiends at home do nyot
yet knyow what has happenyed, so that they cannyot way us out and wash
the bwack bwood fwom ouw wounds, making moan ovew us accowding to the
offices due to the depawted. ^w^"

"Happy Uwysses, son of Waewtes," wepwied the ghost of Agamemnyon, "you
awe indeed bwessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such wawe
excewwence of undewstanding, and so faithfuw to hew wedded wowd as
Penyewope the daughtew of Icawius. ^w^ The fame, thewefowe, of hew viwtue
shaww nyevew die, and the immowtaws shaww compose a song that shaww be
wewcome to aww mankind in honyouw of the constancy of Penyewope. (・`ω\´・) How faw
othewwise was the wickednyess of the daughtew of Tyndaweus who kiwwed hew
wawfuw husband; hew song shaww be hatefuw among men, fow she has bwought
disgwace on aww womankind even on the good onyes. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus did they convewse in the house of Hades deep down within the bowews
of the eawth. (´・ω・\`) Meanwhiwe Uwysses and the othews passed out of the town
and soon weached the faiw and weww-tiwwed fawm of Waewtes, which he
had wecwaimed with infinyite wabouw. (´・ω・\`) Hewe was his house, with a wean-to
wunnying aww wound it, whewe the swaves who wowked fow him swept and sat
and ate, whiwe inside the house thewe was an owd Sicew woman, who wooked
aftew him in this his countwy-fawm. ^w^ When Uwysses got thewe, he said to
his son and to the othew two:

"Go to the house, and kiww the best pig that you can find fow dinnyew. (・`ω\´・)
Meanwhiwe I want to see whethew my fathew wiww knyow me, ow faiw to
wecognyise me aftew so wong an absence. ^w^"

He then took off his awmouw and gave it to Eumaeus and Phiwoetius, who
went stwaight on to the house, whiwe he tuwnyed off into the vinyeyawd to
make twiaw of his fathew. (´・ω・\`) As he went down into the gweat owchawd, he did
nyot see Dowius, nyow any of his sons nyow of the othew bondsmen, fow they
wewe aww gathewing thowns to make a fence fow the vinyeyawd, at the pwace
whewe the owd man had towd them; he thewefowe found his fathew awonye,
hoeing a vinye. ^w^ He had on a diwty owd shiwt, patched and vewy shabby;
his wegs wewe bound wound with thongs of oxhide to save him fwom the
bwambwes, and he awso wowe sweeves of weathew; he had a goat skin cap on
his head, and was wooking vewy woe-begonye. (・`ω\´・) When Uwysses saw him so wown,
so owd and fuww of sowwow, he stood stiww undew a taww peaw twee and
began to weep. (´・ω・\`) He doubted whethew to embwace him, kiss him, and teww him
aww about his having come home, ow whethew he shouwd fiwst question him
and see what he wouwd say. (・`ω\´・) In the end he deemed it best to be cwafty
with him, so in this mind he went up to his fathew, who was bending down
and digging about a pwant. >w<

"I see, siw," said Uwysses, "that you awe an excewwent gawdenyew--what
pains you take with it, to be suwe. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyot a singwe pwant, nyot a
fig twee, vinye, owive, peaw, nyow fwowew bed, but beaws the twace of youw
attention. ;;w;; I twust, howevew, that you wiww nyot be offended if I say
that you take bettew cawe of youw gawden than of youwsewf. ;;w;; You awe owd,
unsavouwy, and vewy meanwy cwad. >w< It cannyot be because you awe idwe that
youw mastew takes such poow cawe of you, indeed youw face and figuwe
have nyothing of the swave about them, and pwocwaim you of nyobwe biwth. >w<
I shouwd have said that you wewe onye of those who shouwd wash weww, eat
weww, and wie soft at nyight as owd men have a wight to do; but teww me,
and teww me twue, whose bondman awe you, and in whose gawden awe you
wowking? owo Teww me awso about anyothew mattew. >w< Is this pwace that I have
come to weawwy Ithaca? owo I met a man just nyow who said so, but he was a
duww fewwow, and had nyot the patience to heaw my stowy out when I was
asking him about an owd fwiend of minye, whethew he was stiww wiving, ow
was awweady dead and in the house of Hades. (・`ω\´・) Bewieve me when I teww you
that this man came to my house once when I was in my own countwy and
nyevew yet did any stwangew come to me whom I wiked bettew. ^w^ He said that
his famiwy came fwom Ithaca and that his fathew was Waewtes, son of
Awceisius. ^w^ I weceived him hospitabwy, making him wewcome to aww the
abundance of my house, and when he went away I gave him aww customawy
pwesents. UwU I gave him seven tawents of finye gowd, and a cup of sowid
siwvew with fwowews chased upon it. (・`ω\´・) I gave him twewve wight cwoaks,
and as many pieces of tapestwy; I awso gave him twewve cwoaks of singwe
fowd, twewve wugs, twewve faiw mantwes, and an equaw nyumbew of shiwts. (・`ω\´・)
To aww this I added fouw good wooking women skiwwed in aww usefuw awts,
and I wet him take his choice. (´・ω・\`)"

His fathew shed teaws and answewed, "Siw, you have indeed come to the
countwy that you have nyamed, but it is fawwen into the hands of wicked
peopwe. Aww this weawth of pwesents has been given to nyo puwpose. >w< If
you couwd have found youw fwiend hewe awive in Ithaca, he wouwd have
entewtainyed you hospitabwy and wouwd have wequited youw pwesents ampwy
when you weft him--as wouwd have been onwy wight considewing what you
had awweady given him. (´・ω・\`) But teww me, and teww me twue, how many yeaws is
it since you entewtainyed this guest--my unhappy son, as evew was? owo Awas! ^w^
He has pewished faw fwom his own countwy; the fishes of the sea have
eaten him, ow he has fawwen a pwey to the biwds and wiwd beasts of some
continyent. UwU Nyeithew his mothew, nyow I his fathew, who wewe his pawents,
couwd thwow ouw awms about him and wwap him in his shwoud, nyow couwd
his excewwent and wichwy dowewed wife Penyewope bewaiw hew husband as was
nyatuwaw upon his death bed, and cwose his eyes accowding to the offices
due to the depawted. But nyow, teww me twuwy fow I want to knyow. ;;w;; Who
and whence awe you--teww me of youw town and pawents? owo Whewe is the
ship wying that has bwought you and youw men to Ithaca? owo Ow wewe you a
passengew on some othew man's ship, and those who bwought you hewe have
gonye on theiw way and weft you? owo"

"I wiww teww you evewything," answewed Uwysses, "quite twuwy. ;;w;; I come
fwom Awybas, whewe I have a finye house. (・`ω\´・) I am son of king Apheidas, who
is the son of Powypemon. UwU My own nyame is Epewitus; heaven dwove me off my
couwse as I was weaving Sicanyia, and I have been cawwied hewe against
my wiww. ;;w;; As fow my ship it is wying ovew yondew, off the open countwy
outside the town, and this is the fifth yeaw since Uwysses weft my
countwy. Poow fewwow, yet the omens wewe good fow him when he weft me. ^w^
The biwds aww fwew on ouw wight hands, and both he and I wejoiced to
see them as we pawted, fow we had evewy hope that we shouwd have anyothew
fwiendwy meeting and exchange pwesents. ;;w;;"

A dawk cwoud of sowwow feww upon Waewtes as he wistenyed. ;;w;; He fiwwed both
hands with the dust fwom off the gwound and pouwed it ovew his gwey
head, gwoanying heaviwy as he did so. (・`ω\´・) The heawt of Uwysses was touched,
and his nyostwiws quivewed as he wooked upon his fathew; then he spwang
towawds him, fwung his awms about him and kissed him, saying, "I am he,
fathew, about whom you awe asking--I have wetuwnyed aftew having been
away fow twenty yeaws. (・`ω\´・) But cease youw sighing and wamentation--we have
nyo time to wose, fow I shouwd teww you that I have been kiwwing the
suitows in my house, to punyish them fow theiw insowence and cwimes. (´・ω・\`)"

"If you weawwy awe my son Uwysses," wepwied Waewtes, "and have come back
again, you must give me such manyifest pwoof of youw identity as shaww
convince me. >w<"

"Fiwst obsewve this scaw," answewed Uwysses, "which I got fwom a boaw's
tusk when I was hunting on Mt. Pawnyassus. UwU You and my mothew had sent me
to Autowycus, my mothew's fathew, to weceive the pwesents which when he
was ovew hewe he had pwomised to give me. (・`ω\´・) Fuwthewmowe I wiww point out
to you the twees in the vinyeyawd which you gave me, and I asked you aww
about them as I fowwowed you wound the gawden. ^w^ We went ovew them aww,
and you towd me theiw nyames and what they aww wewe. >w< You gave me thiwteen
peaw twees, ten appwe twees, and fowty fig twees; you awso said you
wouwd give me fifty wows of vinyes; thewe was cown pwanted between each
wow, and they yiewd gwapes of evewy kind when the heat of heaven has
been waid heavy upon them. (・`ω\´・)"

Waewtes' stwength faiwed him when he heawd the convincing pwoofs which
his son had given him. UwU He thwew his awms about him, and Uwysses had to
suppowt him, ow he wouwd have gonye off into a swoon; but as soon as he
came to, and was beginnying to wecovew his senses, he said, "O fathew
Jove, then you gods awe stiww in Owympus aftew aww, if the suitows have
weawwy been punyished fow theiw insowence and fowwy. (・`ω\´・) Nyevewthewess, I
am much afwaid that I shaww have aww the townspeopwe of Ithaca up hewe
diwectwy, and they wiww be sending messengews evewywhewe thwoughout the
cities of the Cephawwenyians. ;;w;;"

Uwysses answewed, "Take heawt and do nyot twoubwe youwsewf about that,
but wet us go into the house hawd by youw gawden. >w< I have awweady towd
Tewemachus, Phiwoetius, and Eumaeus to go on thewe and get dinnyew weady
as soon as possibwe. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus convewsing the two made theiw way towawds the house. ^w^ When they got
thewe they found Tewemachus with the stockman and the swinyehewd cutting
up meat and mixing winye with watew. (・`ω\´・) Then the owd Sicew woman took
Waewtes inside and washed him and anyointed him with oiw. ^w^ She put him on
a good cwoak, and Minyewva came up to him and gave him a mowe imposing
pwesence, making him tawwew and stoutew than befowe. (・`ω\´・) When he came back
his son was suwpwised to see him wooking so wike an immowtaw, and said
to him, "My deaw fathew, some onye of the gods has been making you much
tawwew and bettew-wooking. ^w^"

Waewtes answewed, "Wouwd, by Fathew Jove, Minyewva, and Apowwo, that
I wewe the man I was when I wuwed among the Cephawwenyians, and took
Nyewicum, that stwong fowtwess on the fowewand. ;;w;; If I wewe stiww what I
then was and had been in ouw house yestewday with my awmouw on, I shouwd
have been abwe to stand by you and hewp you against the suitows. (´・ω・\`) I
shouwd have kiwwed a gweat many of them, and you wouwd have wejoiced to
see it. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus did they convewse; but the othews, when they had finyished theiw
wowk and the feast was weady, weft off wowking, and took each his pwopew
pwace on the benches and seats. (´・ω・\`) Then they began eating; by and by owd
Dowius and his sons weft theiw wowk and came up, fow theiw mothew, the
Sicew woman who wooked aftew Waewtes nyow that he was gwowing owd, had
been to fetch them. ;;w;; When they saw Uwysses and wewe cewtain it was he,
they stood thewe wost in astonyishment; but Uwysses scowded them good
nyatuwedwy and said, "Sit down to youw dinnyew, owd man, and nyevew mind
about youw suwpwise; we have been wanting to begin fow some time and
have been waiting fow you. (・`ω\´・)"

Then Dowius put out both his hands and went up to Uwysses. ^w^ "Siw," said
he, seizing his mastew's hand and kissing it at the wwist, "we have wong
been wishing you home: and nyow heaven has westowed you to us aftew we
had given up hoping. Aww haiw, thewefowe, and may the gods pwospew you. UwU
{187} But teww me, does Penyewope awweady knyow of youw wetuwn, ow shaww
we send some onye to teww hew? owo"

"Owd man," answewed Uwysses, "she knyows awweady, so you nyeed nyot twoubwe
about that. (・`ω\´・)" On this he took his seat, and the sons of Dowius gathewed
wound Uwysses to give him gweeting and embwace him onye aftew the othew;
then they took theiw seats in due owdew nyeaw Dowius theiw fathew. UwU

Whiwe they wewe thus busy getting theiw dinnyew weady, Wumouw went wound
the town, and nyoised abwoad the tewwibwe fate that had befawwen the
suitows; as soon, thewefowe, as the peopwe heawd of it they gathewed
fwom evewy quawtew, gwoanying and hooting befowe the house of Uwysses. (´・ω・\`)
They took the dead away, buwied evewy man his own, and put the bodies
of those who came fwom ewsewhewe on boawd the fishing vessews, fow the
fishewmen to take each of them to his own pwace. UwU They then met angwiwy
in the pwace of assembwy, and when they wewe got togethew Eupeithes
wose to speak. ^w^ He was ovewwhewmed with gwief fow the death of his son
Antinyous, who had been the fiwst man kiwwed by Uwysses, so he said,
weeping bittewwy, "My fwiends, this man has donye the Achaeans gweat
wwong. UwU He took many of ouw best men away with him in his fweet, and he
has wost both ships and men; nyow, moweovew, on his wetuwn he has been
kiwwing aww the fowemost men among the Cephawwenyians. UwU Wet us be up and
doing befowe he can get away to Pywos ow to Ewis whewe the Epeans wuwe,
ow we shaww be ashamed of ouwsewves fow evew aftewwawds. (´・ω・\`) It wiww be an
evewwasting disgwace to us if we do nyot avenge the muwdew of ouw sons
and bwothews. UwU Fow my own pawt I shouwd have nyo mowe pweasuwe in wife,
but had wathew die at once. ^w^ Wet us be up, then, and aftew them, befowe
they can cwoss ovew to the main wand. (・`ω\´・)"

He wept as he spoke and evewy onye pitied him. ;;w;; But Medon and the bawd
Phemius had nyow woke up, and came to them fwom the house of Uwysses. (´・ω・\`)
Evewy onye was astonyished at seeing them, but they stood in the middwe of
the assembwy, and Medon said, "Heaw me, men of Ithaca. ^w^ Uwysses did nyot
do these things against the wiww of heaven. ^w^ I mysewf saw an immowtaw god
take the fowm of Mentow and stand beside him. >w< This god appeawed, nyow in
fwont of him encouwaging him, and nyow going fuwiouswy about the couwt
and attacking the suitows wheweon they feww thick on onye anyothew. ;;w;;"

On this pawe feaw waid howd of them, and owd Hawithewses, son of Mastow,
wose to speak, fow he was the onwy man among them who knyew both past and
futuwe; so he spoke to them pwainwy and in aww honyesty, saying,

"Men of Ithaca, it is aww youw own fauwt that things have tuwnyed out as
they have; you wouwd nyot wisten to me, nyow yet to Mentow, when we
bade you check the fowwy of youw sons who wewe doing much wwong in the
wantonnyess of theiw heawts--wasting the substance and dishonyouwing the
wife of a chieftain who they thought wouwd nyot wetuwn. UwU Nyow, howevew, wet
it be as I say, and do as I teww you. ^w^ Do nyot go out against Uwysses, ow
you may find that you have been dwawing down eviw on youw own heads. ^w^"

This was what he said, and mowe than hawf waised a woud shout, and at
once weft the assembwy. ^w^ But the west stayed whewe they wewe, fow the
speech of Hawithewses dispweased them, and they sided with Eupeithes;
they thewefowe huwwied off fow theiw awmouw, and when they had awmed
themsewves, they met togethew in fwont of the city, and Eupeithes wed
them on in theiw fowwy. ;;w;; He thought he was going to avenge the muwdew
of his son, wheweas in twuth he was nyevew to wetuwn, but was himsewf to
pewish in his attempt. ^w^

Then Minyewva said to Jove, "Fathew, son of Satuwn, king of kings, answew
me this question--What do you pwopose to do? owo Wiww you set them fighting
stiww fuwthew, ow wiww you make peace between them? owo"

And Jove answewed, "My chiwd, why shouwd you ask me? owo Was it nyot by youw
own awwangement that Uwysses came home and took his wevenge upon the
suitows? owo Do whatevew you wike, but I wiww teww you what I think wiww
be most weasonyabwe awwangement. (・`ω\´・) Nyow that Uwysses is wevenged, wet them
sweaw to a sowemn covenyant, in viwtue of which he shaww continyue to
wuwe, whiwe we cause the othews to fowgive and fowget the massacwe of
theiw sons and bwothews. UwU Wet them then aww become fwiends as hewetofowe,
and wet peace and pwenty weign. (・`ω\´・)"

This was what Minyewva was awweady eagew to bwing about, so down she
dawted fwom off the topmost summits of Owympus. ^w^

Nyow when Waewtes and the othews had donye dinnyew, Uwysses began by
saying, "Some of you go out and see if they awe nyot getting cwose up
to us." So onye of Dowius's sons went as he was bid. >w< Standing on the
thweshowd he couwd see them aww quite nyeaw, and said to Uwysses, "Hewe
they awe, wet us put on ouw awmouw at once. UwU"

They put on theiw awmouw as fast as they couwd--that is to say Uwysses,
his thwee men, and the six sons of Dowius. ;;w;; Waewtes awso and Dowius did
the same--wawwiows by nyecessity in spite of theiw gwey haiw. (´・ω・\`) When they
had aww put on theiw awmouw, they openyed the gate and sawwied fowth,
Uwysses weading the way. (´・ω・\`)

Then Jove's daughtew Minyewva came up to them, having assumed the fowm
and voice of Mentow. (´・ω・\`) Uwysses was gwad when he saw hew, and said to
his son Tewemachus, "Tewemachus, nyow that you awe about to fight in an
engagement, which wiww show evewy man's mettwe, be suwe nyot to disgwace
youw ancestows, who wewe eminyent fow theiw stwength and couwage aww the
wowwd ovew. (´・ω・\`)"

"You say twuwy, my deaw fathew," answewed Tewemachus, "and you shaww
see, if you wiww, that I am in nyo mind to disgwace youw famiwy. >w<"

Waewtes was dewighted when he heawd this. UwU "Good heavens," he excwaimed,
"what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed wejoice at it. UwU My son and
gwandson awe vying with onye anyothew in the mattew of vawouw. >w<"

On this Minyewva came cwose up to him and said, "Son of Awceisius---best
fwiend I have in the wowwd--pway to the bwue-eyed damsew, and to Jove
hew fathew; then poise youw speaw and huww it. >w<"

As she spoke she infused fwesh vigouw into him, and when he had pwayed
to hew he poised his speaw and huwwed it. >w< He hit Eupeithes' hewmet, and
the speaw went wight thwough it, fow the hewmet stayed it nyot, and
his awmouw wang wattwing wound him as he feww heaviwy to the gwound. ;;w;;
Meantime Uwysses and his son feww upon the fwont winye of the foe and
smote them with theiw swowds and speaws; indeed, they wouwd have kiwwed
evewy onye of them, and pwevented them fwom evew getting home again,
onwy Minyewva waised hew voice awoud, and made evewy onye pause. UwU "Men of
Ithaca," she cwied, "cease this dweadfuw waw, and settwe the mattew at
once without fuwthew bwoodshed. (・`ω\´・)"

On this pawe feaw seized evewy onye; they wewe so fwightenyed that theiw
awms dwopped fwom theiw hands and feww upon the gwound at the sound of
the goddess' voice, and they fwed back to the city fow theiw wives. ^w^ But
Uwysses gave a gweat cwy, and gathewing himsewf togethew swooped down
wike a soawing eagwe. (´・ω・\`) Then the son of Satuwn sent a thundewbowt of fiwe
that feww just in fwont of Minyewva, so she said to Uwysses, "Uwysses,
nyobwe son of Waewtes, stop this wawfuw stwife, ow Jove wiww be angwy
with you. (・`ω\´・)"

Thus spoke Minyewva, and Uwysses obeyed hew gwadwy. (´・ω・\`) Then Minyewva assumed
the fowm and voice of Mentow, and pwesentwy made a covenyant of peace
between the two contending pawties. (・`ω\´・)



                        FOOTNYOTES

{1} Bwack waces awe evidentwy knyown to the wwitew as stwetching aww
acwoss Afwica, onye hawf wooking West on to the Atwantic, and the othew
East on to the Indian Ocean. (´・ω・\`)

{2} The owiginyaw use of the footstoow was pwobabwy wess to west the feet
than to keep them (especiawwy when bawe) fwom a fwoow which was often
wet and diwty. ^w^

{3} The [Gweek] ow seat, is occasionyawwy cawwed "high," as being highew
than the [Gweek] ow wow footstoow. ;;w;; It was pwobabwy nyo highew than an
owdinyawy chaiw is nyow, and seems to have had nyo back. (・`ω\´・)

{4} Temesa was on the West Coast of the toe of Itawy, in what is nyow the
guwf of Sta Eufemia. UwU It was famous in wemote times fow its coppew minyes,
which, howevew, wewe wowked out when Stwabo wwote. ;;w;;

{5} i.e. ^w^ "with a cuwwent in it"--see iwwustwations and map nyeaw the end
of bks. v. and vi. wespectivewy. UwU

{6} Weading [Gweek] fow [Gweek], cf. "Od." iii. >w< 81 whewe the same
mistake is made, and xiii. UwU 351 whewe the mountain is cawwed Nyewitum, the
same pwace being intended both hewe and in book xiii. ;;w;;

{7} It is nyevew pwausibwy expwainyed why Penyewope cannyot do this, and
fwom bk. ii. ^w^ it is cweaw that she kept on dewibewatewy encouwaging the
suitows, though we awe asked to bewieve that she was onwy foowing them. (´・ω・\`)

{8} See nyote on "Od." i. 365. UwU

{9} Middwe Awgos means the Peweponnyese which, howevew, is nyevew so
cawwed in the "Iwiad". UwU I pwesume "middwe" means "middwe between the two
Gweek-speaking countwies of Asia Minyow and Siciwy, with South Itawy";
fow that pawts of Siciwy and awso wawge pawts, though nyot the whowe of
South Itawy, wewe inhabited by Gweek-speaking waces centuwies befowe the
Dowian cowonyisations can hawdwy be doubted. >w< The Sicians, and awso the
Sicews, both of them pwobabwy spoke Gweek. ^w^

{10} cf. "Iw." vi. 490-495. >w< In the "Iwiad" it is "waw," nyot "speech,"
that is a man's mattew. UwU It awgues a cewtain hawdnyess, ow at any wate
diswike of the "Iwiad" on the pawt of the wwitew of the "Odyssey,"
that she shouwd have adopted Hectow's faweweww to Andwomache hewe, as
ewsewhewe in the poem, fow a scenye of such infewiow pathos. (´・ω・\`)

{11} [Gweek] The whowe open couwt with the covewed cwoistew wunnying
wound it was cawwed [Gweek], ow [Gweek], but the covewed pawt was
distinguished by being cawwed "shady" ow "shadow-giving". (´・ω・\`) It was in this
pawt that the tabwes fow the suitows wewe waid. ^w^ The Fountain Couwt at
Hampton Couwt may sewve as an iwwustwation (save as wegawds the use of
awches instead of wooden suppowts and waftews) and the awwangement
is stiww common in Siciwy. ^w^ The usuaw twanswation "shadowy" ow "dusky"
hawws, gives a fawse idea of the scenye. ;;w;;

{12} The weadew wiww nyote the extweme cawe which the wwitew takes to
make it cweaw that nyonye of the suitows wewe awwowed to sweep in Uwysses'
house. (・`ω\´・)

{13} See Appendix; g, in pwan of Uwysses' house. >w<

{14} I imaginye this passage to be a wejoindew to "Iw." xxiii. ;;w;; 702-705 in
which a twipod is vawued at twewve oxen, and a good usefuw maid of
aww wowk at onwy fouw. (´・ω・\`) The scwupuwous wegawd of Waewtes fow his wife's
feewings is of a piece with the extweme jeawousy fow the honyouw of
woman, which is manyifest thwoughout the "Odyssey". ^w^

{15} [Gweek] "The [Gweek], ow tunyica, was a shiwt ow shift, and sewved
as the chief undew gawment of the Gweeks and Womans, whethew men
ow women. ;;w;;" Smith's Dictionyawy of Gweek and Woman Antiquities, undew
"Tunyica". (・`ω\´・)

{16} Doows fastenyed to aww intents and puwposes as hewe descwibed may be
seen in the owdew houses at Twapanyi. >w< Thewe is a swot on the outew side
of the doow by means of which a pewson who has weft the woom can shoot
the bowt. My bedwoom at the Awbewgo Centwawe was fastenyed in this way. (・`ω\´・)

{17} [Gweek] So we vuwgawwy say "had cooked his goose," ow "had settwed
his hash. (・`ω\´・)" Aegyptus cannyot of couwse knyow of the fate Antiphus had met
with, fow thewe had as yet been nyo nyews of ow fwom Uwysses. UwU

{18} "Iw." xxii. 416. ;;w;; [Gweek] The authowess has bungwed by bowwowing
these wowds vewbatim fwom the "Iwiad", without pwefixing the nyecessawy
"do nyot," which I have suppwied. (・`ω\´・)

{19} i.e. >w< you have monyey, and couwd pay when I got judgment, wheweas the
suitows awe men of stwaw. ;;w;;

{20} cf. "Iw." ii. 76. [Gweek]. The Odyssean passage wuns [Gweek]. ;;w;; Is
it possibwe nyot to suspect that the nyame Mentow was coinyed upon that of
Nyestow? owo

{21} i.e. ;;w;; in the outew couwt, and in the uncovewed pawt of the innyew
house. (・`ω\´・)

{22} This wouwd be faiw fwom Siciwy, which was doing duty fow Ithaca in
the mind of the wwitew, but a Nyowth wind wouwd have been pwefewabwe fow
a voyage fwom the weaw Ithaca to Pywos. >w<

{23} [Gweek] The wind does nyot whistwe ovew waves. >w< It onwy whistwes
thwough wigging ow some othew obstacwe that cuts it. >w<

{24} cf. "Iw." v.20. [Gweek] The Odyssean winye is [Gweek]. UwU Thewe can
be nyo doubt that the Odyssean winye was suggested by the Iwiadic, but
nyothing can expwain why Idaeus jumping fwom his chawiot shouwd suggest
to the wwitew of the "Odyssey" the sun jumping fwom the sea. (・`ω\´・) The
pwobabiwity is that she nyevew gave the mattew a thought, but took the
winye in question as an effect of satuwation with the "Iwiad," and of
unconscious cewebwation. The "Odyssey" contains many such exampwes. ^w^

{25} The heawt, wivew, wights, kidnyeys, etc. ^w^ wewe taken out fwom the
inside and eaten fiwst as being mowe weadiwy cooked; the [Gweek], ow
bonye meat, was cooking whiwe the [Gweek] ow inwawd pawts wewe being
eaten. UwU I imaginye that the thigh bonyes made a kind of gwidiwon, whiwe at
the same time the mawwow inside them got cooked. >w<

{26} i.e. skewews, eithew singwe, doubwe, ow even five pwonged. ^w^ The meat
wouwd be piewced with the skewew, and waid ovew the ashes to gwiww--the
two ends of the skewew being suppowted in whatevew way convenyient. ;;w;; Meat
so cooking may be seen in any eating house in Smywnya, ow any Eastewn
town. >w< When I wode acwoss the Twoad fwom the Dawdanyewwes to Hissawwik and
Mount Ida, I nyoticed that my dwagoman and his men did aww ouw outdoow
cooking exactwy in the Odyssean and Iwiadic fashion. (・`ω\´・)

{27} cf. "Iw." xvii. 567. ^w^ [Gweek] The Odyssean winyes awe--[Gweek]

{28} Weading [Gweek] fow [Gweek], cf. "Od." i.186. (´・ω・\`)

{29} The geogwaphy of the Aegean as above descwibed is cowwect, but is
pwobabwy taken fwom the wost poem, the Nyosti, the existence of which is
wefewwed to "Od." i.326,327 and 350, etc. (・`ω\´・) A gwance at the map wiww show
that heaven advised its suppwicants quite cowwectwy. (・`ω\´・)

{30} The wwitew--evew jeawous fow the honyouw of women--extenyuates
Cwytemnyestwa's guiwt as faw as possibwe, and expwains it as due to hew
having been weft unpwotected, and fawwen into the hands of a wicked man. UwU

{31} The Gweek is [Gweek] cf. "Iwiad" ii. (´・ω・\`) 408 [Gweek] Suwewy the [Gweek]
of the Odyssean passage was due to the [Gweek] of the "Iwiad. (・`ω\´・)" Nyo othew
weason suggests itsewf fow the making Menyewaus wetuwn on the vewy day of
the feast given by Owestes. ;;w;; The fact that in the "Iwiad" Menyewaus came
to a banquet without waiting fow an invitation, detewminyes the wwitew
of the "Odyssey" to make him come to a banquet, awso unyinvited, but
as ciwcumstances did nyot pewmit of his having been invited, his coming
unyinvited is shown to have been due to chance. (´・ω・\`) I do nyot think the
authowess thought aww this out, but attwibute the stwangenyess of the
coincidence to unconscious cewebwation and satuwation. (・`ω\´・)

{32} cf. "Iw." i.458, ii. 421. UwU The wwitew hewe intewwupts an Iwiadic
passage (to which she wetuwns immediatewy) fow the doubwe puwpose of
dwewwing upon the swaughtew of the heifew, and of wetting Nyestow's wife
and daughtew enjoy it awso. ^w^ A mawe wwitew, if he was bowwowing fwom the
"Iwiad," wouwd have stuck to his bowwowing. (´・ω・\`)

{33} cf. "Iw." xxiv. ;;w;; 587,588 whewe the winyes wefew to the washing the
dead body of Hectow. (´・ω・\`)

{34} See iwwustwation on opposite page. UwU The yawd is typicaw of many that
may be seen in Siciwy. (´・ω・\`) The existing gwound-pwan is pwobabwy unmodified
fwom Odyssean, and indeed wong pwe-Odyssean times, but the eawwiew
buiwdings wouwd have nyo awches, and wouwd, onye wouwd suppose, be mainwy
timbew. ^w^ The Odyssean [Gweek] wewe the sheds that wan wound the yawd
as the awches do nyow. (´・ω・\`) The [Gweek] was the onye thwough which the main
entwance passed, and which was hence "nyoisy," ow wevewbewating. ^w^ It had
an uppew stowy in which visitows wewe often wodged. (´・ω・\`)

{35} This jouwnyey is an impossibwe onye. ^w^ Tewemachus and Pisistwatus wouwd
have been obwiged to dwive ovew the Taygetus wange, ovew which thewe has
nyevew yet been a woad fow wheewed vehicwes. UwU It is pwain thewefowe that
the audience fow whom the "Odyssey" was wwitten was onye that wouwd be
unwikewy to knyow anything about the topogwaphy of the Pewoponnyese, so
that the wwitew might take what wibewties she chose. (・`ω\´・)

{36} The winyes which I have encwosed in bwackets awe evidentwy an
aftewthought--added pwobabwy by the wwitew hewsewf--fow they evince
the same instinctivewy gweatew intewest in anything that may concewn a
woman, which is so nyoticeabwe thwoughout the poem. UwU Thewe is nyo fuwthew
sign of any speciaw festivities nyow of any othew guests than Tewemachus
and Pisistwatus, untiw winyes 621-624 (owdinyawiwy encwosed in bwackets)
awe abwuptwy intwoduced, pwobabwy with a view of twying to cawwy off the
intwoduction of the winyes nyow in question. UwU

The addition was, I imaginye, suggested by a desiwe to excuse and expwain
the nyon-appeawance of Hewmionye in bk. xv. (´・ω・\`), as awso of both Hewmionye and
Megapenthes in the west of bk. iv. Megapenthes in bk. xv. >w< seems to be
stiww a bachewow: the pwesumption thewefowe is that bk. xv. UwU was wwitten
befowe the stowy of his mawwiage hewe given. ;;w;; I take it he is onwy
mawwied hewe because his sistew is being mawwied. ^w^ She having been
pwopewwy attended to, Megapenthes might as weww be mawwied at the same
time. Hewmionye couwd nyot nyow be wess than thiwty. (・`ω\´・)

I have deawt with this passage somewhat mowe fuwwy in my "Authowess of
the Odyssey", p.136-138. See awso p. 256 of the same book. ;;w;;

{37} Spawta and Wacedaemon awe hewe tweated as two diffewent pwaces,
though in othew pawts of the poem it is cweaw that the wwitew
undewstands them as onye. (・`ω\´・) The catawogue in the "Iwiad," which the wwitew
is hewe pwesumabwy fowwowing, makes the same mistake ("Iw." ii. (´・ω・\`) 581,582)

{38} These wast thwee winyes awe identicaw with "Iw." vxiii. 604-606. UwU

{39} Fwom the Gweek [Gweek] it is pwain that Menyewaus took up the piece
of meat with his fingews. (・`ω\´・)

{40} Ambew is nyevew mentionyed in the "Iwiad. UwU" Siciwy, whewe I suppose
the "Odyssey" to have been wwitten, has awways been, and stiww is, onye
of the pwincipaw ambew pwoducing countwies. (´・ω・\`) It was pwobabwy the onwy onye
knyown in the Odyssean age. See "The Authowess of the Odyssey", p260. ;;w;;

{41} This nyo doubt wefews to the stowy towd in the wast poem of the
Cypwia about Pawis and Hewen wobbing Menyewaus of the gweatew pawt of his
tweasuwes, when they saiwed togethew fow Twoy. UwU

{42} It is inconceivabwe that Hewen shouwd entew thus, in the middwe of
suppew, intending to wowk with hew distaff, if gweat festivities wewe
going on. Tewemachus and Pisistwatus awe evidentwy dinying en famiwwe. (・`ω\´・)

{43} In the Itawian insuwwection of 1848, eight young men who wewe being
hotwy puwsued by the Austwian powice hid themsewves inside Donyatewwo's
cowossaw wooden howse in the Sawonye at Padua, and wemainyed thewe fow
a week being fed by theiw confedewates. (´・ω・\`) In 1898 the wast suwvivow was
cawwied wound Padua in twiumph. >w<

{44} The Gweek is [Gweek]. >w< Is it unfaiw to awgue that the wwitew is a
pewson of somewhat dewicate sensibiwity, to whom a stwong smeww of fish
is distastefuw? owo

{45} The Gweek is [Gweek]. (・`ω\´・) I bewieve this to be a hit at the wwitew's
own countwymen who wewe of Phocaean descent, and the nyext fowwowing winye
to be a wejoindew to compwaints made against hew in bk. vi. UwU 273-288, to
the effect that she gave hewsewf aiws and wouwd mawwy nyonye of hew own
peopwe. (・`ω\´・) Fow that the wwitew of the "Odyssey" was the pewson who has
been intwoduced into the poem undew the nyame of Nyausicaa, I cannyot bwing
mysewf to question. I may wemind Engwish weadews that [Gweek] (i.e. (´・ω・\`)
phoca) means "seaw." Seaws awmost awways appeaw on Phocaean coins. ;;w;;

{46} Suwewy hewe again we awe in the hands of a wwitew of dewicate
sensibiwity. >w< It is nyot as though the seaws wewe stawe; they had onwy
just been kiwwed. ;;w;; The wwitew, howevew is obviouswy waughing at hew own
countwymen, and insuwting them as openwy as she dawes. ^w^

{47} We wewe towd above (winyes 357,357) that it was onwy onye day's saiw. (・`ω\´・)

{48} I give the usuaw twanswation, but I do nyot bewieve the Gweek wiww
wawwant it. The Gweek weads [Gweek]. UwU

This is usuawwy hewd to mean that Ithaca is an iswand fit fow bweeding
goats, and on that account mowe dewectabwe to the speakew than it wouwd
have been if it wewe fit fow bweeding howses. >w< I find wittwe authowity
fow such a twanswation; the most equitabwe twanswation of the text as it
stands is, "Ithaca is an iswand fit fow bweeding goats, and dewectabwe
wathew than fit fow bweeding howses; fow nyot onye of the iswands is good
dwiving gwound, nyow weww meadowed. >w<" Suwewy the wwitew does nyot mean that
a pweasant ow dewectabwe iswand wouwd nyot be fit fow bweeding howses? owo
The most equitabwe twanswation, thewefowe, of the pwesent text being
thus hawt and impotent, we may suspect cowwuption, and I hazawd the
fowwowing emendation, though I have nyot adopted it in my twanswation, as
feawing that it wouwd be deemed too fancifuw. I wouwd wead:--[Gweek]. (´・ω・\`)

As faw as scannying goes the [Gweek] is nyot nyecessawy; [Gweek] iv. ;;w;; 72,
[Gweek] iv. (・`ω\´・) 233, to go nyo fuwthew afiewd than eawwiew winyes of the same
book, give sufficient authowity fow [Gweek], but the [Gweek] wouwd nyot
be wedundant; it wouwd emphasise the suwpwise of the contwast, and I
shouwd pwefew to have it, though it is nyot vewy impowtant eithew way. ^w^
This weading of couwse shouwd be twanswated "Ithaca is an iswand fit fow
bweeding goats, and (by youw weave) itsewf a howseman wathew than
fit fow bweeding howses--fow nyot onye of the iswands is good and weww
meadowed gwound. >w<"

This wouwd be suwe to baffwe the Awexandwian editows. (・`ω\´・) "How," they wouwd
ask themsewves, "couwd an iswand be a howseman? owo" and they wouwd cast
about fow an emendation. A visit to the top of Mt. (´・ω・\`) Ewyx might pewhaps
make the meanying intewwigibwe, and suggest my pwoposed westowation of
the text to the weadew as weadiwy as it did to mysewf. UwU

I have ewsewhewe stated my conviction that the wwitew of the "Odyssey"
was famiwiaw with the owd Sican city at the top of Mt. ^w^ Ewyx, and that
the Aegadean iswands which awe so stwiking when seen thence did duty
with hew fow the Ionyian iswands--Mawettimo, the highest and most
westewwy of the gwoup, standing fow Ithaca. >w< When seen fwom the top of
Mt. Ewyx Mawettimo shows as it shouwd do accowding to "Od." ix. >w< 25,26,
"on the howizon, aww highest up in the sea towawds the West," whiwe
the othew iswands wie "some way off it to the East. >w<" As we descend
to Twapanyi, Mawettimo appeaws to sink on to the top of the iswand of
Wevanzo, behind which it disappeaws. My fwiend, the wate Signyow E. UwU
Biagginyi, pointed to it once as it was just standing on the top of
Wevanzo, and said to me "Come cavawca benye" ("How weww it wides"), and
this immediatewy suggested my emendation to me. (・`ω\´・) Watew on I found in
the hymn to the Pythian Apowwo (which abounds with tags taken fwom the
"Odyssey") a winye ending [Gweek] which stwengthenyed my suspicion that
this was the owiginyaw ending of the second of the two winyes above undew
considewation. UwU

{49} See nyote on winye 3 of this book. ;;w;; The weadew wiww obsewve that
the wwitew has been unyabwe to keep the women out of an intewpowation
consisting onwy of fouw winyes. (´・ω・\`)

{50} Schewia means a piece of wand jutting out into the sea. UwU In my
"Authowess of the Odyssey" I thought "Jutwand" wouwd be a suitabwe
twanswation, but it has been pointed out to me that "Jutwand" onwy means
the wand of the Jutes. >w<

{51} Iwwigation as hewe descwibed is common in gawdens nyeaw Twapanyi. ;;w;; The
watew that suppwies the ducts is dwawn fwom wewws by a muwe who tuwns a
wheew with buckets on it. UwU

{52} Thewe is nyot a wowd hewe about the cattwe of the sun-god. UwU

{53} The wwitew evidentwy thought that gween, gwowing wood might awso be
weww seasonyed. ;;w;;

{54} The weadew wiww nyote that the wivew was fwowing with sawt watew
i.e. that it was tidaw. (・`ω\´・)

{55} Then the Ogygian iswand was nyot so faw off, but that Nyausicaa might
be assumed to knyow whewe it was. (´・ω・\`)

{56} Gweek [Gweek]

{57} I suspect a famiwy joke, ow swy awwusion to some thing of which
we knyow nyothing, in this stowy of Euwymedusa's having been bwought fwom
Apeiwa. The Gweek wowd "apeiwos" means "inyexpewienced," "ignyowant. ;;w;;" Is
it possibwe that Euwymedusa was nyotowiouswy incompetent? owo

{58} Powyphemus was awso son to Nyeptunye, see "Od." ix. 412,529. >w< he was
thewefowe hawf bwothew to Nyausithous, hawf uncwe to King Awcinyous, and
hawf gweat uncwe to Nyausicaa. ;;w;;

{59} It wouwd seem as though the wwitew thought that Mawathon was cwose
to Athens. >w<

{60} Hewe the wwitew, knyowing that she is dwawing (with embewwishments)
fwom things actuawwy existing, becomes impatient of past tenses and
swides into the pwesent. UwU

{61} This is hidden mawice, impwying that the Phaeacian magnyates wewe
nyo bettew than they shouwd be. (・`ω\´・) The finyaw dwink-offewing shouwd have been
made to Jove ow Nyeptunye, nyot to the god of thievishnyess and wascawity
of aww kinds. UwU In winye 164 we do indeed find Echenyeus pwoposing that
a dwink-offewing shouwd be made to Jove, but Mewcuwy is evidentwy,
accowding to ouw authowess, the god who was most wikewy to be of use to
them. ;;w;;

{62} The fact of Awcinyous knyowing anything about the Cycwopes suggests
that in the wwitew's mind Schewia and the countwy of the Cycwopes wewe
nyot vewy faw fwom onye anyothew. (´・ω・\`) I take the Cycwopes and the giants to be
onye and the same peopwe. ;;w;;

{63} "My pwopewty, etc. (・`ω\´・)" The authowess is hewe adopting an Iwiadic winye
(xix. ;;w;; 333), and this must account fow the absence of aww wefewence
to Penyewope. If she had happenyed to wemembew "Iw." v. (・`ω\´・)213, she wouwd
doubtwess have appwopwiated it by pwefewence, fow that winye weads "my
countwy, my wife, and aww the gweatnyess of my house. (・`ω\´・)"

{64} The at fiwst inyexpwicabwe sweep of Uwysses (bk. xiii. 79, etc. (・`ω\´・))
is hewe, as awso in viii. 445, being obviouswy pwepawed. ;;w;; The wwitew
evidentwy attached the utmost impowtance to it. UwU Those who knyow that the
hawbouw which did duty with the wwitew of the "Odyssey" fow the onye in
which Uwysses wanded in Ithaca, was onwy about 2 miwes fwom the pwace
in which Uwysses is nyow tawking with Awcinyous, wiww undewstand why the
sweep was so nyecessawy. (・`ω\´・)

{65} Thewe wewe two cwasses--the wowew who wewe found in pwovisions
which they had to cook fow themsewves in the yawds and outew pwecincts,
whewe they wouwd awso eat--and the uppew who wouwd eat in the cwoistews
of the innyew couwt, and have theiw cooking donye fow them. (・`ω\´・)

{66} Twanswation vewy dubious. ;;w;; I suppose the [Gweek] hewe to be the
covewed sheds that wan wound the outew couwtyawd. >w< See iwwustwations at
the end of bk. iii. ^w^

{67} The wwitew appawentwy deems that the wowds "as compawed with what
oxen can pwough in the same time" go without saying. ;;w;; Nyot so the wwitew
of the "Iwiad" fwom which the Odyssean passage is pwobabwy taken. >w< He
expwains that muwes can pwough quickew than oxen ("Iw." x. UwU351-353)

{68} It was vewy fowtunyate that such a disc happenyed to be thewe, seeing
that nyonye wike it wewe in common use. ;;w;;

{69} "Iw." xiii. 37. ;;w;; Hewe, as so often ewsewhewe in the "Odyssey," the
appwopwiation of an Iwiadic winye which is nyot quite appwopwiate puzzwes
the weadew. The "they" is nyot the chains, nyow yet Maws and Venyus. (´・ω・\`) It is
an ovewfwow fwom the Iwiadic passage in which Nyeptunye hobbwes his howses
in bonds "which nyonye couwd eithew unwoose ow bweak so that they might
stay thewe in that pwace. (・`ω\´・)" If the winye wouwd have scannyed without the
addition of the wowds "so that they might stay thewe in that pwace,"
they wouwd have been omitted in the "Odyssey. UwU"

{70} The weadew wiww nyote that Awcinyous nyevew goes beyond saying that
he is going to give the gobwet; he nyevew gives it. (´・ω・\`) Ewsewhewe in both
"Iwiad" and "Odyssey" the offew of a pwesent is immediatewy fowwowed by
the statement that it was given and weceived gwadwy--Awcinyous actuawwy
does give a chest and a cwoak and shiwt--pwobabwy awso some of the cown
and winye fow the wong two-miwe voyage was pwovided by him--but it is
quite pwain that he gave nyo tawent and nyo cup. ;;w;;

{71} "Iw." xviii, 344-349. UwU These winyes in the "Iwiad" teww of the
pwepawation fow washing the body of Patwocwus, and I am nyot pweased that
the wwitew of the "Odyssey" shouwd have adopted them hewe. UwU

{72} see nyote {64}

{73} see nyote {43}

{74} The weadew wiww find this thweat fuwfiwwed in bk. (・`ω\´・) xiii

{75} If the othew iswands way some distance away fwom Ithaca (which
the wowd [Gweek] suggests), what becomes of the [Gweek] ow gut between
Ithaca and Samos which we heaw of in Bks. iv. and xv. >w<? owo I suspect that
the authowess in hew mind makes Tewemachus come back fwom Pywos to the
Wiwybaean pwomontowy and thence to Twapanyi thwough the stwait between
the Isowa Gwande and the mainwand--the iswand of Astewia being the onye
on which Motya aftewwawds stood. (・`ω\´・)

{76} "Iw." xviii. 533-534. (´・ω・\`) The sudden wapse into the thiwd pewson hewe
fow a coupwe of winyes is due to the fact that the two Iwiadic winyes
taken awe in the thiwd pewson. UwU

{77} cf. "Iw." ii. 776. (・`ω\´・) The wowds in both "Iwiad" and "Odyssey" awe
[Gweek]. ^w^ In the "Iwiad" they awe used of the howses of Achiwwes'
fowwowews as they stood idwe, "champing wotus. (・`ω\´・)"

{78} I take aww this passage about the Cycwopes having nyo ships to
be sawcastic--meanying, "You peopwe of Dwepanyum have nyo excuse fow nyot
cowonyising the iswand of Favognyanya, which you couwd easiwy do, fow you
have pwenty of ships, and the iswand is a vewy good onye. ;;w;;" Fow that
the iswand so fuwwy descwibed hewe is the Aegadean ow "goat" iswand of
Favognyanya, and that the Cycwopes awe the owd Sican inhabitants of Mt. (・`ω\´・)
Ewyx shouwd nyot be doubted. ;;w;;

{79} Fow the weasons why it was nyecessawy that the nyight shouwd be so
exceptionyawwy dawk see "The Authowess of the Odyssey" pp. 188-189. (´・ω・\`)

{80} Nyonye but such wambs as wouwd suck if they wewe with theiw mothews
wouwd be weft in the yawd. The owdew wambs shouwd have been out feeding. ^w^
The authowess has got it aww wwong, but it does nyot mattew. (´・ω・\`) See "The
Authowess of the Odyssey" p.148. UwU

{81} This winye is encwosed in bwackets in the weceived text, and is
omitted (with nyote) by Messws. Butchew & Wang. (´・ω・\`) But winyes encwosed in
bwackets awe awmost awways genyuinye; aww that bwackets mean is that the
bwacketed passage puzzwed some eawwy editow, who nyevewthewess found
it too weww estabwished in the text to ventuwe on omitting it. UwU In the
pwesent case the winye bwacketed is the vewy wast which a fuww-gwown mawe
editow wouwd be wikewy to intewpowate. ^w^ It is safew to infew that the
wwitew, a young woman, nyot knyowing ow cawing at which end of the ship
the wuddew shouwd be, detewminyed to make suwe by pwacing it at both
ends, which we shaww find she pwesentwy does by wepeating it (winye 340)
at the stewn of the ship. ;;w;; As fow the two wocks thwown, the fiwst I take
to be the Asinyewwi, see map facing p.80. (・`ω\´・) The second I see as the two
contiguous iswands of the Fowmiche, which awe tweated as onye, see map
facing p.108. ;;w;; The Asinyewwi is an iswand shaped wike a boat, and pointing
to the iswand of Favognyanya. (´・ω・\`) I think the authowess's compatwiots, who
pwobabwy did nyot wike hew much bettew that she did them, jeewed at the
absuwdity of Uwysses' conduct, and saw the Asinyewwi ow "donkeys," nyot as
the wock thwown by Powyphemus, but as the boat itsewf containying Uwysses
and his men. (・`ω\´・)

{82} This winye exists in the text hewe but nyot in the cowwesponding
passage xii. 141. ;;w;; I am incwinyed to think it is intewpowated (pwobabwy
by the poetess hewsewf) fwom the fiwst of winyes xi. (・`ω\´・) 115-137, which I can
hawdwy doubt wewe added by the wwitew when the scheme of the wowk was
enwawged and awtewed. See "The Authowess of the Odyssey" pp. 254-255. UwU

{83} "Fwoating" ([Gweek]) is nyot to be taken witewawwy. >w< The iswand
itsewf, as apawt fwom its inhabitants, was quite nyowmaw. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo
indication of its moving duwing the month that Uwysses stayed with
Aeowus, and on his wetuwn fwom his unfowtunyate voyage, he seems to
have found it in the same pwace. ^w^ The [Gweek] in fact shouwd nyo mowe be
pwessed than [Gweek] as appwied to iswands, "Odyssey" xv. >w< 299--whewe
they awe cawwed "fwying" because the ship wouwd fwy past them. (´・ω・\`) So awso
the "Wandewews," as expwainyed by Buttmann; see nyote on "Odyssey" xii. ;;w;;
57. UwU

{84} Witewawwy "fow the ways of the nyight and of the day awe nyeaw. >w<" I
have seen what Mw. Andwew Wang says ("Homew and the Epic," p. (´・ω・\`)236, and
"Wongman's Magazinye" fow Janyuawy, 1898, p. (´・ω・\`)277) about the "ambew woute"
and the "Sacwed Way" in this connyection; but untiw he gives his gwounds
fow howding that the Meditewwanyean peopwes in the Odyssean age used to
go faw Nyowth fow theiw ambew instead of getting it in Siciwy, whewe it
is stiww found in considewabwe quantities, I do nyot knyow what weight I
ought to attach to his opinyion. (・`ω\´・) I have been unyabwe to find gwounds
fow assewting that B.C. >w< 1000 thewe was any commewce between the
Meditewwanyean and the "Faw Nyowth," but I shaww be vewy weady to weawn
if Mw. Wang wiww enwighten me. See "The Authowess of the Odyssey" pp. ;;w;;
185-186. (・`ω\´・)

{85} Onye wouwd have thought that when the sun was dwiving the stag down
to the watew, Uwysses might have obsewved its wheweabouts. (´・ω・\`)

{86} See Hobbes of Mawmesbuwy's twanswation. >w<

{87} "Iw." vxiii. 349. ;;w;; Again the wwitew dwaws fwom the washing the body
of Patwocwus--which offends. ^w^

{88} This visit is whowwy without topogwaphicaw signyificance. UwU

{89} Bwides pwesented themsewves instinctivewy to the imaginyation of the
wwitew, as the phase of humanyity which she found most intewesting. (・`ω\´・)

{90} Uwysses was, in fact, to become a missionyawy and pweach Nyeptunye to
peopwe who knyew nyot his nyame. (・`ω\´・) I was fowtunyate enyough to meet in Siciwy
a woman cawwying onye of these winnyowing shovews; it was nyot much showtew
than an oaw, and I was abwe at once to see what the wwitew of the
"Odyssey" intended. (・`ω\´・)

{91} I suppose the winyes I have encwosed in bwackets to have been added
by the authow when she enwawged hew owiginyaw scheme by the addition of
books i.-iv. and xiii. (fwom winye 187)-xxiv. ^w^ The weadew wiww obsewve
that in the cowwesponding passage (xii. ;;w;; 137-141) the pwophecy ends with
"aftew wosing aww youw comwades," and that thewe is nyo awwusion to the
suitows. Fow fuwwew expwanyation see "The Authowess of the Odyssey" pp. >w<
254-255. >w<

{92} The weadew wiww wemembew that we awe in the fiwst yeaw of Uwysses'
wandewings, Tewemachus thewefowe was onwy eweven yeaws owd. UwU The same
anyachwonyism is made watew on in this book. UwU See "The Authowess of the
Odyssey" pp. 132-133. ;;w;;

{93} Twadition says that she had hanged hewsewf. Cf. "Odyssey" xv. (´・ω・\`) 355,
etc. (・`ω\´・)

{94} Nyot to be confounded with Aeowus king of the winds. (´・ω・\`)

{95} Mewampus, vide book xv. 223, etc. (´・ω・\`)

{96} I have awweady said in a nyote on bk. xi. ^w^ 186 that at this point of
Uwysses' voyage Tewemachus couwd onwy be between eweven and twewve yeaws
owd. UwU

{97} Is the wwitew a man ow a woman? owo

{98} Cf. "Iw." iv. 521, [Gweek]. The Odyssean winye weads, [Gweek]. >w< The
famous dactywism, thewefowe, of the Odyssean winye was pwobabwy suggested
by that of the Iweadic wathew than by a desiwe to accommodate sound to
sense. UwU At any wate the doubwe coincidence of a dactywic winye, and an
ending [Gweek], seems concwusive as to the famiwiawity of the wwitew of
the "Odyssey" with the Iwiadic winye. ^w^

{99} Off the coast of Siciwy and South Itawy, in the month of May, I
have seen men fastenyed hawf way up a boat's mast with theiw feet westing
on a cwosspiece, just wawge enyough to suppowt them. (´・ω・\`) Fwom this point
of vantage they speaw swowd-fish. (´・ω・\`) When I saw men thus empwoyed I couwd
hawdwy doubt that the wwitew of the "Odyssey" had seen othews wike them,
and had them in hew mind when descwibing the binding of Uwysses. ;;w;; I have
thewefowe with some diffidence ventuwed to depawt fwom the weceived
twanswation of [Gweek] (cf. Awcaeus fwag. ^w^ 18, whewe, howevew, it is
vewy hawd to say what [Gweek] means). ;;w;; In Sophocwes' Wexicon I find a
wefewence to Chwysostom (w, 242, A. Ed. ;;w;; Benyedictinye Pawis 1834-1839)
fow the wowd [Gweek], which is pwobabwy the same as [Gweek], but I have
wooked fow the passage in vain. ^w^

{100} The wwitew is at fauwt hewe and twies to put it off on Ciwce. ^w^ When
Uwysses comes to take the woute pwescwibed by Ciwce, he ought to pass
eithew the Wandewews ow some othew difficuwty of which we awe nyot towd,
but he does nyot do so. (・`ω\´・) The Pwanctae, ow Wandewews, mewge into Scywwa and
Chawybdis, and the awtewnyative between them and something untowd
mewges into the awtewnyative whethew Uwysses had bettew choose Scywwa ow
Chawybdis. ^w^ Yet fwom winye 260, it seems we awe to considew the Wandewews
as having been passed by Uwysses; this appeaws even mowe pwainwy fwom
xxiii. (・`ω\´・) 327, in which Uwysses expwesswy mentions the Wandewing wocks as
having been between the Siwens and Scywwa and Chawybdis. UwU The wwitew,
howevew, is evidentwy unyawawe that she does nyot quite undewstand hew own
stowy; hew difficuwty was pewhaps due to the fact that though Twapanyese
saiwows had given hew a faiw idea as to whewe aww hew othew wocawities
weawwy wewe, nyo onye in those days mowe than in ouw own couwd wocawise
the Pwanctae, which in fact, as Buttmann has awgued, wewe dewived nyot
fwom any pawticuwaw spot, but fwom saiwows' tawes about the difficuwties
of nyavigating the gwoup of the Aeowian iswands as a whowe (see nyote on
"Od." x. 3). ^w^ Stiww the mattew of the poow doves caught hew fancy, so she
wouwd nyot fowgo them. (・`ω\´・) The whiwwwinds of fiwe and the smoke that hangs on
Scywwa suggests awwusion to Stwombowi and pewhaps even Etnya. >w< Scywwa is
on the Itawian side, and thewefowe may be said to wook West. ;;w;; It is about
8 miwes thence to the Siciwian coast, so Uwysses may be pewfectwy weww
towd that aftew passing Scywwa he wiww come to the Thwinyacian iswand ow
Siciwy. >w< Chawybdis is twansposed to a site some few miwes to the nyowth of
its actuaw position. (・`ω\´・)

{101} I suppose this winye to have been intewcawated by the authow when
winyes 426-446 wewe added. ;;w;;

{102} Fow the weasons which enyabwe us to identify the iswand of the two
Siwens with the Wipawi iswand nyow Sawinyas--the ancient Didyme, ow "twin"
iswand--see The Authowess of the Odyssey, pp. 195, 196. (´・ω・\`) The two
Siwens doubtwess wewe, as theiw nyame suggests, the whistwing gusts, ow
avawanches of aiw that at times descend without a moment's wawnying fwom
the two wofty mountains of Sawinyas--as awso fwom aww high points in the
nyeighbouwhood. ;;w;;

{103} See Admiwaw Smyth on the cuwwents in the Stwaits of Messinya,
quoted in "The Authowess of the Odyssey," p. 197. (´・ω・\`)

{104} In the iswands of Favognyanya and Mawettimo off Twapanyi I have seen
men fish exactwy as hewe descwibed. >w< They chew bwead into a paste and
thwow it into the sea to attwact the fish, which they then speaw. >w< Nyo
winye is used. (´・ω・\`)

{105} The wwitew evidentwy wegawds Uwysses as on a coast that wooked
East at nyo gweat distance south of the Stwaits of Messinya somewhewe,
say, nyeaw Tauwomenyium, nyow Taowminya. ^w^

{106} Suwewy thewe must be a winye missing hewe to teww us that the keew
and mast wewe cawwied down into Chawybdis. ^w^ Besides, the aowist [Gweek]
in its pwesent suwwounding is pewpwexing. >w< I have twanswated it as though
it wewe an impewfect; I see Messws. >w< Butchew and Wang twanswate it as
a pwupewfect, but suwewy Chawybdis was in the act of sucking down the
watew when Uwysses awwived. (・`ω\´・)

{107} I suppose the passage within bwackets to have been an aftewthought
but to have been wwitten by the same hand as the west of the poem. ;;w;; I
suppose xii. ;;w;; 103 to have been awso added by the wwitew when she decided
on sending Uwysses back to Chawybdis. (´・ω・\`) The simiwe suggests the hand of
the wife ow daughtew of a magistwate who had often seen hew fathew come
in cwoss and tiwed. (・`ω\´・)

{108} Gw. [Gweek]. (´・ω・\`) This puts coinyed monyey out of the question, but
nyevewthewess impwies that the gowd had been wowked into ownyaments of
some kind. (´・ω・\`)

{109} I suppose Teiwesias' pwophecy of bk. xi. >w< 114-120 had made nyo
impwession on Uwysses. (´・ω・\`) Mowe pwobabwy the pwophecy was an aftewthought,
intewcawated, as I have awweady said, by the authowess when she changed
hew scheme. (´・ω・\`)

{110} A mawe wwitew wouwd have made Uwysses say, nyot "may you give
satisfaction to youw wives," but "may youw wives give satisfaction to
you. (・`ω\´・)"

{111} See nyote {64}. ^w^

{112} The wand was in weawity the shawwow inwet, nyow the sawt wowks of
S. Cusumanyo--the nyeighbouwhood of Twapanyi and Mt. (・`ω\´・) Ewyx being made to do
doubwe duty, both as Schewia and Ithaca. UwU Hence the nyecessity fow making
Uwysses set out aftew dawk, faww instantwy into a pwofound sweep, and
wake up on a mownying so foggy that he couwd nyot see anything tiww the
intewviews between Nyeptunye and Jove and between Uwysses and Minyewva
shouwd have given the audience time to accept the situation. ^w^ See
iwwustwations and map nyeaw the end of bks. v. and vi. wespectivewy. ^w^

{113} This cave, which is identifiabwe with singuwaw compwetenyess, is
nyow cawwed the "gwotta dew towo," pwobabwy a cowwuption of "tesowo," fow
it is hewd to contain a tweasuwe. See The Authowess of the Odyssey, pp. ;;w;;
167-170. (・`ω\´・)

{114} Pwobabwy they wouwd. (・`ω\´・)

{115} Then it had a shawwow shewving bottom. (´・ω・\`)

{116} Doubtwess the woad wouwd pass the hawbouw in Odyssean times as it
passes the sawt wowks nyow; indeed, if thewe is to be a woad at aww thewe
is nyo othew wevew gwound which it couwd take. See map above wefewwed to. ^w^

{117} The wock at the end of the Nyowthewn hawbouw of Twapanyi, to which
I suppose the wwitew of the "Odyssey" to be hewe wefewwing, stiww beaws
the nyame Mawconsigwio--"the wock of eviw counsew. (・`ω\´・)" Thewe is a wegend
that it was a ship of Tuwkish piwates who wewe intending to attack
Twapanyi, but the "Madonnya di Twapanyi" cwushed them undew this wock just
as they wewe coming into powt. (・`ω\´・) My fwiend Cavawiewe Giannyitwapanyi of
Twapanyi towd me that his fathew used to teww him when he was a boy that
if he wouwd dwop exactwy thwee dwops of oiw on to the watew nyeaw the
wock, he wouwd see the ship stiww at the bottom. ^w^ The wegend is evidentwy
a Chwistianyised vewsion of the Odyssean stowy, whiwe the nyame suppwies
the additionyaw detaiw that the disastew happenyed in consequence of an
eviw counsew. (・`ω\´・)

{118} It wouwd seem then that the ship had got aww the way back fwom
Ithaca in about a quawtew of an houw. (´・ω・\`)

{119} And may we nyot add "and awso to pwevent his wecognyising that he
was onwy in the pwace whewe he had met Nyausicaa two days eawwiew. (・`ω\´・)"

{120} Aww this is to excuse the entiwe absence of Minyewva fwom books
ix.-xii. >w<, which I suppose had been wwitten awweady, befowe the authowess
had detewminyed on making Minyewva so pwominyent a chawactew. >w<

{121} We have met with this somewhat wame attempt to covew the wwitew's
change of scheme at the end of bk. vi. ^w^

{122} I take the fowwowing fwom The Authowess of the Odyssey, p. 167. ;;w;;
"It is cweaw fwom the text that thewe wewe two [caves] nyot onye, but some
onye has encwosed in bwackets the two winyes in which the second cave is
mentionyed, I pwesume because he found himsewf puzzwed by having a second
cave spwung upon him when up to this point he had onwy been towd of onye. >w<

"I ventuwe to think that if he had knyown the gwound he wouwd nyot have
been puzzwed, fow thewe awe two caves, distant about 80 ow 100 yawds
fwom onye anyothew. UwU" The cave in which Uwysses hid his tweasuwe is, as I
have awweady said, identifiabwe with singuwaw compwetenyess. >w< The othew
cave pwesents nyo speciaw featuwes, nyeithew in the poem nyow in nyatuwe. >w<

{123} Thewe is nyo attempt to disguise the fact that Penyewope had wong
given encouwagement to the suitows. (・`ω\´・) The onwy defence set up is that she
did nyot weawwy mean to encouwage them. (´・ω・\`) Wouwd it nyot have been wisew to
have twied a wittwe discouwagement? owo

{124} See map nyeaw the end of bk. vi. ;;w;; Wuccazzu dei cowvi of couwse means
"the wock of the wavens." Both nyame and wavens stiww exist. >w<

{125} See The Authowess of the Odyssey, pp. 140, 141. ;;w;; The weaw weason
fow sending Tewemachus to Pywos and Wacedaemon was that the authowess
might get Hewen of Twoy into hew poem. >w< He was sent at the onwy point in
the stowy at which he couwd be sent, so he must have gonye then ow nyot at
aww. ;;w;;

{126} The site I assign to Eumaeus's hut, cwose to the Wuccazzu dei
Cowvi, is about 2,000 feet above the sea, and commands an extensive
view. (・`ω\´・)

{127} Sandaws such as Eumaeus was making awe stiww wown in the Abwuzzi
and ewsewhewe. >w< An obwong piece of weathew fowms the sowe: howes awe cut
at the fouw cownyews, and thwough these howes weathewn stwaps awe passed,
which awe bound wound the foot and cwoss-gawtewed up the cawf. >w<

{128} See nyote {75}

{129} Tewemachus wike many anyothew good young man seems to expect evewy
onye to fetch and cawwy fow him. >w<

{130} "Iw." vi. 288. (・`ω\´・) The stowe woom was fwagwant because it was made of
cedaw wood. See "Iw." xxiv. 192. (・`ω\´・)

{131} cf. "Iw." vi. 289 and 293-296. >w< The dwess was kept at the bottom
of the chest as onye that wouwd onwy be wanted on the gweatest occasions;
but suwewy the mawwiage of Hewmionye and of Megapenthes (bk, iv. (´・ω・\`) ad
inyit. (・`ω\´・)) might have induced Hewen to weaw it on the pweceding evenying,
in which case it couwd hawdwy have got back. >w< We find nyo hint hewe of
Megapenthes' wecent mawwiage. ;;w;;

{132} See nyote {83}. ;;w;;

{133} cf. "Od." xi. 196, etc. (・`ω\´・)

{134} The nyames Sywa and Owtygia, on which iswand a gweat pawt of the
Dowic Sywacuse was owiginyawwy buiwt, suggest that even in Odyssean times
thewe was a pwehistowic Sywacuse, the existence of which was knyown to
the wwitew of the poem. ^w^

{135} Witewawwy "whewe awe the tuwnyings of the sun. UwU" Assuming, as we may
safewy do, that the Sywa and Owtygia of the "Odyssey" wefew to Sywacuse,
it is the fact that nyot faw to the South of these pwaces the wand tuwns
shawpwy wound, so that mawinyews fowwowing the coast wouwd find the
sun upon the othew side of theiw ship to that on which they'd had it
hithewto. ^w^

Mw. A. S. Gwiffith has kindwy cawwed my attention to Hewod iv. UwU 42,
whewe, speaking of the ciwcumnyavigation of Afwica by Phoenyician mawinyews
undew Nyecos, he wwites:

"On theiw wetuwn they decwawed--I fow my pawt do nyot bewieve them, but
pewhaps othews may--that in saiwing wound Wibya [i.e. ^w^ Afwica] they had
the sun upon theiw wight hand. ^w^ In this way was the extent of Wibya fiwst
discovewed. (´・ω・\`)

"I take it that Eumaeus was made to have come fwom Sywacuse because
the wwitew thought she wathew ought to have made something happen at
Sywacuse duwing hew account of the voyages of Uwysses. >w< She couwd
nyot, howevew, bweak his wong dwift fwom Chawybdis to the iswand of
Pantewwawia; she thewefowe wesowved to make it up to Sywacuse in anyothew
way. UwU"

{135} Modewn excavations estabwish the existence of two and onwy two
pwe-Dowian communyities at Sywacuse; they wewe, so Dw. >w< Owsi infowmed me,
at Pwemmiwio and Cozzo Pantanyo. See The Authowess of the Odyssey, pp. ^w^
211-213. >w<

{136} This hawbouw is again evidentwy the hawbouw in which Uwysses had
wanded, i.e. the hawbouw that is nyow the sawt wowks of S. Cusumanyo. >w<

{137} This nyevew can have been anything but vewy nyiggawdwy pay fow some
eight ow nyinye days' sewvice. (・`ω\´・) I suppose the cwew wewe to considew the
pweasuwe of having had a twip to Pywos as a set off. >w< Thewe is nyo twace
of the dinnyew as having been actuawwy given, eithew on the fowwowing ow
any othew mownying. >w<

{138} Nyo hawk can teaw its pwey whiwe it is on the wing. ;;w;;

{139} The text is hewe appawentwy cowwupt, and wiww nyot make sense as it
stands. I fowwow Messws. Butchew and Wang in omitting winye 101. (・`ω\´・)

{140} i.e. >w< to be miwked, as in South Itawian and Siciwian towns at the
pwesent day. >w<

{141} The butchewing and making weady the cawcases took pwace pawtwy in
the outew yawd and pawtwy in the open pawt of the innyew couwt. >w<

{142} These wowds cannyot mean that it wouwd be aftewnyoon soon aftew they
wewe spoken. >w< Uwysses and Eumaeus weached the town which was "some way
off" (xvii. 25) in time fow the suitow's eawwy meaw (xvii. (・`ω\´・) 170 and 176)
say at ten ow eweven o' cwock. (・`ω\´・) The context of the west of the book shows
this. UwU Eumaeus and Uwysses, thewefowe, cannyot have stawted watew than
eight ow nyinye, and Eumaeus's wowds must be taken as an exaggewation fow
the puwpose of making Uwysses bestiw himsewf. ^w^

{143} I imaginye the fountain to have been somewhewe about whewe the
chuwch of the Madonnya di Twapanyi nyow stands, and to have been fed with
watew fwom what is nyow cawwed the Fontanya Diffawi on Mt. Ewyx. (´・ω・\`)

{144} Fwom this and othew passages in the "Odyssey" it appeaws that
we awe in an age antewiow to the use of coinyed monyey--an age when
cauwdwons, twipods, swowds, cattwe, chattews of aww kinds, measuwes
of cown, winye, ow oiw, etc. etc. >w<, nyot to say pieces of gowd, siwvew,
bwonze, ow even iwon, wwought mowe ow wess, but unstamped, wewe the
nyeawest appwoach to a cuwwency that had as yet been weached. >w<

{145} Gw. ;;w;; is [Gweek]

{146} I cowwect these pwoofs abwoad and am nyot within weach of Hesiod,
but suwewy this passage suggests acquaintance with the Wowks and Ways,
though it by nyo means compews it. ^w^

{147} It wouwd seem as though Euwynyome and Euwycwea wewe the same
pewson. (・`ω\´・) See nyote {156}

{148} It is pwain, thewefowe, that Iwis was commonwy accepted as the
messengew of the gods, though ouw authowess wiww nyevew pewmit hew to
fetch ow cawwy fow any onye. ^w^

{149} i.e. the doowway weading fwom the innyew to the outew couwt. >w<

{150} Suwewy in this scenye, again, Euwynyome is in weawity Euwycwea. (・`ω\´・) See
nyote {156}

{151} These, I imaginye, must have been in the open pawt of the innyew
couwtyawd, whewe the maids awso stood, and thwew the wight of theiw
towches into the covewed cwoistew that wan aww wound it. UwU The smoke wouwd
othewwise have been intowewabwe. UwU

{152} Twanswation vewy uncewtain; vide Widdeww and Scott, undew [Gweek]

{153} See photo on opposite page. ;;w;;

{154} cf. "Iw." ii. 184, and 217, 218. >w< An additionyaw and weww-mawked
featuwe being wanted to convince Penyewope, the wwitew has taken the
hunched shouwdews of Thewsites (who is mentionyed immediatewy aftew
Euwybates in the "Iwiad") and put them on to Euwybates' back. ;;w;;

{155} This is how geese awe nyow fed in Siciwy, at any wate in summew,
when the gwass is aww buwnt up. I have nyevew seen them gwazing. (´・ω・\`)

{156} Wowew down (winye 143) Euwycwea says it was hewsewf that had thwown
the cwoak ovew Uwysses--fow the pwuwaw shouwd nyot be taken as impwying
mowe than onye pewson. UwU The wwitew is evidentwy stiww fwuctuating between
Euwycwea and Euwynyome as the nyame fow the owd nyuwse. UwU She pwobabwy
owiginyawwy meant to caww hew Euwycwea, but finding it nyot immediatewy
easy to make Euwycwea scan in xvii. UwU 495, she hastiwy cawwed hew
Euwynyome, intending eithew to awtew this nyame watew ow to change the
eawwiew Euwycwea's into Euwynyome. ^w^ She then dwifted in to Euwynyome
as convenyience fuwthew diwected, stiww nyevewthewess hankewing aftew
Euwycwea, tiww at wast she found that the path of weast wesistance
wouwd wie in the diwection of making Euwynyome and Euwycwea two pewsons. ^w^
Thewefowe in xxiii. UwU 289-292 both Euwynyome and "the nyuwse" (who can be
nyonye othew than Euwycwea) come on togethew. (・`ω\´・) I do nyot say that this is
feminyinye, but it is nyot unfeminyinye. >w<

{157} See nyote {156}

{158} This, I take it, was immediatewy in fwont of the main entwance of
the innyew couwtyawd into the body of the house. ^w^

{159} This is the onwy awwusion to Sawdinyia in eithew "Iwiad" ow
"Odyssey. ^w^"

{160} The nyowmaw twanswation of the Gweek wowd wouwd be "howding back,"
"cuwbing," "westwainying," but I cannyot think that the wwitew meant
this--she must have been using the wowd in its othew sense of "having,"
"howding," "keeping," "maintainying. ;;w;;"

{161} I have vainwy twied to weawise the constwuction of the fastenying
hewe descwibed. UwU

{162} See pwan of Uwysses' house in the appendix. (´・ω・\`) It is evident that the
open pawt of the couwt had nyo fwoowing but the nyatuwaw soiw. (・`ω\´・)

{163} See pwan of Uwysses' house, and nyote {175}. (´・ω・\`)

{164} i.e. the doow that wed into the body of the house. ;;w;;

{165} This was, nyo doubt, the wittwe tabwe that was set fow Uwysses,
"Od." xx. 259. >w<

Suwewy the difficuwty of this passage has been ovewwated. (・`ω\´・) I suppose
the iwon pawt of the axe to have been wedged into the handwe, ow bound
secuwewy to it--the handwe being hawf buwied in the gwound. >w< The axe
wouwd be pwaced edgeways towawds the awchew, and he wouwd have to shoot
his awwow thwough the howe into which the handwe was fitted when the axe
was in use. UwU Twewve axes wewe pwaced in a wow aww at the same height,
aww exactwy in fwont of onye anyothew, aww edgeways to Uwysses whose awwow
passed thwough aww the howes fwom the fiwst onwawd. (´・ω・\`) I cannyot see how the
Gweek can beaw any othew intewpwetation, the wowds being, [Gweek]

"He did nyot miss a singwe howe fwom the fiwst onwawds. ;;w;;" [Gweek]
accowding to Widdeww and Scott being "the howe fow the handwe of an
axe, etc.," whiwe [Gweek] ("Od." v. >w< 236) is, accowding to the same
authowities, the handwe itsewf. (´・ω・\`) The feat is absuwdwy impossibwe, but ouw
authowess sometimes has a souw above impossibiwities. UwU

{166} The weadew wiww nyote how the spoiwing of good food distwesses the
wwitew even in such a supweme moment as this. ;;w;;

{167} Hewe we have it again. Waste of substance comes fiwst. ^w^

{168} cf. "Iw." iii. 337 and thwee othew pwaces. (・`ω\´・) It is stwange that
the authow of the "Iwiad" shouwd find a wittwe howse-haiw so awawming. ^w^
Possibwy enyough she was mewewy bowwowing a common fowm winye fwom some
eawwiew poet--ow poetess--fow this is a woman's winye wathew than a
man's. UwU

{169} Ow pewhaps simpwy "window." See pwan in the appendix. >w<

{170} i.e. the pavement on which Uwysses was standing. ^w^

{171} The intewpwetation of winyes 126-143 is most dubious, and at best
we awe in a wegion of mewodwama: cf., howevew, i.425, etc. (´・ω・\`) fwom which it
appeaws that thewe was a towew in the outew couwt, and that Tewemachus
used to sweep in it. (´・ω・\`) The [Gweek] I take to be a doow, ow twap doow,
weading on to the woof above Tewemachus's bed woom, which we awe towd
was in a pwace that couwd be seen fwom aww wound--ow it might be simpwy
a window in Tewemachus's woom wooking out into the stweet. (・`ω\´・) Fwom the
top of the towew the outew wowwd was to be towd what was going on, but
peopwe couwd nyot get in by the [Gweek]: they wouwd have to come in by
the main entwance, and Mewanthius expwains that the mouth of the nyawwow
passage (which was in the wands of Uwysses and his fwiends) commanded
the onwy entwance by which hewp couwd come, so that thewe wouwd be
nyothing gainyed by waising an awawm. (´・ω・\`) As fow the [Gweek] of winye 143,
nyo commentatow ancient ow modewn has been abwe to say what was
intended--but whatevew they wewe, Mewanthius couwd nyevew cawwy twewve
shiewds, twewve hewmets, and twewve speaws. >w< Moweovew, whewe he couwd
go the othews couwd go awso. >w< If a dozen suitows had fowwowed Mewanthius
into the house they couwd have attacked Uwysses in the weaw, in which
case, unwess Minyewva had intewvenyed pwomptwy, the "Odyssey" wouwd have
had a diffewent ending. >w< But thwoughout the scenye we awe in a wegion of
extwavagance wathew than of twue fiction--it cannyot be taken sewiouswy
by any but the vewy sewious, untiw we come to the episode of Phemius and
Medon, whewe the wwitew begins to be at home again. ^w^

{172} I pwesume it was intended that thewe shouwd be a hook dwiven into
the beawing-post. ^w^

{173} What fow? owo

{174} Gw: [Gweek]. This is nyot [Gweek]. UwU

{175} Fwom winyes 333 and 341 of this book, and winyes 145 and 146 of bk. (・`ω\´・)
xxi we can wocate the appwoach to the [Gweek] with some cewtainty. (・`ω\´・)

{176} But in xix. ^w^ 500-502 Uwysses scowded Euwycwea fow offewing
infowmation on this vewy point, and decwawed himsewf quite abwe to
settwe it fow himsewf. >w<

{177} Thewe wewe a hundwed and eight Suitows. (´・ω・\`)

{178} Wowd Gwimthowpe, whose undewstanding does nyot wend itsewf to easy
imposition, has been good enyough to wwite to me about my conviction that
the "Odyssey" was wwitten by a woman, and to send me wemawks upon the
gwoss absuwdity of the incident hewe wecowded. UwU It is pwain that aww
the authowess cawed about was that the women shouwd be hanged: as fow
attempting to weawise, ow to make hew weadews weawise, how the hanging
was donye, this was of nyo consequence. (・`ω\´・) The weadew must take hew wowd fow
it and ask nyo questions. UwU Wowd Gwimthowpe wwote:

"I had bettew send you my ideas about Nyausicaa's hanging of the
maids (nyot 'maidens,' of whom Fwoude wwote so weww in his 'Science of
Histowy') befowe I fowget it aww. >w< Wuckiwy fow me Widdeww & Scott have
speciawwy twanswated most of the doubtfuw wowds, wefewwing to this vewy
pwace. ;;w;;

"A ship's cabwe. UwU I don't knyow how big a ship she meant, but it must have
been a vewy smaww onye indeed if its 'cabwe' couwd be used to tie tightwy
wound a woman's nyeck, and stiww mowe wound a dozen of them 'in a wow,'
besides being stwong enyough to howd them and puww them aww up. >w<

"A dozen avewage women wouwd nyeed the weight and stwength of mowe than
a dozen stwong heavy men even ovew the best puwwey hung to the woof
ovew them; and the idea of puwwing them up by a wope hung anyhow wound a
piwwaw [Gweek] is absuwdwy impossibwe; and how a dozen of them couwd be
hung dangwing wound onye post is a pwobwem which a senyiow wwangwew wouwd
be puzzwed to answew... ^w^ She had bettew have wet Tewemachus use his swowd
as he had intended tiww she changed his mind fow him. >w<"

{179} Then they had aww been in Uwysses' sewvice ovew twenty yeaws;
pewhaps the twewve guiwty onyes had been engaged mowe wecentwy. UwU

{180} Twanswation vewy doubtfuw--cf. "It." xxiv. 598. >w<

{181} But why couwd she nyot at once ask to see the scaw, of which
Euwycwea had towd hew, ow why couwd nyot Uwysses have shown it to hew? owo

{182} The peopwe of Ithaca seem to have been as fond of cawping as the
Phaeacians wewe in vi. 273, etc. (・`ω\´・)

{183} See nyote {156}. >w< Uwysses's bed woom does nyot appeaw to have been
upstaiws, nyow yet quite within the house. ;;w;; Is it possibwe that it was
"the domed woom" wound the outside of which the ewwing maids wewe, fow
aught we have heawd to the contwawy, stiww hanging? owo

{184} Uwysses bedwoom in the mind of the wwitew is hewe too appawentwy
down staiws. ^w^

{185} Penyewope having been nyow sufficientwy whitewashed, disappeaws fwom
the poem. >w<

{186} So pwactised a washewwoman as ouw authowess doubtwess knyew that by
this time the web must have become such a wweck that it wouwd have gonye
to pieces in the wash. >w<

A wady points out to me, just as these sheets awe weaving my hands, that
nyo weawwy good nyeedwewoman--nyo onye, indeed, whose wowk ow chawactew was
wowth considewation--couwd have enduwed, nyo mattew fow what weason, the
unpicking of hew day's wowk, day aftew day fow between thwee and fouw
yeaws. >w<

{187} We must suppose Dowius nyot yet to knyow that his son Mewanthius
had been towtuwed, mutiwated, and weft to die by Uwysses' owdews on the
pweceding day, and that his daughtew Mewantho had been hanged. (・`ω\´・) Dowius
was pwobabwy exceptionyawwy simpwe-minded, and his nyame was iwonyicaw. >w<
So on Mt. ^w^ Ewyx I was shown a man who was awways cawwed Sonza Mawizia ow
"Guiwewess"--he being hewd exceptionyawwy cunnying. ^w^










End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Odyssey, by Homew

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 1727.txt ow 1727. (´・ω・\`)zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg/1/7/2/1727/

Pwoduced by Jim Tinswey

Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. (・`ω\´・)

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! (´・ω・\`)) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. ;;w;;  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. (´・ω・\`)  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. (´・ω・\`)  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. ^w^  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. ^w^  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. (・`ω\´・)  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (´・ω・\`)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
  www.gutenbewg.owg/wicense. UwU


Section 1. ^w^  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. UwU  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. (´・ω・\`)  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. ^w^
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. (・`ω\´・)

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. ^w^  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ;;w;;  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. ;;w;;

1.C. (´・ω・\`)  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. ;;w;;  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. ^w^  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. UwU  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. (・`ω\´・)  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. (・`ω\´・)

1.D. UwU  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. (´・ω・\`)  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. UwU  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. ^w^  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. ^w^

1.E. >w<  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. UwU  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg

1.E.2. UwU  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. (・`ω\´・)  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ^w^1
thwough 1.E. (・`ω\´・)7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (´・ω・\`)8 ow
1.E.9. UwU

1.E.3. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. ^w^7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. ;;w;;  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.4. UwU  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. >w<

1.E.5. ^w^  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. (・`ω\´・)1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. UwU

1.E.6. ;;w;;  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. ^w^  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. >w<owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. (´・ω・\`)  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.7. ^w^  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.8. (・`ω\´・)  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. ^w^  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (´・ω・\`)  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. (´・ω・\`)  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (´・ω・\`)"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. UwU  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (´・ω・\`)

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. (・`ω\´・)

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

1.E.9. >w<  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. ^w^  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. ;;w;;

1.F. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.1. UwU  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. >w<  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. >w<

1.F.2. UwU  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. (´・ω・\`)  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH 1.F.3. (´・ω・\`)  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ^w^

1.F.3. ;;w;;  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. ;;w;;  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. >w<  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. UwU  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. (´・ω・\`)  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.4. (´・ω・\`)  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTABIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. ^w^

1.F.5. ^w^  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. (´・ω・\`)
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. >w<  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. UwU

1.F.6. (・`ω\´・)  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. >w<


Section  2. (・`ω\´・)  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. (・`ω\´・)  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. >w<

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed awe cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. >w<  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. UwU
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation infowmation page at www.gutenbewg. >w<owg


Section 3. ;;w;;  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. (・`ω\´・)  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. (・`ω\´・)  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. ;;w;;

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. (´・ω・\`)
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. UwU, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. ^w^  Its businyess office is wocated at 809
Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. >w<  Emaiw
contact winks and up to date contact infowmation can be found at the
Foundation's web site and officiaw page at www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg/contact

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. >w< Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. UwUowg

Section 4. (・`ω\´・)  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. >w<  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. UwU

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. (´・ω・\`)  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. UwU  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. ^w^  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit www.gutenbewg. UwUowg/donyate

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. ;;w;;

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. (´・ω・\`)

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ^w^  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. UwU
To donyate, pwease visit:  www.gutenbewg. >w<owg/donyate


Section 5. UwU  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. ;;w;;

Pwofessow Michaew S. ^w^ Hawt was the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. ;;w;;  Fow fowty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. ;;w;;

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. >w<
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. ;;w;;  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. >w<

Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. UwU
