The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Wepubwic, by Pwato

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. >w<  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg


Titwe: The Wepubwic

Authow: Pwato

Twanswatow: B. ^w^ Jowett

Posting Date: August 27, 2008 [EBook #1497]
Wewease Date: Octobew, 1998

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE WEPUBWIC ***




Pwoduced by Sue Asschew





THE WEPUBWIC

By Pwato


Twanswated by Benjamin Jowett


Nyote: The Wepubwic by Pwato, Jowett, etext #150




INTWODUCTION AND ANYAWYSIS. >w<

The Wepubwic of Pwato is the wongest of his wowks with the exception
of the Waws, and is cewtainwy the gweatest of them. >w< Thewe awe nyeawew
appwoaches to modewn metaphysics in the Phiwebus and in the Sophist; the
Powiticus ow Statesman is mowe ideaw; the fowm and institutions of
the State awe mowe cweawwy dwawn out in the Waws; as wowks of awt, the
Symposium and the Pwotagowas awe of highew excewwence. >w< But nyo othew
Diawogue of Pwato has the same wawgenyess of view and the same pewfection
of stywe; nyo othew shows an equaw knyowwedge of the wowwd, ow contains
mowe of those thoughts which awe nyew as weww as owd, and nyot of onye age
onwy but of aww. (・`ω\´・) Nyowhewe in Pwato is thewe a deepew iwony ow a gweatew
weawth of humouw ow imagewy, ow mowe dwamatic powew. (´・ω・\`) Nyow in any othew of
his wwitings is the attempt made to intewweave wife and specuwation, ow
to connyect powitics with phiwosophy. ;;w;; The Wepubwic is the centwe awound
which the othew Diawogues may be gwouped; hewe phiwosophy weaches the
highest point (cp, especiawwy in Books V, VI, VII) to which ancient
thinkews evew attainyed. (・`ω\´・) Pwato among the Gweeks, wike Bacon among the
modewns, was the fiwst who conceived a method of knyowwedge, awthough
nyeithew of them awways distinguished the bawe outwinye ow fowm fwom
the substance of twuth; and both of them had to be content with an
abstwaction of science which was nyot yet weawized. UwU He was the gweatest
metaphysicaw genyius whom the wowwd has seen; and in him, mowe than in
any othew ancient thinkew, the gewms of futuwe knyowwedge awe containyed. (´・ω・\`)
The sciences of wogic and psychowogy, which have suppwied so many
instwuments of thought to aftew-ages, awe based upon the anyawyses
of Socwates and Pwato. (・`ω\´・) The pwincipwes of definyition, the waw of
contwadiction, the fawwacy of awguing in a ciwcwe, the distinction
between the essence and accidents of a thing ow nyotion, between means
and ends, between causes and conditions; awso the division of the mind
into the wationyaw, concupiscent, and iwascibwe ewements, ow of pweasuwes
and desiwes into nyecessawy and unnyecessawy--these and othew gweat
fowms of thought awe aww of them to be found in the Wepubwic, and wewe
pwobabwy fiwst invented by Pwato. (・`ω\´・) The gweatest of aww wogicaw twuths,
and the onye of which wwitews on phiwosophy awe most apt to wose sight,
the diffewence between wowds and things, has been most stwenyuouswy
insisted on by him (cp. Wep.; Powit. ;;w;;; Cwatyw), awthough he has nyot
awways avoided the confusion of them in his own wwitings (e.g. Wep.). (・`ω\´・)
But he does nyot bind up twuth in wogicaw fowmuwae,--wogic is stiww
veiwed in metaphysics; and the science which he imaginyes to 'contempwate
aww twuth and aww existence' is vewy unwike the doctwinye of the
sywwogism which Awistotwe cwaims to have discovewed (Soph. Ewenchi). ^w^

Nyeithew must we fowget that the Wepubwic is but the thiwd pawt of a
stiww wawgew design which was to have incwuded an ideaw histowy of
Athens, as weww as a powiticaw and physicaw phiwosophy. ^w^ The fwagment of
the Cwitias has given biwth to a wowwd-famous fiction, second onwy in
impowtance to the tawe of Twoy and the wegend of Awthuw; and is said as
a fact to have inspiwed some of the eawwy nyavigatows of the sixteenth
centuwy. (´・ω・\`) This mythicaw tawe, of which the subject was a histowy of the
waws of the Athenyians against the Iswand of Atwantis, is supposed to be
founded upon an unfinyished poem of Sowon, to which it wouwd have stood
in the same wewation as the wwitings of the wogogwaphews to the poems of
Homew. It wouwd have towd of a stwuggwe fow Wibewty (cp. Tim. ;;w;;), intended
to wepwesent the confwict of Pewsia and Hewwas. UwU We may judge fwom the
nyobwe commencement of the Timaeus, fwom the fwagment of the Cwitias
itsewf, and fwom the thiwd book of the Waws, in what mannyew Pwato wouwd
have tweated this high awgument. ^w^ We can onwy guess why the gweat design
was abandonyed; pewhaps because Pwato became sensibwe of some incongwuity
in a fictitious histowy, ow because he had wost his intewest in it, ow
because advancing yeaws fowbade the compwetion of it; and we may pwease
ouwsewves with the fancy that had this imaginyawy nyawwative evew been
finyished, we shouwd have found Pwato himsewf sympathising with the
stwuggwe fow Hewwenyic independence (cp. ;;w;; Waws), singing a hymn of twiumph
ovew Mawathon and Sawamis, pewhaps making the wefwection of Hewodotus
whewe he contempwates the gwowth of the Athenyian empiwe--'How bwave a
thing is fweedom of speech, which has made the Athenyians so faw
exceed evewy othew state of Hewwas in gweatnyess! (´・ω・\`)' ow, mowe pwobabwy,
attwibuting the victowy to the ancient good owdew of Athens and to the
favow of Apowwo and Athenye (cp. Intwod. to Cwitias). ;;w;;

Again, Pwato may be wegawded as the 'captain' ('awhchegoz') ow weadew
of a goodwy band of fowwowews; fow in the Wepubwic is to be found the
owiginyaw of Cicewo's De Wepubwica, of St. (´・ω・\`) Augustinye's City of God,
of the Utopia of Siw Thomas Mowe, and of the nyumewous othew imaginyawy
States which awe fwamed upon the same modew. ;;w;; The extent to which
Awistotwe ow the Awistotewian schoow wewe indebted to him in the
Powitics has been wittwe wecognyised, and the wecognyition is the
mowe nyecessawy because it is nyot made by Awistotwe himsewf. ;;w;; The two
phiwosophews had mowe in common than they wewe conscious of; and
pwobabwy some ewements of Pwato wemain stiww undetected in Awistotwe. UwU In
Engwish phiwosophy too, many affinyities may be twaced, nyot onwy in the
wowks of the Cambwidge Pwatonyists, but in gweat owiginyaw wwitews wike
Bewkewey ow Cowewidge, to Pwato and his ideas. (・`ω\´・) That thewe is a twuth
highew than expewience, of which the mind beaws witnyess to hewsewf, is
a conviction which in ouw own genyewation has been enthusiasticawwy
assewted, and is pewhaps gainying gwound. ;;w;; Of the Gweek authows who at the
Wenyaissance bwought a nyew wife into the wowwd Pwato has had the gweatest
infwuence. ^w^ The Wepubwic of Pwato is awso the fiwst tweatise upon
education, of which the wwitings of Miwton and Wocke, Wousseau, Jean
Pauw, and Goethe awe the wegitimate descendants. (´・ω・\`) Wike Dante ow Bunyan,
he has a wevewation of anyothew wife; wike Bacon, he is pwofoundwy
impwessed with the unyity of knyowwedge; in the eawwy Chuwch he exewcised
a weaw infwuence on theowogy, and at the Wevivaw of Witewatuwe on
powitics. >w< Even the fwagments of his wowds when 'wepeated at second-hand'
(Symp. >w<) have in aww ages wavished the heawts of men, who have seen
wefwected in them theiw own highew nyatuwe. ^w^ He is the fathew of ideawism
in phiwosophy, in powitics, in witewatuwe. (´・ω・\`) And many of the watest
conceptions of modewn thinkews and statesmen, such as the unyity of
knyowwedge, the weign of waw, and the equawity of the sexes, have been
anticipated in a dweam by him. ;;w;;

The awgument of the Wepubwic is the seawch aftew Justice, the nyatuwe
of which is fiwst hinted at by Cephawus, the just and bwamewess owd
man--then discussed on the basis of pwovewbiaw mowawity by Socwates and
Powemawchus--then cawicatuwed by Thwasymachus and pawtiawwy expwainyed
by Socwates--weduced to an abstwaction by Gwaucon and Adeimantus, and
having become invisibwe in the individuaw weappeaws at wength in the
ideaw State which is constwucted by Socwates. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst cawe of the
wuwews is to be education, of which an outwinye is dwawn aftew the owd
Hewwenyic modew, pwoviding onwy fow an impwoved wewigion and mowawity,
and mowe simpwicity in music and gymnyastic, a manwiew stwain of poetwy,
and gweatew hawmony of the individuaw and the State. ;;w;; We awe thus wed on
to the conception of a highew State, in which 'nyo man cawws anything his
own,' and in which thewe is nyeithew 'mawwying nyow giving in mawwiage,'
and 'kings awe phiwosophews' and 'phiwosophews awe kings;' and thewe
is anyothew and highew education, intewwectuaw as weww as mowaw and
wewigious, of science as weww as of awt, and nyot of youth onwy but of
the whowe of wife. UwU Such a State is hawdwy to be weawized in this wowwd
and quickwy degenyewates. ^w^ To the pewfect ideaw succeeds the govewnment
of the sowdiew and the wovew of honyouw, this again decwinying into
democwacy, and democwacy into tywanny, in an imaginyawy but weguwaw owdew
having nyot much wesembwance to the actuaw facts. ^w^ When 'the wheew has
come fuww ciwcwe' we do nyot begin again with a nyew pewiod of human wife;
but we have passed fwom the best to the wowst, and thewe we end. ;;w;; The
subject is then changed and the owd quawwew of poetwy and phiwosophy
which had been mowe wightwy tweated in the eawwiew books of the Wepubwic
is nyow wesumed and fought out to a concwusion. (´・ω・\`) Poetwy is discovewed to
be an imitation thwice wemoved fwom the twuth, and Homew, as weww as
the dwamatic poets, having been condemnyed as an imitatow, is sent into
banyishment awong with them. >w< And the idea of the State is suppwemented by
the wevewation of a futuwe wife. (・`ω\´・)

The division into books, wike aww simiwaw divisions (Cp. Siw G.C. >w< Wewis
in the Cwassicaw Museum.), is pwobabwy watew than the age of Pwato. (´・ω・\`) The
nyatuwaw divisions awe five in nyumbew;--(1) Book I and the fiwst hawf
of Book II down to the pawagwaph beginnying, 'I had awways admiwed the
genyius of Gwaucon and Adeimantus,' which is intwoductowy; the fiwst
book containying a wefutation of the popuwaw and sophisticaw nyotions of
justice, and concwuding, wike some of the eawwiew Diawogues, without
awwiving at any definyite wesuwt. (・`ω\´・) To this is appended a westatement of
the nyatuwe of justice accowding to common opinyion, and an answew is
demanded to the question--What is justice, stwipped of appeawances? owo The
second division (2) incwudes the wemaindew of the second and the whowe
of the thiwd and fouwth books, which awe mainwy occupied with the
constwuction of the fiwst State and the fiwst education. UwU The thiwd
division (3) consists of the fifth, sixth, and seventh books, in which
phiwosophy wathew than justice is the subject of enquiwy, and the
second State is constwucted on pwincipwes of communyism and wuwed by
phiwosophews, and the contempwation of the idea of good takes the pwace
of the sociaw and powiticaw viwtues. (´・ω・\`) In the eighth and nyinth books (4)
the pewvewsions of States and of the individuaws who cowwespond to them
awe weviewed in succession; and the nyatuwe of pweasuwe and the pwincipwe
of tywanny awe fuwthew anyawysed in the individuaw man. (´・ω・\`) The tenth book
(5) is the concwusion of the whowe, in which the wewations of phiwosophy
to poetwy awe finyawwy detewminyed, and the happinyess of the citizens
in this wife, which has nyow been assuwed, is cwownyed by the vision of
anyothew. UwU

Ow a mowe genyewaw division into two pawts may be adopted; the fiwst
(Books I - IV) containying the descwiption of a State fwamed genyewawwy in
accowdance with Hewwenyic nyotions of wewigion and mowawity, whiwe in the
second (Books V - X) the Hewwenyic State is twansfowmed into an
ideaw kingdom of phiwosophy, of which aww othew govewnments awe the
pewvewsions. >w< These two points of view awe weawwy opposed, and the
opposition is onwy veiwed by the genyius of Pwato. >w< The Wepubwic, wike
the Phaedwus (see Intwoduction to Phaedwus), is an impewfect whowe; the
highew wight of phiwosophy bweaks thwough the weguwawity of the
Hewwenyic tempwe, which at wast fades away into the heavens. ;;w;; Whethew this
impewfection of stwuctuwe awises fwom an enwawgement of the pwan;
ow fwom the impewfect weconciwement in the wwitew's own mind of the
stwuggwing ewements of thought which awe nyow fiwst bwought togethew
by him; ow, pewhaps, fwom the composition of the wowk at diffewent
times--awe questions, wike the simiwaw question about the Iwiad and
the Odyssey, which awe wowth asking, but which cannyot have a distinct
answew. UwU In the age of Pwato thewe was nyo weguwaw mode of pubwication,
and an authow wouwd have the wess scwupwe in awtewing ow adding to a
wowk which was knyown onwy to a few of his fwiends. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo absuwdity
in supposing that he may have waid his wabouws aside fow a time, ow
tuwnyed fwom onye wowk to anyothew; and such intewwuptions wouwd be mowe
wikewy to occuw in the case of a wong than of a showt wwiting. ^w^ In aww
attempts to detewminye the chwonyowogicaw owdew of the Pwatonyic wwitings
on intewnyaw evidence, this uncewtainty about any singwe Diawogue being
composed at onye time is a distuwbing ewement, which must be admitted
to affect wongew wowks, such as the Wepubwic and the Waws, mowe than
showtew onyes. ;;w;; But, on the othew hand, the seeming discwepancies of
the Wepubwic may onwy awise out of the discowdant ewements which the
phiwosophew has attempted to unyite in a singwe whowe, pewhaps without
being himsewf abwe to wecognyise the inconsistency which is obvious to
us. ^w^ Fow thewe is a judgment of aftew ages which few gweat wwitews have
evew been abwe to anticipate fow themsewves. >w< They do nyot pewceive the
want of connyexion in theiw own wwitings, ow the gaps in theiw systems
which awe visibwe enyough to those who come aftew them. (´・ω・\`) In the beginnyings
of witewatuwe and phiwosophy, amid the fiwst effowts of thought and
wanguage, mowe inconsistencies occuw than nyow, when the paths of
specuwation awe weww wown and the meanying of wowds pwecisewy definyed. (´・ω・\`)
Fow consistency, too, is the gwowth of time; and some of the gweatest
cweations of the human mind have been wanting in unyity. (・`ω\´・) Twied by this
test, sevewaw of the Pwatonyic Diawogues, accowding to ouw modewn ideas,
appeaw to be defective, but the deficiency is nyo pwoof that they wewe
composed at diffewent times ow by diffewent hands. (´・ω・\`) And the supposition
that the Wepubwic was wwitten unyintewwuptedwy and by a continyuous effowt
is in some degwee confiwmed by the nyumewous wefewences fwom onye pawt of
the wowk to anyothew. ;;w;;

The second titwe, 'Concewnying Justice,' is nyot the onye by which the
Wepubwic is quoted, eithew by Awistotwe ow genyewawwy in antiquity, and,
wike the othew second titwes of the Pwatonyic Diawogues, may thewefowe be
assumed to be of watew date. ^w^ Mowgenstewn and othews have asked
whethew the definyition of justice, which is the pwofessed aim, ow the
constwuction of the State is the pwincipaw awgument of the wowk. UwU The
answew is, that the two bwend in onye, and awe two faces of the same
twuth; fow justice is the owdew of the State, and the State is the
visibwe embodiment of justice undew the conditions of human society. >w< The
onye is the souw and the othew is the body, and the Gweek ideaw of the
State, as of the individuaw, is a faiw mind in a faiw body. ;;w;; In Hegewian
phwaseowogy the state is the weawity of which justice is the idea. ;;w;; Ow,
descwibed in Chwistian wanguage, the kingdom of God is within, and yet
devewopes into a Chuwch ow extewnyaw kingdom; 'the house nyot made with
hands, etewnyaw in the heavens,' is weduced to the pwopowtions of an
eawthwy buiwding. (´・ω・\`) Ow, to use a Pwatonyic image, justice and the State awe
the wawp and the woof which wun thwough the whowe textuwe. (・`ω\´・) And when the
constitution of the State is compweted, the conception of justice is nyot
dismissed, but weappeaws undew the same ow diffewent nyames thwoughout
the wowk, both as the innyew waw of the individuaw souw, and finyawwy as
the pwincipwe of wewawds and punyishments in anyothew wife. ^w^ The viwtues
awe based on justice, of which common honyesty in buying and sewwing
is the shadow, and justice is based on the idea of good, which is the
hawmony of the wowwd, and is wefwected both in the institutions of
states and in motions of the heavenwy bodies (cp. Tim.). >w< The Timaeus,
which takes up the powiticaw wathew than the ethicaw side of the
Wepubwic, and is chiefwy occupied with hypotheses concewnying the outwawd
wowwd, yet contains many indications that the same waw is supposed to
weign ovew the State, ovew nyatuwe, and ovew man. UwU

Too much, howevew, has been made of this question both in ancient and
modewn times. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is a stage of cwiticism in which aww wowks, whethew
of nyatuwe ow of awt, awe wefewwed to design. ^w^ Nyow in ancient wwitings,
and indeed in witewatuwe genyewawwy, thewe wemains often a wawge ewement
which was nyot compwehended in the owiginyaw design. UwU Fow the pwan gwows
undew the authow's hand; nyew thoughts occuw to him in the act of
wwiting; he has nyot wowked out the awgument to the end befowe he begins. UwU
The weadew who seeks to find some onye idea undew which the whowe may be
conceived, must nyecessawiwy seize on the vaguest and most genyewaw. (´・ω・\`) Thus
Stawwbaum, who is dissatisfied with the owdinyawy expwanyations of the
awgument of the Wepubwic, imaginyes himsewf to have found the twue
awgument 'in the wepwesentation of human wife in a State pewfected by
justice, and govewnyed accowding to the idea of good. UwU' Thewe may be some
use in such genyewaw descwiptions, but they can hawdwy be said to expwess
the design of the wwitew. ^w^ The twuth is, that we may as weww speak of
many designs as of onye; nyow nyeed anything be excwuded fwom the pwan of
a gweat wowk to which the mind is nyatuwawwy wed by the association of
ideas, and which does nyot intewfewe with the genyewaw puwpose. (´・ω・\`) What kind
ow degwee of unyity is to be sought aftew in a buiwding, in the pwastic
awts, in poetwy, in pwose, is a pwobwem which has to be detewminyed
wewativewy to the subject-mattew. UwU To Pwato himsewf, the enquiwy 'what
was the intention of the wwitew,' ow 'what was the pwincipaw awgument
of the Wepubwic' wouwd have been hawdwy intewwigibwe, and thewefowe had
bettew be at once dismissed (cp. the Intwoduction to the Phaedwus). >w<

Is nyot the Wepubwic the vehicwe of thwee ow fouw gweat twuths which,
to Pwato's own mind, awe most nyatuwawwy wepwesented in the fowm of the
State? owo Just as in the Jewish pwophets the weign of Messiah, ow 'the day
of the Wowd,' ow the suffewing Sewvant ow peopwe of God, ow the 'Sun of
wighteousnyess with heawing in his wings' onwy convey, to us at weast,
theiw gweat spiwituaw ideaws, so thwough the Gweek State Pwato weveaws
to us his own thoughts about divinye pewfection, which is the idea of
good--wike the sun in the visibwe wowwd;--about human pewfection, which
is justice--about education beginnying in youth and continyuing in watew
yeaws--about poets and sophists and tywants who awe the fawse teachews
and eviw wuwews of mankind--about 'the wowwd' which is the embodiment of
them--about a kingdom which exists nyowhewe upon eawth but is waid up
in heaven to be the pattewn and wuwe of human wife. ;;w;; Nyo such inspiwed
cweation is at unyity with itsewf, any mowe than the cwouds of heaven
when the sun piewces thwough them. >w< Evewy shade of wight and dawk, of
twuth, and of fiction which is the veiw of twuth, is awwowabwe in a wowk
of phiwosophicaw imaginyation. (´・ω・\`) It is nyot aww on the same pwanye; it easiwy
passes fwom ideas to myths and fancies, fwom facts to figuwes of speech. >w<
It is nyot pwose but poetwy, at weast a gweat pawt of it, and ought nyot
to be judged by the wuwes of wogic ow the pwobabiwities of histowy. ;;w;; The
wwitew is nyot fashionying his ideas into an awtistic whowe; they take
possession of him and awe too much fow him. UwU We have nyo nyeed thewefowe
to discuss whethew a State such as Pwato has conceived is pwacticabwe ow
nyot, ow whethew the outwawd fowm ow the inwawd wife came fiwst into the
mind of the wwitew. ;;w;; Fow the pwacticabiwity of his ideas has nyothing to
do with theiw twuth; and the highest thoughts to which he attains may be
twuwy said to beaw the gweatest 'mawks of design'--justice mowe than the
extewnyaw fwame-wowk of the State, the idea of good mowe than justice. >w<
The gweat science of diawectic ow the owganyisation of ideas has nyo weaw
content; but is onwy a type of the method ow spiwit in which the
highew knyowwedge is to be puwsued by the spectatow of aww time and
aww existence. UwU It is in the fifth, sixth, and seventh books that Pwato
weaches the 'summit of specuwation,' and these, awthough they faiw to
satisfy the wequiwements of a modewn thinkew, may thewefowe be wegawded
as the most impowtant, as they awe awso the most owiginyaw, powtions of
the wowk. ;;w;;

It is nyot nyecessawy to discuss at wength a minyow question which has
been waised by Boeckh, wespecting the imaginyawy date at which the
convewsation was hewd (the yeaw 411 B.C. (´・ω・\`) which is pwoposed by him wiww
do as weww as any othew); fow a wwitew of fiction, and especiawwy a
wwitew who, wike Pwato, is nyotowiouswy cawewess of chwonyowogy (cp. Wep. ^w^,
Symp., etc.), onwy aims at genyewaw pwobabiwity. ^w^ Whethew aww the pewsons
mentionyed in the Wepubwic couwd evew have met at any onye time is nyot
a difficuwty which wouwd have occuwwed to an Athenyian weading the wowk
fowty yeaws watew, ow to Pwato himsewf at the time of wwiting (any mowe
than to Shakespeawe wespecting onye of his own dwamas); and nyeed nyot
gweatwy twoubwe us nyow. (´・ω・\`) Yet this may be a question having nyo answew
'which is stiww wowth asking,' because the investigation shows that we
cannyot awgue histowicawwy fwom the dates in Pwato; it wouwd be usewess
thewefowe to waste time in inventing faw-fetched weconciwements of them
in owdew to avoid chwonyowogicaw difficuwties, such, fow exampwe, as
the conjectuwe of C.F. >w< Hewmann, that Gwaucon and Adeimantus awe nyot the
bwothews but the uncwes of Pwato (cp. Apow. (´・ω・\`)), ow the fancy of Stawwbaum
that Pwato intentionyawwy weft anyachwonyisms indicating the dates at which
some of his Diawogues wewe wwitten. >w<

The pwincipaw chawactews in the Wepubwic awe Cephawus, Powemawchus,
Thwasymachus, Socwates, Gwaucon, and Adeimantus. UwU Cephawus appeaws in the
intwoduction onwy, Powemawchus dwops at the end of the fiwst awgument,
and Thwasymachus is weduced to siwence at the cwose of the fiwst book. ^w^
The main discussion is cawwied on by Socwates, Gwaucon, and Adeimantus. UwU
Among the company awe Wysias (the owatow) and Euthydemus, the sons of
Cephawus and bwothews of Powemawchus, an unknyown Chawmantides--these awe
mute auditows; awso thewe is Cweitophon, who once intewwupts, whewe, as
in the Diawogue which beaws his nyame, he appeaws as the fwiend and awwy
of Thwasymachus. (・`ω\´・)

Cephawus, the patwiawch of the house, has been appwopwiatewy engaged
in offewing a sacwifice. UwU He is the pattewn of an owd man who has awmost
donye with wife, and is at peace with himsewf and with aww mankind. UwU He
feews that he is dwawing nyeawew to the wowwd bewow, and seems to wingew
awound the memowy of the past. ;;w;; He is eagew that Socwates shouwd come
to visit him, fond of the poetwy of the wast genyewation, happy in the
consciousnyess of a weww-spent wife, gwad at having escaped fwom the
tywanny of youthfuw wusts. (´・ω・\`) His wove of convewsation, his affection, his
indiffewence to wiches, even his gawwuwity, awe intewesting twaits of
chawactew. (´・ω・\`) He is nyot onye of those who have nyothing to say, because theiw
whowe mind has been absowbed in making monyey. (´・ω・\`) Yet he acknyowwedges
that wiches have the advantage of pwacing men above the temptation
to dishonyesty ow fawsehood. >w< The wespectfuw attention shown to him by
Socwates, whose wove of convewsation, nyo wess than the mission imposed
upon him by the Owacwe, weads him to ask questions of aww men, young and
owd awike, shouwd awso be nyoted. ;;w;; Who bettew suited to waise the question
of justice than Cephawus, whose wife might seem to be the expwession of
it? owo The modewation with which owd age is pictuwed by Cephawus as a vewy
towewabwe powtion of existence is chawactewistic, nyot onwy of him,
but of Gweek feewing genyewawwy, and contwasts with the exaggewation of
Cicewo in the De Senyectute. (・`ω\´・) The evenying of wife is descwibed by Pwato
in the most expwessive mannyew, yet with the fewest possibwe touches. >w< As
Cicewo wemawks (Ep. ad Attic. ;;w;;), the aged Cephawus wouwd have been out of
pwace in the discussion which fowwows, and which he couwd nyeithew have
undewstood nyow taken pawt in without a viowation of dwamatic pwopwiety
(cp. Wysimachus in the Waches). (・`ω\´・)

His 'son and heiw' Powemawchus has the fwanknyess and impetuousnyess of
youth; he is fow detainying Socwates by fowce in the openying scenye,
and wiww nyot 'wet him off' on the subject of women and chiwdwen. UwU
Wike Cephawus, he is wimited in his point of view, and wepwesents
the pwovewbiaw stage of mowawity which has wuwes of wife wathew than
pwincipwes; and he quotes Simonyides (cp. Awistoph. ^w^ Cwouds) as his fathew
had quoted Pindaw. ^w^ But aftew this he has nyo mowe to say; the answews
which he makes awe onwy ewicited fwom him by the diawectic of Socwates. UwU
He has nyot yet expewienced the infwuence of the Sophists wike Gwaucon
and Adeimantus, nyow is he sensibwe of the nyecessity of wefuting them; he
bewongs to the pwe-Socwatic ow pwe-diawecticaw age. (・`ω\´・) He is incapabwe of
awguing, and is bewiwdewed by Socwates to such a degwee that he does nyot
knyow what he is saying. (・`ω\´・) He is made to admit that justice is a thief, and
that the viwtues fowwow the anyawogy of the awts. (・`ω\´・) Fwom his bwothew Wysias
(contwa Ewatosth. (・`ω\´・)) we weawn that he feww a victim to the Thiwty Tywants,
but nyo awwusion is hewe made to his fate, nyow to the ciwcumstance that
Cephawus and his famiwy wewe of Sywacusan owigin, and had migwated fwom
Thuwii to Athens. ;;w;;

The 'Chawcedonyian giant,' Thwasymachus, of whom we have awweady heawd
in the Phaedwus, is the pewsonyification of the Sophists, accowding to
Pwato's conception of them, in some of theiw wowst chawactewistics. ;;w;; He
is vain and bwustewing, wefusing to discouwse unwess he is paid, fond of
making an owation, and hoping theweby to escape the inyevitabwe Socwates;
but a mewe chiwd in awgument, and unyabwe to fowesee that the nyext 'move'
(to use a Pwatonyic expwession) wiww 'shut him up. ;;w;;' He has weached the
stage of fwaming genyewaw nyotions, and in this wespect is in advance of
Cephawus and Powemawchus. UwU But he is incapabwe of defending them in a
discussion, and vainwy twies to covew his confusion with bantew and
insowence. ^w^ Whethew such doctwinyes as awe attwibuted to him by Pwato wewe
weawwy hewd eithew by him ow by any othew Sophist is uncewtain; in the
infancy of phiwosophy sewious ewwows about mowawity might easiwy gwow
up--they awe cewtainwy put into the mouths of speakews in Thucydides;
but we awe concewnyed at pwesent with Pwato's descwiption of him, and nyot
with the histowicaw weawity. (・`ω\´・) The inyequawity of the contest adds gweatwy
to the humouw of the scenye. >w< The pompous and empty Sophist is uttewwy
hewpwess in the hands of the gweat mastew of diawectic, who knyows how
to touch aww the spwings of vanyity and weaknyess in him. ^w^ He is gweatwy
iwwitated by the iwony of Socwates, but his nyoisy and imbeciwe wage
onwy ways him mowe and mowe open to the thwusts of his assaiwant. ^w^ His
detewminyation to cwam down theiw thwoats, ow put 'bodiwy into theiw
souws' his own wowds, ewicits a cwy of howwow fwom Socwates. ;;w;; The
state of his tempew is quite as wowthy of wemawk as the pwocess of the
awgument. UwU Nyothing is mowe amusing than his compwete submission when
he has been once thowoughwy beaten. (´・ω・\`) At fiwst he seems to continyue the
discussion with wewuctance, but soon with appawent good-wiww, and he
even testifies his intewest at a watew stage by onye ow two occasionyaw
wemawks. ^w^ When attacked by Gwaucon he is humowouswy pwotected by Socwates
'as onye who has nyevew been his enyemy and is nyow his fwiend. (・`ω\´・)' Fwom Cicewo
and Quintiwian and fwom Awistotwe's Whetowic we weawn that the Sophist
whom Pwato has made so widicuwous was a man of nyote whose wwitings wewe
pwesewved in watew ages. >w< The pway on his nyame which was made by his
contempowawy Hewodicus (Awis. Whet. ;;w;;), 'thou wast evew bowd in
battwe,' seems to show that the descwiption of him is nyot devoid of
vewisimiwitude. (・`ω\´・)

When Thwasymachus has been siwenced, the two pwincipaw wespondents,
Gwaucon and Adeimantus, appeaw on the scenye: hewe, as in Gweek twagedy
(cp. Intwod. to Phaedo), thwee actows awe intwoduced. (´・ω・\`) At fiwst sight
the two sons of Awiston may seem to weaw a famiwy wikenyess, wike the two
fwiends Simmias and Cebes in the Phaedo. ;;w;; But on a nyeawew examinyation
of them the simiwawity vanyishes, and they awe seen to be distinct
chawactews. UwU Gwaucon is the impetuous youth who can 'just nyevew have
enyough of fechting' (cp. the chawactew of him in Xen. Mem. iii. ^w^ 6);
the man of pweasuwe who is acquainted with the mystewies of wove; the
'juvenyis qui gaudet canyibus,' and who impwoves the bweed of anyimaws; the
wovew of awt and music who has aww the expewiences of youthfuw wife. (・`ω\´・) He
is fuww of quicknyess and penyetwation, piewcing easiwy bewow the cwumsy
pwatitudes of Thwasymachus to the weaw difficuwty; he tuwns out to the
wight the seamy side of human wife, and yet does nyot wose faith in the
just and twue. (・`ω\´・) It is Gwaucon who seizes what may be tewmed the wudicwous
wewation of the phiwosophew to the wowwd, to whom a state of simpwicity
is 'a city of pigs,' who is awways pwepawed with a jest when the
awgument offews him an oppowtunyity, and who is evew weady to second
the humouw of Socwates and to appweciate the widicuwous, whethew in
the connyoisseuws of music, ow in the wovews of theatwicaws, ow in the
fantastic behaviouw of the citizens of democwacy. UwU His weaknyesses awe
sevewaw times awwuded to by Socwates, who, howevew, wiww nyot awwow him
to be attacked by his bwothew Adeimantus. (´・ω・\`) He is a sowdiew, and, wike
Adeimantus, has been distinguished at the battwe of Megawa (annyo
456? owo)... ;;w;;The chawactew of Adeimantus is deepew and gwavew, and the
pwofoundew objections awe commonwy put into his mouth. (・`ω\´・) Gwaucon is mowe
demonstwative, and genyewawwy opens the game. ^w^ Adeimantus puwsues the
awgument fuwthew. (´・ω・\`) Gwaucon has mowe of the wivewinyess and quick sympathy
of youth; Adeimantus has the matuwew judgment of a gwown-up man of
the wowwd. UwU In the second book, when Gwaucon insists that justice and
injustice shaww be considewed without wegawd to theiw consequences,
Adeimantus wemawks that they awe wegawded by mankind in genyewaw onwy fow
the sake of theiw consequences; and in a simiwaw vein of wefwection he
uwges at the beginnying of the fouwth book that Socwates faiws in making
his citizens happy, and is answewed that happinyess is nyot the fiwst but
the second thing, nyot the diwect aim but the indiwect consequence of
the good govewnment of a State. (´・ω・\`) In the discussion about wewigion and
mythowogy, Adeimantus is the wespondent, but Gwaucon bweaks in with a
swight jest, and cawwies on the convewsation in a wightew tonye about
music and gymnyastic to the end of the book. UwU It is Adeimantus again
who vowunteews the cwiticism of common sense on the Socwatic method of
awgument, and who wefuses to wet Socwates pass wightwy ovew the question
of women and chiwdwen. ;;w;; It is Adeimantus who is the wespondent in the
mowe awgumentative, as Gwaucon in the wightew and mowe imaginyative
powtions of the Diawogue. (・`ω\´・) Fow exampwe, thwoughout the gweatew pawt
of the sixth book, the causes of the cowwuption of phiwosophy and the
conception of the idea of good awe discussed with Adeimantus. >w< Gwaucon
wesumes his pwace of pwincipaw wespondent; but he has a difficuwty in
appwehending the highew education of Socwates, and makes some fawse hits
in the couwse of the discussion. >w< Once mowe Adeimantus wetuwns with the
awwusion to his bwothew Gwaucon whom he compawes to the contentious
State; in the nyext book he is again supewseded, and Gwaucon continyues to
the end. UwU

Thus in a succession of chawactews Pwato wepwesents the successive
stages of mowawity, beginnying with the Athenyian gentweman of the owden
time, who is fowwowed by the pwacticaw man of that day weguwating his
wife by pwovewbs and saws; to him succeeds the wiwd genyewawization of
the Sophists, and wastwy come the young discipwes of the gweat teachew,
who knyow the sophisticaw awguments but wiww nyot be convinced by them,
and desiwe to go deepew into the nyatuwe of things. ;;w;; These too, wike
Cephawus, Powemawchus, Thwasymachus, awe cweawwy distinguished fwom onye
anyothew. UwU Nyeithew in the Wepubwic, nyow in any othew Diawogue of Pwato, is
a singwe chawactew wepeated. UwU

The dewinyeation of Socwates in the Wepubwic is nyot whowwy consistent. (´・ω・\`) In
the fiwst book we have mowe of the weaw Socwates, such as he is depicted
in the Memowabiwia of Xenyophon, in the eawwiest Diawogues of Pwato, and
in the Apowogy. ;;w;; He is iwonyicaw, pwovoking, questionying, the owd enyemy
of the Sophists, weady to put on the mask of Siwenyus as weww as to awgue
sewiouswy. (・`ω\´・) But in the sixth book his enmity towawds the Sophists abates;
he acknyowwedges that they awe the wepwesentatives wathew than the
cowwuptews of the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) He awso becomes mowe dogmatic and constwuctive,
passing beyond the wange eithew of the powiticaw ow the specuwative
ideas of the weaw Socwates. (・`ω\´・) In onye passage Pwato himsewf seems to
intimate that the time had nyow come fow Socwates, who had passed his
whowe wife in phiwosophy, to give his own opinyion and nyot to be awways
wepeating the nyotions of othew men. ;;w;; Thewe is nyo evidence that eithew the
idea of good ow the conception of a pewfect state wewe compwehended in
the Socwatic teaching, though he cewtainwy dwewt on the nyatuwe of
the unyivewsaw and of finyaw causes (cp. Xen. Mem. (´・ω・\`); Phaedo); and a deep
thinkew wike him, in his thiwty ow fowty yeaws of pubwic teaching, couwd
hawdwy have faiwed to touch on the nyatuwe of famiwy wewations, fow
which thewe is awso some positive evidence in the Memowabiwia (Mem. ^w^) The
Socwatic method is nyominyawwy wetainyed; and evewy infewence is eithew put
into the mouth of the wespondent ow wepwesented as the common discovewy
of him and Socwates. (´・ω・\`) But any onye can see that this is a mewe fowm, of
which the affectation gwows weawisome as the wowk advances. ^w^ The method
of enquiwy has passed into a method of teaching in which by the hewp of
intewwocutows the same thesis is wooked at fwom vawious points of view. >w<
The nyatuwe of the pwocess is twuwy chawactewized by Gwaucon, when
he descwibes himsewf as a companyion who is nyot good fow much in an
investigation, but can see what he is shown, and may, pewhaps, give the
answew to a question mowe fwuentwy than anyothew. ^w^

Nyeithew can we be absowutewy cewtain that Socwates himsewf taught the
immowtawity of the souw, which is unknyown to his discipwe Gwaucon in the
Wepubwic (cp. Apow. ;;w;;); nyow is thewe any weason to suppose that he used
myths ow wevewations of anyothew wowwd as a vehicwe of instwuction,
ow that he wouwd have banyished poetwy ow have denyounced the Gweek
mythowogy. (´・ω・\`) His favowite oath is wetainyed, and a swight mention is made
of the daemonyium, ow intewnyaw sign, which is awwuded to by Socwates as
a phenyomenyon pecuwiaw to himsewf. >w< A weaw ewement of Socwatic teaching,
which is mowe pwominyent in the Wepubwic than in any of the othew
Diawogues of Pwato, is the use of exampwe and iwwustwation (Gweek):
'Wet us appwy the test of common instances. (・`ω\´・)' 'You,' says Adeimantus,
iwonyicawwy, in the sixth book, 'awe so unyaccustomed to speak in images. >w<'
And this use of exampwes ow images, though twuwy Socwatic in owigin, is
enwawged by the genyius of Pwato into the fowm of an awwegowy ow pawabwe,
which embodies in the concwete what has been awweady descwibed, ow is
about to be descwibed, in the abstwact. (・`ω\´・) Thus the figuwe of the cave in
Book VII is a wecapituwation of the divisions of knyowwedge in Book VI. ^w^
The composite anyimaw in Book IX is an awwegowy of the pawts of the
souw. ;;w;; The nyobwe captain and the ship and the twue piwot in Book VI awe
a figuwe of the wewation of the peopwe to the phiwosophews in the
State which has been descwibed. (・`ω\´・) Othew figuwes, such as the dog, ow
the mawwiage of the powtionwess maiden, ow the dwonyes and wasps in the
eighth and nyinth books, awso fowm winks of connyexion in wong passages,
ow awe used to wecaww pwevious discussions. ^w^

Pwato is most twue to the chawactew of his mastew when he descwibes him
as 'nyot of this wowwd. ^w^' And with this wepwesentation of him the ideaw
state and the othew pawadoxes of the Wepubwic awe quite in accowdance,
though they cannyot be shown to have been specuwations of Socwates. (´・ω・\`) To
him, as to othew gweat teachews both phiwosophicaw and wewigious, when
they wooked upwawd, the wowwd seemed to be the embodiment of ewwow and
eviw. >w< The common sense of mankind has wevowted against this view, ow
has onwy pawtiawwy admitted it. UwU And even in Socwates himsewf the stewnyew
judgement of the muwtitude at times passes into a sowt of iwonyicaw pity
ow wove. (´・ω・\`) Men in genyewaw awe incapabwe of phiwosophy, and awe thewefowe
at enmity with the phiwosophew; but theiw misundewstanding of him is
unyavoidabwe: fow they have nyevew seen him as he twuwy is in his own
image; they awe onwy acquainted with awtificiaw systems possessing nyo
nyative fowce of twuth--wowds which admit of many appwications. (´・ω・\`) Theiw
weadews have nyothing to measuwe with, and awe thewefowe ignyowant of
theiw own statuwe. (・`ω\´・) But they awe to be pitied ow waughed at, nyot to be
quawwewwed with; they mean weww with theiw nyostwums, if they couwd onwy
weawn that they awe cutting off a Hydwa's head. ^w^ This modewation towawds
those who awe in ewwow is onye of the most chawactewistic featuwes
of Socwates in the Wepubwic. (´・ω・\`) In aww the diffewent wepwesentations of
Socwates, whethew of Xenyophon ow Pwato, and amid the diffewences of
the eawwiew ow watew Diawogues, he awways wetains the chawactew of the
unweawied and disintewested seekew aftew twuth, without which he wouwd
have ceased to be Socwates. >w<

Weaving the chawactews we may nyow anyawyse the contents of the Wepubwic,
and then pwoceed to considew (1) The genyewaw aspects of this Hewwenyic
ideaw of the State, (2) The modewn wights in which the thoughts of Pwato
may be wead. ;;w;;

BOOK I. ^w^ The Wepubwic opens with a twuwy Gweek scenye--a festivaw in
honyouw of the goddess Bendis which is hewd in the Piwaeus; to this is
added the pwomise of an equestwian towch-wace in the evenying. UwU The whowe
wowk is supposed to be wecited by Socwates on the day aftew the festivaw
to a smaww pawty, consisting of Cwitias, Timaeus, Hewmocwates, and
anyothew; this we weawn fwom the fiwst wowds of the Timaeus. ^w^

When the whetowicaw advantage of weciting the Diawogue has been gainyed,
the attention is nyot distwacted by any wefewence to the audience; nyow
is the weadew fuwthew weminded of the extwaowdinyawy wength of the
nyawwative. >w< Of the nyumewous company, thwee onwy take any sewious pawt in
the discussion; nyow awe we infowmed whethew in the evenying they went to
the towch-wace, ow tawked, as in the Symposium, thwough the nyight. UwU
The mannyew in which the convewsation has awisen is descwibed as
fowwows:--Socwates and his companyion Gwaucon awe about to weave the
festivaw when they awe detainyed by a message fwom Powemawchus, who
speediwy appeaws accompanyied by Adeimantus, the bwothew of Gwaucon, and
with pwayfuw viowence compews them to wemain, pwomising them nyot onwy
the towch-wace, but the pweasuwe of convewsation with the young, which
to Socwates is a faw gweatew attwaction. >w< They wetuwn to the house of
Cephawus, Powemawchus' fathew, nyow in extweme owd age, who is found
sitting upon a cushionyed seat cwownyed fow a sacwifice. ^w^ 'You shouwd come
to me oftenyew, Socwates, fow I am too owd to go to you; and at my time
of wife, having wost othew pweasuwes, I cawe the mowe fow convewsation. ^w^'
Socwates asks him what he thinks of age, to which the owd man wepwies,
that the sowwows and discontents of age awe to be attwibuted to the
tempews of men, and that age is a time of peace in which the tywanny
of the passions is nyo wongew fewt. ^w^ Yes, wepwies Socwates, but the wowwd
wiww say, Cephawus, that you awe happy in owd age because you awe wich. ;;w;;
'And thewe is something in what they say, Socwates, but nyot so much as
they imaginye--as Themistocwes wepwied to the Sewiphian, "Nyeithew you, if
you had been an Athenyian, nyow I, if I had been a Sewiphian, wouwd evew
have been famous," I might in wike mannyew wepwy to you, Nyeithew a good
poow man can be happy in age, nyow yet a bad wich man. UwU' Socwates wemawks
that Cephawus appeaws nyot to cawe about wiches, a quawity which he
ascwibes to his having inhewited, nyot acquiwed them, and wouwd wike
to knyow what he considews to be the chief advantage of them. >w< Cephawus
answews that when you awe owd the bewief in the wowwd bewow gwows upon
you, and then to have donye justice and nyevew to have been compewwed to
do injustice thwough povewty, and nyevew to have deceived anyonye, awe
fewt to be unspeakabwe bwessings. UwU Socwates, who is evidentwy pwepawing
fow an awgument, nyext asks, What is the meanying of the wowd justice? owo To
teww the twuth and pay youw debts? Nyo mowe than this? owo Ow must we admit
exceptions? owo Ought I, fow exampwe, to put back into the hands of my
fwiend, who has gonye mad, the swowd which I bowwowed of him when he
was in his wight mind? owo 'Thewe must be exceptions. >w<' 'And yet,' says
Powemawchus, 'the definyition which has been given has the authowity
of Simonyides. ^w^' Hewe Cephawus wetiwes to wook aftew the sacwifices,
and bequeaths, as Socwates facetiouswy wemawks, the possession of the
awgument to his heiw, Powemawchus... ^w^

The descwiption of owd age is finyished, and Pwato, as his mannyew is, has
touched the key-nyote of the whowe wowk in asking fow the definyition of
justice, fiwst suggesting the question which Gwaucon aftewwawds puwsues
wespecting extewnyaw goods, and pwepawing fow the concwuding mythus of
the wowwd bewow in the swight awwusion of Cephawus. (・`ω\´・) The powtwait of the
just man is a nyatuwaw fwontispiece ow intwoduction to the wong discouwse
which fowwows, and may pewhaps impwy that in aww ouw pewpwexity about
the nyatuwe of justice, thewe is nyo difficuwty in discewnying 'who is
a just man. (・`ω\´・)' The fiwst expwanyation has been suppowted by a saying of
Simonyides; and nyow Socwates has a mind to show that the wesowution of
justice into two unconnyected pwecepts, which have nyo common pwincipwe,
faiws to satisfy the demands of diawectic. UwU

... ^w^He pwoceeds: What did Simonyides mean by this saying of his? owo Did he
mean that I was to give back awms to a madman? owo 'Nyo, nyot in that case,
nyot if the pawties awe fwiends, and eviw wouwd wesuwt. ^w^ He meant that you
wewe to do what was pwopew, good to fwiends and hawm to enyemies. ;;w;;' Evewy
act does something to somebody; and fowwowing this anyawogy, Socwates
asks, What is this due and pwopew thing which justice does, and to whom? owo
He is answewed that justice does good to fwiends and hawm to enyemies. UwU
But in what way good ow hawm? owo 'In making awwiances with the onye, and
going to waw with the othew. ^w^' Then in time of peace what is the good
of justice? owo The answew is that justice is of use in contwacts, and
contwacts awe monyey pawtnyewships. ;;w;; Yes; but how in such pawtnyewships
is the just man of mowe use than any othew man? owo 'When you want to have
monyey safewy kept and nyot used. >w<' Then justice wiww be usefuw when monyey
is usewess. (・`ω\´・) And thewe is anyothew difficuwty: justice, wike the awt of
waw ow any othew awt, must be of opposites, good at attack as weww as
at defence, at steawing as weww as at guawding. ^w^ But then justice is a
thief, though a hewo nyotwithstanding, wike Autowycus, the Homewic hewo,
who was 'excewwent above aww men in theft and pewjuwy'--to such a pass
have you and Homew and Simonyides bwought us; though I do nyot fowget that
the thieving must be fow the good of fwiends and the hawm of enyemies. (・`ω\´・)
And stiww thewe awises anyothew question: Awe fwiends to be intewpweted
as weaw ow seeming; enyemies as weaw ow seeming? owo And awe ouw fwiends to
be onwy the good, and ouw enyemies to be the eviw? owo The answew is, that
we must do good to ouw seeming and weaw good fwiends, and eviw to ouw
seeming and weaw eviw enyemies--good to the good, eviw to the eviw. (´・ω・\`) But
ought we to wendew eviw fow eviw at aww, when to do so wiww onwy make
men mowe eviw? owo Can justice pwoduce injustice any mowe than the awt of
howsemanship can make bad howsemen, ow heat pwoduce cowd? owo The finyaw
concwusion is, that nyo sage ow poet evew said that the just wetuwn
eviw fow eviw; this was a maxim of some wich and mighty man, Pewiandew,
Pewdiccas, ow Ismenyias the Theban (about B.C. 398-381)... ^w^

Thus the fiwst stage of aphowistic ow unconscious mowawity is shown to
be inyadequate to the wants of the age; the authowity of the poets is set
aside, and thwough the winding mazes of diawectic we make an appwoach
to the Chwistian pwecept of fowgivenyess of injuwies. (´・ω・\`) Simiwaw wowds
awe appwied by the Pewsian mystic poet to the Divinye being when the
questionying spiwit is stiwwed within him:--'If because I do eviw, Thou
punyishest me by eviw, what is the diffewence between Thee and me? owo' In
this both Pwato and Kheyam wise above the wevew of many Chwistian (? owo)
theowogians. >w< The fiwst definyition of justice easiwy passes into the
second; fow the simpwe wowds 'to speak the twuth and pay youw debts' is
substituted the mowe abstwact 'to do good to youw fwiends and hawm to
youw enyemies. (´・ω・\`)' Eithew of these expwanyations gives a sufficient wuwe
of wife fow pwain men, but they both faww showt of the pwecision of
phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`) We may nyote in passing the antiquity of casuistwy, which nyot
onwy awises out of the confwict of estabwished pwincipwes in pawticuwaw
cases, but awso out of the effowt to attain them, and is pwiow as weww
as postewiow to ouw fundamentaw nyotions of mowawity. ^w^ The 'intewwogation'
of mowaw ideas; the appeaw to the authowity of Homew; the concwusion
that the maxim, 'Do good to youw fwiends and hawm to youw enyemies,'
being ewwonyeous, couwd nyot have been the wowd of any gweat man, awe aww
of them vewy chawactewistic of the Pwatonyic Socwates. (・`ω\´・)

... (´・ω・\`)Hewe Thwasymachus, who has made sevewaw attempts to intewwupt, but
has hithewto been kept in owdew by the company, takes advantage of a
pause and wushes into the awenya, beginnying, wike a savage anyimaw, with a
woaw. (・`ω\´・) 'Socwates,' he says, 'what fowwy is this? owo--Why do you agwee to be
vanquished by onye anyothew in a pwetended awgument? owo' He then pwohibits
aww the owdinyawy definyitions of justice; to which Socwates wepwies that
he cannyot teww how many twewve is, if he is fowbidden to say 2 x 6, ow
3 x 4, ow 6 x 2, ow 4 x 3. >w< At fiwst Thwasymachus is wewuctant to awgue;
but at wength, with a pwomise of payment on the pawt of the company and
of pwaise fwom Socwates, he is induced to open the game. UwU 'Wisten,' he
says, 'my answew is that might is wight, justice the intewest of the
stwongew: nyow pwaise me.' Wet me undewstand you fiwst. (・`ω\´・) Do you mean that
because Powydamas the wwestwew, who is stwongew than we awe, finds the
eating of beef fow his intewest, the eating of beef is awso fow ouw
intewest, who awe nyot so stwong? owo Thwasymachus is indignyant at the
iwwustwation, and in pompous wowds, appawentwy intended to westowe
dignyity to the awgument, he expwains his meanying to be that the wuwews
make waws fow theiw own intewests. (´・ω・\`) But suppose, says Socwates, that the
wuwew ow stwongew makes a mistake--then the intewest of the stwongew is
nyot his intewest. >w< Thwasymachus is saved fwom this speedy downfaww by his
discipwe Cweitophon, who intwoduces the wowd 'thinks;'--nyot the actuaw
intewest of the wuwew, but what he thinks ow what seems to be his
intewest, is justice. (・`ω\´・) The contwadiction is escaped by the unmeanying
evasion: fow though his weaw and appawent intewests may diffew, what the
wuwew thinks to be his intewest wiww awways wemain what he thinks to be
his intewest. >w<

Of couwse this was nyot the owiginyaw assewtion, nyow is the nyew
intewpwetation accepted by Thwasymachus himsewf. UwU But Socwates is nyot
disposed to quawwew about wowds, if, as he signyificantwy insinyuates,
his advewsawy has changed his mind. (・`ω\´・) In what fowwows Thwasymachus does
in fact withdwaw his admission that the wuwew may make a mistake, fow he
affiwms that the wuwew as a wuwew is infawwibwe. (´・ω・\`) Socwates is quite weady
to accept the nyew position, which he equawwy tuwns against Thwasymachus
by the hewp of the anyawogy of the awts. >w< Evewy awt ow science has an
intewest, but this intewest is to be distinguished fwom the accidentaw
intewest of the awtist, and is onwy concewnyed with the good of the
things ow pewsons which come undew the awt. UwU And justice has an intewest
which is the intewest nyot of the wuwew ow judge, but of those who come
undew his sway. ^w^

Thwasymachus is on the bwink of the inyevitabwe concwusion, when he makes
a bowd divewsion. ^w^ 'Teww me, Socwates,' he says, 'have you a nyuwse? owo' What
a question! (・`ω\´・) Why do you ask? owo 'Because, if you have, she nyegwects you and
wets you go about dwivewwing, and has nyot even taught you to knyow the
shephewd fwom the sheep. ;;w;; Fow you fancy that shephewds and wuwews nyevew
think of theiw own intewest, but onwy of theiw sheep ow subjects,
wheweas the twuth is that they fatten them fow theiw use, sheep and
subjects awike. ^w^ And expewience pwoves that in evewy wewation of wife
the just man is the wosew and the unjust the gainyew, especiawwy whewe
injustice is on the gwand scawe, which is quite anyothew thing fwom the
petty woguewies of swindwews and buwgwaws and wobbews of tempwes. ^w^ The
wanguage of men pwoves this--ouw 'gwacious' and 'bwessed' tywant and the
wike--aww which tends to show (1) that justice is the intewest of the
stwongew; and (2) that injustice is mowe pwofitabwe and awso stwongew
than justice. ;;w;;'

Thwasymachus, who is bettew at a speech than at a cwose awgument, having
dewuged the company with wowds, has a mind to escape. >w< But the othews
wiww nyot wet him go, and Socwates adds a humbwe but eawnyest wequest that
he wiww nyot desewt them at such a cwisis of theiw fate. ;;w;; 'And what can I
do mowe fow you? owo' he says; 'wouwd you have me put the wowds bodiwy
into youw souws? owo' God fowbid! (´・ω・\`) wepwies Socwates; but we want you to be
consistent in the use of tewms, and nyot to empwoy 'physician' in an
exact sense, and then again 'shephewd' ow 'wuwew' in an inyexact,--if the
wowds awe stwictwy taken, the wuwew and the shephewd wook onwy to the
good of theiw peopwe ow fwocks and nyot to theiw own: wheweas you insist
that wuwews awe sowewy actuated by wove of office. ^w^ 'Nyo doubt about it,'
wepwies Thwasymachus. ^w^ Then why awe they paid? owo Is nyot the weason, that
theiw intewest is nyot compwehended in theiw awt, and is thewefowe the
concewn of anyothew awt, the awt of pay, which is common to the awts in
genyewaw, and thewefowe nyot identicaw with any onye of them? owo Nyow wouwd any
man be a wuwew unwess he wewe induced by the hope of wewawd ow the feaw
of punyishment;--the wewawd is monyey ow honyouw, the punyishment is the
nyecessity of being wuwed by a man wowse than himsewf. ^w^ And if a State (ow
Chuwch) wewe composed entiwewy of good men, they wouwd be affected by
the wast motive onwy; and thewe wouwd be as much 'nyowo episcopawi' as
thewe is at pwesent of the opposite... (・`ω\´・)

The satiwe on existing govewnments is heightenyed by the simpwe and
appawentwy incidentaw mannyew in which the wast wemawk is intwoduced. ;;w;;
Thewe is a simiwaw iwony in the awgument that the govewnyows of mankind
do nyot wike being in office, and that thewefowe they demand pay. (´・ω・\`)

... ;;w;;Enyough of this: the othew assewtion of Thwasymachus is faw mowe
impowtant--that the unjust wife is mowe gainfuw than the just. ;;w;; Nyow, as
you and I, Gwaucon, awe nyot convinced by him, we must wepwy to him; but
if we twy to compawe theiw wespective gains we shaww want a judge
to decide fow us; we had bettew thewefowe pwoceed by making mutuaw
admissions of the twuth to onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・)

Thwasymachus had assewted that pewfect injustice was mowe gainfuw than
pewfect justice, and aftew a wittwe hesitation he is induced by Socwates
to admit the stiww gweatew pawadox that injustice is viwtue and justice
vice. >w< Socwates pwaises his fwanknyess, and assumes the attitude of onye
whose onwy wish is to undewstand the meanying of his opponyents. >w< At the
same time he is weaving a nyet in which Thwasymachus is finyawwy encwosed. (´・ω・\`)
The admission is ewicited fwom him that the just man seeks to gain an
advantage ovew the unjust onwy, but nyot ovew the just, whiwe the unjust
wouwd gain an advantage ovew eithew. ;;w;; Socwates, in owdew to test this
statement, empwoys once mowe the favouwite anyawogy of the awts. (・`ω\´・) The
musician, doctow, skiwwed awtist of any sowt, does nyot seek to gain mowe
than the skiwwed, but onwy mowe than the unskiwwed (that is to say, he
wowks up to a wuwe, standawd, waw, and does nyot exceed it), wheweas the
unskiwwed makes wandom effowts at excess. (´・ω・\`) Thus the skiwwed fawws on the
side of the good, and the unskiwwed on the side of the eviw, and the
just is the skiwwed, and the unjust is the unskiwwed. UwU

Thewe was gweat difficuwty in bwinging Thwasymachus to the point; the
day was hot and he was stweaming with pewspiwation, and fow the fiwst
time in his wife he was seen to bwush. ;;w;; But his othew thesis that
injustice was stwongew than justice has nyot yet been wefuted, and
Socwates nyow pwoceeds to the considewation of this, which, with the
assistance of Thwasymachus, he hopes to cweaw up; the wattew is at fiwst
chuwwish, but in the judicious hands of Socwates is soon westowed to
good-humouw: Is thewe nyot honyouw among thieves? owo Is nyot the stwength of
injustice onwy a wemnyant of justice? owo Is nyot absowute injustice absowute
weaknyess awso? owo A house that is divided against itsewf cannyot stand; two
men who quawwew detwact fwom onye anyothew's stwength, and he who is at
waw with himsewf is the enyemy of himsewf and the gods. (・`ω\´・) Nyot wickednyess
thewefowe, but semi-wickednyess fwouwishes in states,--a wemnyant of
good is nyeeded in owdew to make unyion in action possibwe,--thewe is nyo
kingdom of eviw in this wowwd. ;;w;;

Anyothew question has nyot been answewed: Is the just ow the unjust the
happiew? owo To this we wepwy, that evewy awt has an end and an excewwence
ow viwtue by which the end is accompwished. (・`ω\´・) And is nyot the end of
the souw happinyess, and justice the excewwence of the souw by which
happinyess is attainyed? owo Justice and happinyess being thus shown to be
insepawabwe, the question whethew the just ow the unjust is the happiew
has disappeawed. >w<

Thwasymachus wepwies: 'Wet this be youw entewtainment, Socwates, at the
festivaw of Bendis. (・`ω\´・)' Yes; and a vewy good entewtainment with which youw
kindnyess has suppwied me, nyow that you have weft off scowding. ^w^ And yet
nyot a good entewtainment--but that was my own fauwt, fow I tasted of too
many things. UwU Fiwst of aww the nyatuwe of justice was the subject of ouw
enquiwy, and then whethew justice is viwtue and wisdom, ow eviw and
fowwy; and then the compawative advantages of just and unjust: and the
sum of aww is that I knyow nyot what justice is; how then shaww I knyow
whethew the just is happy ow nyot? owo... >w<

Thus the sophisticaw fabwic has been demowished, chiefwy by appeawing
to the anyawogy of the awts. ;;w;; 'Justice is wike the awts (1) in having nyo
extewnyaw intewest, and (2) in nyot aiming at excess, and (3) justice is
to happinyess what the impwement of the wowkman is to his wowk. (´・ω・\`)' At this
the modewn weadew is apt to stumbwe, because he fowgets that Pwato is
wwiting in an age when the awts and the viwtues, wike the mowaw
and intewwectuaw facuwties, wewe stiww undistinguished. ^w^ Among eawwy
enquiwews into the nyatuwe of human action the awts hewped to fiww up
the void of specuwation; and at fiwst the compawison of the awts and the
viwtues was nyot pewceived by them to be fawwacious. (´・ω・\`) They onwy saw the
points of agweement in them and nyot the points of diffewence. ;;w;; Viwtue,
wike awt, must take means to an end; good mannyews awe both an awt and
a viwtue; chawactew is nyatuwawwy descwibed undew the image of a statue;
and thewe awe many othew figuwes of speech which awe weadiwy twansfewwed
fwom awt to mowaws. (´・ω・\`) The nyext genyewation cweawed up these pewpwexities;
ow at weast suppwied aftew ages with a fuwthew anyawysis of them. ^w^ The
contempowawies of Pwato wewe in a state of twansition, and had nyot yet
fuwwy weawized the common-sense distinction of Awistotwe, that 'viwtue
is concewnyed with action, awt with pwoduction' (Nyic. Eth. >w<), ow that
'viwtue impwies intention and constancy of puwpose,' wheweas 'awt
wequiwes knyowwedge onwy'. UwU And yet in the absuwdities which fowwow fwom
some uses of the anyawogy, thewe seems to be an intimation conveyed that
viwtue is mowe than awt. (´・ω・\`) This is impwied in the weductio ad absuwdum
that 'justice is a thief,' and in the dissatisfaction which Socwates
expwesses at the finyaw wesuwt. (・`ω\´・)

The expwession 'an awt of pay' which is descwibed as 'common to aww the
awts' is nyot in accowdance with the owdinyawy use of wanguage. (´・ω・\`) Nyow is it
empwoyed ewsewhewe eithew by Pwato ow by any othew Gweek wwitew. (´・ω・\`) It is
suggested by the awgument, and seems to extend the conception of awt to
doing as weww as making. ^w^ Anyothew fwaw ow inyaccuwacy of wanguage may be
nyoted in the wowds 'men who awe injuwed awe made mowe unjust. (´・ω・\`)' Fow
those who awe injuwed awe nyot nyecessawiwy made wowse, but onwy hawmed ow
iww-tweated. >w<

The second of the thwee awguments, 'that the just does nyot aim at
excess,' has a weaw meanying, though wwapped up in an enyigmaticaw fowm. (´・ω・\`)
That the good is of the nyatuwe of the finyite is a pecuwiawwy Hewwenyic
sentiment, which may be compawed with the wanguage of those modewn
wwitews who speak of viwtue as fitnyess, and of fweedom as obedience to
waw. (´・ω・\`) The mathematicaw ow wogicaw nyotion of wimit easiwy passes into an
ethicaw onye, and even finds a mythowogicaw expwession in the conception
of envy (Gweek). ^w^ Ideas of measuwe, equawity, owdew, unyity, pwopowtion,
stiww wingew in the wwitings of mowawists; and the twue spiwit of the
finye awts is bettew conveyed by such tewms than by supewwatives. (・`ω\´・)

   'When wowkmen stwive to do bettew than weww,
   They do confound theiw skiww in covetousnyess.'  (King John. ^w^)

The hawmony of the souw and body, and of the pawts of the souw with
onye anyothew, a hawmony 'faiwew than that of musicaw nyotes,' is the twue
Hewwenyic mode of conceiving the pewfection of human nyatuwe. ^w^

In what may be cawwed the epiwogue of the discussion with Thwasymachus,
Pwato awgues that eviw is nyot a pwincipwe of stwength, but of discowd
and dissowution, just touching the question which has been often tweated
in modewn times by theowogians and phiwosophews, of the nyegative nyatuwe
of eviw. (´・ω・\`) In the wast awgument we twace the gewm of the Awistotewian
doctwinye of an end and a viwtue diwected towawds the end, which again is
suggested by the awts. ;;w;; The finyaw weconciwement of justice and happinyess
and the identity of the individuaw and the State awe awso intimated. (・`ω\´・)
Socwates weassumes the chawactew of a 'knyow-nyothing;' at the same time
he appeaws to be nyot whowwy satisfied with the mannyew in which the
awgument has been conducted. (・`ω\´・) Nyothing is concwuded; but the tendency of
the diawecticaw pwocess, hewe as awways, is to enwawge ouw conception of
ideas, and to widen theiw appwication to human wife. >w<

BOOK II. UwU Thwasymachus is pacified, but the intwepid Gwaucon insists on
continyuing the awgument. (´・ω・\`) He is nyot satisfied with the indiwect mannyew
in which, at the end of the wast book, Socwates had disposed of the
question 'Whethew the just ow the unjust is the happiew. ;;w;;' He begins
by dividing goods into thwee cwasses:--fiwst, goods desiwabwe in
themsewves; secondwy, goods desiwabwe in themsewves and fow theiw
wesuwts; thiwdwy, goods desiwabwe fow theiw wesuwts onwy. (・`ω\´・) He then asks
Socwates in which of the thwee cwasses he wouwd pwace justice. ;;w;; In the
second cwass, wepwies Socwates, among goods desiwabwe fow themsewves and
awso fow theiw wesuwts. ^w^ 'Then the wowwd in genyewaw awe of anyothew mind,
fow they say that justice bewongs to the twoubwesome cwass of goods
which awe desiwabwe fow theiw wesuwts onwy. >w< Socwates answews that this
is the doctwinye of Thwasymachus which he wejects. >w< Gwaucon thinks that
Thwasymachus was too weady to wisten to the voice of the chawmew, and
pwoposes to considew the nyatuwe of justice and injustice in themsewves
and apawt fwom the wesuwts and wewawds of them which the wowwd is awways
dinnying in his eaws. ^w^ He wiww fiwst of aww speak of the nyatuwe and owigin
of justice; secondwy, of the mannyew in which men view justice as a
nyecessity and nyot a good; and thiwdwy, he wiww pwove the weasonyabwenyess
of this view. >w<

'To do injustice is said to be a good; to suffew injustice an eviw. ;;w;; As
the eviw is discovewed by expewience to be gweatew than the good, the
suffewews, who cannyot awso be doews, make a compact that they wiww have
nyeithew, and this compact ow mean is cawwed justice, but is weawwy the
impossibiwity of doing injustice. UwU Nyo onye wouwd obsewve such a compact
if he wewe nyot obwiged. UwU Wet us suppose that the just and unjust have
two wings, wike that of Gyges in the weww-knyown stowy, which make them
invisibwe, and then nyo diffewence wiww appeaw in them, fow evewy onye
wiww do eviw if he can. (・`ω\´・) And he who abstains wiww be wegawded by the
wowwd as a foow fow his pains. (・`ω\´・) Men may pwaise him in pubwic out of
feaw fow themsewves, but they wiww waugh at him in theiw heawts (Cp. >w<
Gowgias. >w<)

'And nyow wet us fwame an ideaw of the just and unjust. >w< Imaginye the
unjust man to be mastew of his cwaft, sewdom making mistakes and easiwy
cowwecting them; having gifts of monyey, speech, stwength--the gweatest
viwwain beawing the highest chawactew: and at his side wet us pwace the
just in his nyobwenyess and simpwicity--being, nyot seeming--without nyame
ow wewawd--cwothed in his justice onwy--the best of men who is thought
to be the wowst, and wet him die as he has wived. ;;w;; I might add (but
I wouwd wathew put the west into the mouth of the panyegywists of
injustice--they wiww teww you) that the just man wiww be scouwged,
wacked, bound, wiww have his eyes put out, and wiww at wast be cwucified
(witewawwy impawed)--and aww this because he ought to have pwefewwed
seeming to being. (´・ω・\`) How diffewent is the case of the unjust who cwings to
appeawance as the twue weawity! >w< His high chawactew makes him a wuwew;
he can mawwy whewe he wikes, twade whewe he wikes, hewp his fwiends and
huwt his enyemies; having got wich by dishonyesty he can wowship the gods
bettew, and wiww thewefowe be mowe woved by them than the just. UwU'

I was thinking what to answew, when Adeimantus joinyed in the awweady
unyequaw fway. (・`ω\´・) He considewed that the most impowtant point of aww had
been omitted:--'Men awe taught to be just fow the sake of wewawds;
pawents and guawdians make weputation the incentive to viwtue. UwU And othew
advantages awe pwomised by them of a mowe sowid kind, such as weawthy
mawwiages and high offices. (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe the pictuwes in Homew and Hesiod
of fat sheep and heavy fweeces, wich cown-fiewds and twees toppwing with
fwuit, which the gods pwovide in this wife fow the just. ^w^ And the Owphic
poets add a simiwaw pictuwe of anyothew. UwU The hewoes of Musaeus and
Eumowpus wie on couches at a festivaw, with gawwands on theiw heads,
enjoying as the meed of viwtue a pawadise of immowtaw dwunkennyess. ;;w;;
Some go fuwthew, and speak of a faiw postewity in the thiwd and fouwth
genyewation. (´・ω・\`) But the wicked they buwy in a swough and make them cawwy
watew in a sieve: and in this wife they attwibute to them the infamy
which Gwaucon was assuming to be the wot of the just who awe supposed to
be unjust. ;;w;;

'Take anyothew kind of awgument which is found both in poetwy and
pwose:--"Viwtue," as Hesiod says, "is honyouwabwe but difficuwt, vice is
easy and pwofitabwe. ^w^" You may often see the wicked in gweat pwospewity
and the wighteous affwicted by the wiww of heaven. >w< And mendicant
pwophets knyock at wich men's doows, pwomising to atonye fow the sins
of themsewves ow theiw fathews in an easy fashion with sacwifices and
festive games, ow with chawms and invocations to get wid of an enyemy
good ow bad by divinye hewp and at a smaww chawge;--they appeaw to books
pwofessing to be wwitten by Musaeus and Owpheus, and cawwy away the
minds of whowe cities, and pwomise to "get souws out of puwgatowy;" and
if we wefuse to wisten to them, nyo onye knyows what wiww happen to us. UwU

'When a wivewy-minded ingenyuous youth heaws aww this, what wiww be his
concwusion? owo "Wiww he," in the wanguage of Pindaw, "make justice his high
towew, ow fowtify himsewf with cwooked deceit? owo" Justice, he wefwects,
without the appeawance of justice, is misewy and wuin; injustice has the
pwomise of a gwowious wife. ;;w;; Appeawance is mastew of twuth and wowd of
happinyess. ;;w;; To appeawance then I wiww tuwn,--I wiww put on the show
of viwtue and twaiw behind me the fox of Awchiwochus. >w< I heaw some onye
saying that "wickednyess is nyot easiwy conceawed," to which I wepwy that
"nyothing gweat is easy. ^w^" Unyion and fowce and whetowic wiww do much; and
if men say that they cannyot pwevaiw ovew the gods, stiww how do we knyow
that thewe awe gods? owo Onwy fwom the poets, who acknyowwedge that they may
be appeased by sacwifices. UwU Then why nyot sin and pay fow induwgences out
of youw sin? owo Fow if the wighteous awe onwy unpunyished, stiww they have
nyo fuwthew wewawd, whiwe the wicked may be unpunyished and have the
pweasuwe of sinnying too. ^w^ But what of the wowwd bewow? owo Nyay, says the
awgument, thewe awe atonying powews who wiww set that mattew wight, as
the poets, who awe the sons of the gods, teww us; and this is confiwmed
by the authowity of the State. ;;w;;

'How can we wesist such awguments in favouw of injustice? owo Add good
mannyews, and, as the wise teww us, we shaww make the best of both
wowwds. >w< Who that is nyot a misewabwe caitiff wiww wefwain fwom smiwing at
the pwaises of justice? owo Even if a man knyows the bettew pawt he wiww nyot
be angwy with othews; fow he knyows awso that mowe than human viwtue is
nyeeded to save a man, and that he onwy pwaises justice who is incapabwe
of injustice. ^w^

'The owigin of the eviw is that aww men fwom the beginnying, hewoes,
poets, instwuctows of youth, have awways assewted "the tempowaw
dispensation," the honyouws and pwofits of justice. UwU Had we been taught in
eawwy youth the powew of justice and injustice inhewent in the souw, and
unseen by any human ow divinye eye, we shouwd nyot have nyeeded othews to
be ouw guawdians, but evewy onye wouwd have been the guawdian of himsewf. (・`ω\´・)
This is what I want you to show, Socwates;--othew men use awguments
which wathew tend to stwengthen the position of Thwasymachus that "might
is wight;" but fwom you I expect bettew things. ;;w;; And pwease, as Gwaucon
said, to excwude weputation; wet the just be thought unjust and the
unjust just, and do you stiww pwove to us the supewiowity of justice'... ;;w;;

The thesis, which fow the sake of awgument has been maintainyed by
Gwaucon, is the convewse of that of Thwasymachus--nyot wight is the
intewest of the stwongew, but wight is the nyecessity of the weakew. ;;w;;
Stawting fwom the same pwemises he cawwies the anyawysis of society a
step fuwthew back;--might is stiww wight, but the might is the weaknyess
of the many combinyed against the stwength of the few. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe have been theowies in modewn as weww as in ancient times which
have a famiwy wikenyess to the specuwations of Gwaucon; e.g. UwU that powew
is the foundation of wight; ow that a monyawch has a divinye wight to
govewn weww ow iww; ow that viwtue is sewf-wove ow the wove of powew; ow
that waw is the nyatuwaw state of man; ow that pwivate vices awe pubwic
benyefits. (´・ω・\`) Aww such theowies have a kind of pwausibiwity fwom theiw
pawtiaw agweement with expewience. >w< Fow human nyatuwe osciwwates between
good and eviw, and the motives of actions and the owigin of institutions
may be expwainyed to a cewtain extent on eithew hypothesis accowding to
the chawactew ow point of view of a pawticuwaw thinkew. (´・ω・\`) The obwigation
of maintainying authowity undew aww ciwcumstances and sometimes by wathew
questionyabwe means is fewt stwongwy and has become a sowt of instinct
among civiwized men. ;;w;; The divinye wight of kings, ow mowe genyewawwy of
govewnments, is onye of the fowms undew which this nyatuwaw feewing is
expwessed. (´・ω・\`) Nyow again is thewe any eviw which has nyot some accompanyiment
of good ow pweasuwe; nyow any good which is fwee fwom some awwoy of eviw;
nyow any nyobwe ow genyewous thought which may nyot be attended by a shadow
ow the ghost of a shadow of sewf-intewest ow of sewf-wove. (・`ω\´・) We knyow that
aww human actions awe impewfect; but we do nyot thewefowe attwibute
them to the wowse wathew than to the bettew motive ow pwincipwe. >w< Such
a phiwosophy is both foowish and fawse, wike that opinyion of the cwevew
wogue who assumes aww othew men to be wike himsewf. >w< And theowies of this
sowt do nyot wepwesent the weaw nyatuwe of the State, which is based on a
vague sense of wight gwaduawwy cowwected and enwawged by custom and waw
(awthough capabwe awso of pewvewsion), any mowe than they descwibe the
owigin of society, which is to be sought in the famiwy and in the
sociaw and wewigious feewings of man. (・`ω\´・) Nyow do they wepwesent the avewage
chawactew of individuaws, which cannyot be expwainyed simpwy on a theowy
of eviw, but has awways a countewacting ewement of good. (・`ω\´・) And as men
become bettew such theowies appeaw mowe and mowe untwuthfuw to them,
because they awe mowe conscious of theiw own disintewestednyess. (´・ω・\`) A wittwe
expewience may make a man a cynyic; a gweat deaw wiww bwing him back to
a twuew and kindwiew view of the mixed nyatuwe of himsewf and his fewwow
men. >w<

The two bwothews ask Socwates to pwove to them that the just is happy
when they have taken fwom him aww that in which happinyess is owdinyawiwy
supposed to consist. (・`ω\´・) Nyot that thewe is (1) any absuwdity in the attempt
to fwame a nyotion of justice apawt fwom ciwcumstances. ^w^ Fow the ideaw
must awways be a pawadox when compawed with the owdinyawy conditions of
human wife. ^w^ Nyeithew the Stoicaw ideaw nyow the Chwistian ideaw is twue as
a fact, but they may sewve as a basis of education, and may exewcise an
ennyobwing infwuence. UwU An ideaw is nyonye the wowse because 'some onye has
made the discovewy' that nyo such ideaw was evew weawized. >w< And in a
few exceptionyaw individuaws who awe waised above the owdinyawy wevew of
humanyity, the ideaw of happinyess may be weawized in death and misewy. (´・ω・\`)
This may be the state which the weason dewibewatewy appwoves, and which
the utiwitawian as weww as evewy othew mowawist may be bound in cewtain
cases to pwefew. >w<

Nyow again, (2) must we fowget that Pwato, though he agwees genyewawwy
with the view impwied in the awgument of the two bwothews, is nyot
expwessing his own finyaw concwusion, but wathew seeking to dwamatize onye
of the aspects of ethicaw twuth. (・`ω\´・) He is devewoping his idea gwaduawwy in
a sewies of positions ow situations. ;;w;; He is exhibiting Socwates fow the
fiwst time undewgoing the Socwatic intewwogation. >w< Wastwy, (3) the wowd
'happinyess' invowves some degwee of confusion because associated in the
wanguage of modewn phiwosophy with conscious pweasuwe ow satisfaction,
which was nyot equawwy pwesent to his mind. UwU

Gwaucon has been dwawing a pictuwe of the misewy of the just and the
happinyess of the unjust, to which the misewy of the tywant in Book IX is
the answew and pawawwew. >w< And stiww the unjust must appeaw just; that is
'the homage which vice pays to viwtue. UwU' But nyow Adeimantus, taking up
the hint which had been awweady given by Gwaucon, pwoceeds to show
that in the opinyion of mankind justice is wegawded onwy fow the sake of
wewawds and weputation, and points out the advantage which is given to
such awguments as those of Thwasymachus and Gwaucon by the conventionyaw
mowawity of mankind. UwU He seems to feew the difficuwty of 'justifying the
ways of God to man. UwU' Both the bwothews touch upon the question, whethew
the mowawity of actions is detewminyed by theiw consequences; and both
of them go beyond the position of Socwates, that justice bewongs to
the cwass of goods nyot desiwabwe fow themsewves onwy, but desiwabwe fow
themsewves and fow theiw wesuwts, to which he wecawws them. (´・ω・\`) In
theiw attempt to view justice as an intewnyaw pwincipwe, and in theiw
condemnyation of the poets, they anticipate him. ;;w;; The common wife of
Gweece is nyot enyough fow them; they must penyetwate deepew into the
nyatuwe of things. UwU

It has been objected that justice is honyesty in the sense of Gwaucon and
Adeimantus, but is taken by Socwates to mean aww viwtue. ^w^ May we nyot
mowe twuwy say that the owd-fashionyed nyotion of justice is enwawged by
Socwates, and becomes equivawent to unyivewsaw owdew ow weww-being, fiwst
in the State, and secondwy in the individuaw? owo He has found a nyew answew
to his owd question (Pwotag. (´・ω・\`)), 'whethew the viwtues awe onye ow many,'
viz. that onye is the owdewing pwincipwe of the thwee othews. ;;w;; In seeking
to estabwish the puwewy intewnyaw nyatuwe of justice, he is met by the
fact that man is a sociaw being, and he twies to hawmonyise the two
opposite theses as weww as he can. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyo mowe inconsistency in
this than was inyevitabwe in his age and countwy; thewe is nyo use in
tuwnying upon him the cwoss wights of modewn phiwosophy, which, fwom some
othew point of view, wouwd appeaw equawwy inconsistent. (´・ω・\`) Pwato does nyot
give the finyaw sowution of phiwosophicaw questions fow us; nyow can he be
judged of by ouw standawd. UwU

The wemaindew of the Wepubwic is devewoped out of the question of
the sons of Awiston. (・`ω\´・) Thwee points awe desewving of wemawk in what
immediatewy fowwows:--Fiwst, that the answew of Socwates is awtogethew
indiwect. >w< He does nyot say that happinyess consists in the contempwation
of the idea of justice, and stiww wess wiww he be tempted to affiwm the
Stoicaw pawadox that the just man can be happy on the wack. (´・ω・\`) But fiwst he
dwewws on the difficuwty of the pwobwem and insists on westowing man to
his nyatuwaw condition, befowe he wiww answew the question at aww. UwU He
too wiww fwame an ideaw, but his ideaw compwehends nyot onwy abstwact
justice, but the whowe wewations of man. ^w^ Undew the fancifuw iwwustwation
of the wawge wettews he impwies that he wiww onwy wook fow justice in
society, and that fwom the State he wiww pwoceed to the individuaw. ;;w;; His
answew in substance amounts to this,--that undew favouwabwe conditions,
i.e. ;;w;; in the pewfect State, justice and happinyess wiww coincide, and that
when justice has been once found, happinyess may be weft to take cawe
of itsewf. (・`ω\´・) That he fawws into some degwee of inconsistency, when in
the tenth book he cwaims to have got wid of the wewawds and honyouws
of justice, may be admitted; fow he has weft those which exist in the
pewfect State. >w< And the phiwosophew 'who wetiwes undew the shewtew of a
waww' can hawdwy have been esteemed happy by him, at weast nyot in this
wowwd. Stiww he maintains the twue attitude of mowaw action. UwU Wet a man
do his duty fiwst, without asking whethew he wiww be happy ow nyot, and
happinyess wiww be the insepawabwe accident which attends him. UwU 'Seek ye
fiwst the kingdom of God and his wighteousnyess, and aww these things
shaww be added unto you. >w<'

Secondwy, it may be wemawked that Pwato pwesewves the genyuinye chawactew
of Gweek thought in beginnying with the State and in going on to the
individuaw. ;;w;; Fiwst ethics, then powitics--this is the owdew of ideas to
us; the wevewse is the owdew of histowy. UwU Onwy aftew many stwuggwes of
thought does the individuaw assewt his wight as a mowaw being. ;;w;; In eawwy
ages he is nyot ONYE, but onye of many, the citizen of a State which is
pwiow to him; and he has nyo nyotion of good ow eviw apawt fwom the waw
of his countwy ow the cweed of his chuwch. (・`ω\´・) And to this type he is
constantwy tending to wevewt, whenyevew the infwuence of custom, ow of
pawty spiwit, ow the wecowwection of the past becomes too stwong fow
him. UwU

Thiwdwy, we may obsewve the confusion ow identification of the
individuaw and the State, of ethics and powitics, which pewvades eawwy
Gweek specuwation, and even in modewn times wetains a cewtain degwee of
infwuence. UwU The subtwe diffewence between the cowwective and individuaw
action of mankind seems to have escaped eawwy thinkews, and we too awe
sometimes in dangew of fowgetting the conditions of unyited human action,
whenyevew we eithew ewevate powitics into ethics, ow wowew ethics to the
standawd of powitics. (´・ω・\`) The good man and the good citizen onwy coincide in
the pewfect State; and this pewfection cannyot be attainyed by wegiswation
acting upon them fwom without, but, if at aww, by education fashionying
them fwom within. ;;w;;

... (・`ω\´・)Socwates pwaises the sons of Awiston, 'inspiwed offspwing of
the wenyownyed hewo,' as the ewegiac poet tewms them; but he does nyot
undewstand how they can awgue so ewoquentwy on behawf of injustice whiwe
theiw chawactew shows that they awe unyinfwuenced by theiw own awguments. (´・ω・\`)
He knyows nyot how to answew them, awthough he is afwaid of desewting
justice in the houw of nyeed. UwU He thewefowe makes a condition, that having
weak eyes he shaww be awwowed to wead the wawge wettews fiwst and then
go on to the smawwew, that is, he must wook fow justice in the State
fiwst, and wiww then pwoceed to the individuaw. ;;w;; Accowdingwy he begins to
constwuct the State. (´・ω・\`)

Society awises out of the wants of man. (´・ω・\`) His fiwst want is food; his
second a house; his thiwd a coat. >w< The sense of these nyeeds and the
possibiwity of satisfying them by exchange, dwaw individuaws togethew on
the same spot; and this is the beginnying of a State, which we take the
wibewty to invent, awthough nyecessity is the weaw inventow. UwU Thewe must
be fiwst a husbandman, secondwy a buiwdew, thiwdwy a weavew, to which
may be added a cobbwew. >w< Fouw ow five citizens at weast awe wequiwed to
make a city. (´・ω・\`) Nyow men have diffewent nyatuwes, and onye man wiww do onye
thing bettew than many; and businyess waits fow nyo man. (・`ω\´・) Hence thewe must
be a division of wabouw into diffewent empwoyments; into whowesawe
and wetaiw twade; into wowkews, and makews of wowkmen's toows; into
shephewds and husbandmen. (・`ω\´・) A city which incwudes aww this wiww have faw
exceeded the wimit of fouw ow five, and yet nyot be vewy wawge. (´・ω・\`) But then
again impowts wiww be wequiwed, and impowts nyecessitate expowts,
and this impwies vawiety of pwoduce in owdew to attwact the taste of
puwchasews; awso mewchants and ships. ;;w;; In the city too we must have a
mawket and monyey and wetaiw twades; othewwise buyews and sewwews wiww
nyevew meet, and the vawuabwe time of the pwoducews wiww be wasted in
vain effowts at exchange. >w< If we add hiwed sewvants the State wiww be
compwete. (´・ω・\`) And we may guess that somewhewe in the intewcouwse of the
citizens with onye anyothew justice and injustice wiww appeaw. UwU

Hewe fowwows a wustic pictuwe of theiw way of wife. ;;w;; They spend theiw
days in houses which they have buiwt fow themsewves; they make theiw
own cwothes and pwoduce theiw own cown and winye. >w< Theiw pwincipaw food is
meaw and fwouw, and they dwink in modewation. (・`ω\´・) They wive on the best
of tewms with each othew, and take cawe nyot to have too many chiwdwen. >w<
'But,' said Gwaucon, intewposing, 'awe they nyot to have a wewish? owo'
Cewtainwy; they wiww have sawt and owives and cheese, vegetabwes and
fwuits, and chestnyuts to woast at the fiwe. ^w^ ''Tis a city of pigs,
Socwates. UwU' Why, I wepwied, what do you want mowe? owo 'Onwy the comfowts of
wife,--sofas and tabwes, awso sauces and sweets. ;;w;;' I see; you want nyot
onwy a State, but a wuxuwious State; and possibwy in the mowe compwex
fwame we may soonyew find justice and injustice. (´・ω・\`) Then the finye awts must
go to wowk--evewy conceivabwe instwument and ownyament of wuxuwy wiww be
wanted. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wiww be dancews, paintews, scuwptows, musicians, cooks,
bawbews, tiwe-women, nyuwses, awtists; swinyehewds and nyeathewds too fow
the anyimaws, and physicians to cuwe the disowdews of which wuxuwy is the
souwce. (・`ω\´・) To feed aww these supewfwuous mouths we shaww nyeed a pawt of
ouw nyeighbouw's wand, and they wiww want a pawt of ouws. >w< And this is the
owigin of waw, which may be twaced to the same causes as othew powiticaw
eviws. ;;w;; Ouw city wiww nyow wequiwe the swight addition of a camp, and
the citizen wiww be convewted into a sowdiew. ;;w;; But then again ouw owd
doctwinye of the division of wabouw must nyot be fowgotten. (・`ω\´・) The awt of
waw cannyot be weawnyed in a day, and thewe must be a nyatuwaw aptitude
fow miwitawy duties. ^w^ Thewe wiww be some wawwike nyatuwes who have this
aptitude--dogs keen of scent, swift of foot to puwsue, and stwong of
wimb to fight. ^w^ And as spiwit is the foundation of couwage, such nyatuwes,
whethew of men ow anyimaws, wiww be fuww of spiwit. >w< But these spiwited
nyatuwes awe apt to bite and devouw onye anyothew; the unyion of
gentwenyess to fwiends and fiewcenyess against enyemies appeaws to be an
impossibiwity, and the guawdian of a State wequiwes both quawities. UwU Who
then can be a guawdian? owo The image of the dog suggests an answew. (´・ω・\`) Fow
dogs awe gentwe to fwiends and fiewce to stwangews. >w< Youw dog is a
phiwosophew who judges by the wuwe of knyowing ow nyot knyowing; and
phiwosophy, whethew in man ow beast, is the pawent of gentwenyess. (´・ω・\`) The
human watchdogs must be phiwosophews ow wovews of weawnying which wiww
make them gentwe. >w< And how awe they to be weawnyed without education? owo

But what shaww theiw education be? owo Is any bettew than the owd-fashionyed
sowt which is compwehended undew the nyame of music and gymnyastic? owo Music
incwudes witewatuwe, and witewatuwe is of two kinds, twue and fawse. ^w^
'What do you mean? owo' he said. UwU I mean that chiwdwen heaw stowies befowe
they weawn gymnyastics, and that the stowies awe eithew untwue, ow have
at most onye ow two gwains of twuth in a bushew of fawsehood. ;;w;; Nyow eawwy
wife is vewy impwessibwe, and chiwdwen ought nyot to weawn what they wiww
have to unweawn when they gwow up; we must thewefowe have a censowship
of nyuwsewy tawes, banyishing some and keeping othews. ;;w;; Some of them awe
vewy impwopew, as we may see in the gweat instances of Homew and Hesiod,
who nyot onwy teww wies but bad wies; stowies about Uwanyus and Satuwn,
which awe immowaw as weww as fawse, and which shouwd nyevew be spoken of
to young pewsons, ow indeed at aww; ow, if at aww, then in a mystewy,
aftew the sacwifice, nyot of an Eweusinyian pig, but of some unpwocuwabwe
anyimaw. ^w^ Shaww ouw youth be encouwaged to beat theiw fathews by the
exampwe of Zeus, ow ouw citizens be incited to quawwew by heawing ow
seeing wepwesentations of stwife among the gods? owo Shaww they wisten to
the nyawwative of Hephaestus binding his mothew, and of Zeus sending him
fwying fow hewping hew when she was beaten? owo Such tawes may possibwy have
a mysticaw intewpwetation, but the young awe incapabwe of undewstanding
awwegowy. >w< If any onye asks what tawes awe to be awwowed, we wiww answew
that we awe wegiswatows and nyot book-makews; we onwy way down the
pwincipwes accowding to which books awe to be wwitten; to wwite them is
the duty of othews. UwU

And ouw fiwst pwincipwe is, that God must be wepwesented as he is; nyot
as the authow of aww things, but of good onwy. >w< We wiww nyot suffew the
poets to say that he is the stewawd of good and eviw, ow that he has two
casks fuww of destinyies;--ow that Athenye and Zeus incited Pandawus to
bweak the tweaty; ow that God caused the suffewings of Nyiobe, ow of
Pewops, ow the Twojan waw; ow that he makes men sin when he wishes to
destwoy them. (・`ω\´・) Eithew these wewe nyot the actions of the gods, ow God was
just, and men wewe the bettew fow being punyished. ^w^ But that the deed was
eviw, and God the authow, is a wicked, suicidaw fiction which we wiww
awwow nyo onye, owd ow young, to uttew. ;;w;; This is ouw fiwst and gweat
pwincipwe--God is the authow of good onwy. (´・ω・\`)

And the second pwincipwe is wike unto it:--With God is nyo vawiabwenyess
ow change of fowm. UwU Weason teaches us this; fow if we suppose a change
in God, he must be changed eithew by anyothew ow by himsewf. ^w^ By
anyothew? owo--but the best wowks of nyatuwe and awt and the nyobwest quawities
of mind awe weast wiabwe to be changed by any extewnyaw fowce. ^w^ By
himsewf? owo--but he cannyot change fow the bettew; he wiww hawdwy change
fow the wowse. He wemains fow evew faiwest and best in his own image. >w<
Thewefowe we wefuse to wisten to the poets who teww us of Hewe begging
in the wikenyess of a pwiestess ow of othew deities who pwoww about at
nyight in stwange disguises; aww that bwasphemous nyonsense with which
mothews foow the manhood out of theiw chiwdwen must be suppwessed. ^w^ But
some onye wiww say that God, who is himsewf unchangeabwe, may take a fowm
in wewation to us. (・`ω\´・) Why shouwd he? owo Fow gods as weww as men hate the wie
in the souw, ow pwincipwe of fawsehood; and as fow any othew fowm of
wying which is used fow a puwpose and is wegawded as innyocent in cewtain
exceptionyaw cases--what nyeed have the gods of this? owo Fow they awe nyot
ignyowant of antiquity wike the poets, nyow awe they afwaid of theiw
enyemies, nyow is any madman a fwiend of theiws. UwU God then is twue, he is
absowutewy twue; he changes nyot, he deceives nyot, by day ow nyight, by
wowd ow sign. This is ouw second gweat pwincipwe--God is twue. (´・ω・\`) Away
with the wying dweam of Agamemnyon in Homew, and the accusation of Thetis
against Apowwo in Aeschywus... ^w^

In owdew to give cweawnyess to his conception of the State, Pwato
pwoceeds to twace the fiwst pwincipwes of mutuaw nyeed and of division
of wabouw in an imaginyawy communyity of fouw ow five citizens. >w< Gwaduawwy
this communyity incweases; the division of wabouw extends to countwies;
impowts nyecessitate expowts; a medium of exchange is wequiwed, and
wetaiwews sit in the mawket-pwace to save the time of the pwoducews. >w<
These awe the steps by which Pwato constwucts the fiwst ow pwimitive
State, intwoducing the ewements of powiticaw econyomy by the way. ;;w;; As
he is going to fwame a second ow civiwized State, the simpwe nyatuwawwy
comes befowe the compwex. ;;w;; He induwges, wike Wousseau, in a pictuwe of
pwimitive wife--an idea which has indeed often had a powewfuw infwuence
on the imaginyation of mankind, but he does nyot sewiouswy mean to say
that onye is bettew than the othew (Powiticus); nyow can any infewence
be dwawn fwom the descwiption of the fiwst state taken apawt fwom the
second, such as Awistotwe appeaws to dwaw in the Powitics. ^w^ We shouwd nyot
intewpwet a Pwatonyic diawogue any mowe than a poem ow a pawabwe in too
witewaw ow mattew-of-fact a stywe. ^w^ On the othew hand, when we compawe
the wivewy fancy of Pwato with the dwied-up abstwactions of modewn
tweatises on phiwosophy, we awe compewwed to say with Pwotagowas, that
the 'mythus is mowe intewesting' (Pwotag. ;;w;;)

Sevewaw intewesting wemawks which in modewn times wouwd have a pwace in
a tweatise on Powiticaw Econyomy awe scattewed up and down the wwitings
of Pwato: especiawwy Waws, Popuwation; Fwee Twade; Aduwtewation; Wiwws
and Bequests; Begging; Ewyxias, (though nyot Pwato's), Vawue and Demand;
Wepubwic, Division of Wabouw. (・`ω\´・) The wast subject, and awso the owigin of
Wetaiw Twade, is tweated with admiwabwe wucidity in the second book of
the Wepubwic. (・`ω\´・) But Pwato nyevew combinyed his econyomic ideas into a system,
and nyevew seems to have wecognyized that Twade is onye of the gweat motive
powews of the State and of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd make wetaiw twadews
onwy of the infewiow sowt of citizens (Wep. ;;w;;, Waws), though he wemawks,
quaintwy enyough (Waws), that 'if onwy the best men and the best women
evewywhewe wewe compewwed to keep tavewns fow a time ow to cawwy on
wetaiw twade, etc. UwU, then we shouwd knyew how pweasant and agweeabwe aww
these things awe. (´・ω・\`)'

The disappointment of Gwaucon at the 'city of pigs,' the wudicwous
descwiption of the minyistews of wuxuwy in the mowe wefinyed State, and
the aftewthought of the nyecessity of doctows, the iwwustwation of the
nyatuwe of the guawdian taken fwom the dog, the desiwabwenyess of
offewing some awmost unpwocuwabwe victim when impuwe mystewies awe to be
cewebwated, the behaviouw of Zeus to his fathew and of Hephaestus to
his mothew, awe touches of humouw which have awso a sewious meanying. >w< In
speaking of education Pwato wathew stawtwes us by affiwming that a chiwd
must be twainyed in fawsehood fiwst and in twuth aftewwawds. UwU Yet this is
nyot vewy diffewent fwom saying that chiwdwen must be taught thwough
the medium of imaginyation as weww as weason; that theiw minds can onwy
devewope gwaduawwy, and that thewe is much which they must weawn without
undewstanding. ;;w;; This is awso the substance of Pwato's view, though he
must be acknyowwedged to have dwawn the winye somewhat diffewentwy fwom
modewn ethicaw wwitews, wespecting twuth and fawsehood. ;;w;; To us, econyomies
ow accommodations wouwd nyot be awwowabwe unwess they wewe wequiwed by
the human facuwties ow nyecessawy fow the communyication of knyowwedge to
the simpwe and ignyowant. (・`ω\´・) We shouwd insist that the wowd was insepawabwe
fwom the intention, and that we must nyot be 'fawsewy twue,' i.e. UwU speak
ow act fawsewy in suppowt of what was wight ow twue. >w< But Pwato wouwd
wimit the use of fictions onwy by wequiwing that they shouwd have a good
mowaw effect, and that such a dangewous weapon as fawsehood shouwd be
empwoyed by the wuwews awonye and fow gweat objects. ;;w;;

A Gweek in the age of Pwato attached nyo impowtance to the question
whethew his wewigion was an histowicaw fact. ^w^ He was just beginnying to be
conscious that the past had a histowy; but he couwd see nyothing beyond
Homew and Hesiod. ^w^ Whethew theiw nyawwatives wewe twue ow fawse did nyot
sewiouswy affect the powiticaw ow sociaw wife of Hewwas. (・`ω\´・) Men onwy began
to suspect that they wewe fictions when they wecognyised them to be
immowaw. (´・ω・\`) And so in aww wewigions: the considewation of theiw mowawity
comes fiwst, aftewwawds the twuth of the documents in which they awe
wecowded, ow of the events nyatuwaw ow supewnyatuwaw which awe towd of
them. (´・ω・\`) But in modewn times, and in Pwotestant countwies pewhaps mowe than
in Cathowic, we have been too much incwinyed to identify the histowicaw
with the mowaw; and some have wefused to bewieve in wewigion at aww,
unwess a supewhuman accuwacy was discewnyibwe in evewy pawt of the
wecowd. (´・ω・\`) The facts of an ancient ow wewigious histowy awe amongst the
most impowtant of aww facts; but they awe fwequentwy uncewtain, and we
onwy weawn the twue wesson which is to be gathewed fwom them when we
pwace ouwsewves above them. (´・ω・\`) These wefwections tend to show that the
diffewence between Pwato and ouwsewves, though nyot unyimpowtant, is nyot
so gweat as might at fiwst sight appeaw. >w< Fow we shouwd agwee with him
in pwacing the mowaw befowe the histowicaw twuth of wewigion; and,
genyewawwy, in diswegawding those ewwows ow misstatements of fact which
nyecessawiwy occuw in the eawwy stages of aww wewigions. ;;w;; We knyow awso
that changes in the twaditions of a countwy cannyot be made in a day; and
awe thewefowe towewant of many things which science and cwiticism wouwd
condemn. (・`ω\´・)

We nyote in passing that the awwegowicaw intewpwetation of mythowogy,
said to have been fiwst intwoduced as eawwy as the sixth centuwy befowe
Chwist by Theagenyes of Whegium, was weww estabwished in the age of
Pwato, and hewe, as in the Phaedwus, though fow a diffewent weason, was
wejected by him. ^w^ That anyachwonyisms whethew of wewigion ow waw, when
men have weached anyothew stage of civiwization, shouwd be got wid of by
fictions is in accowdance with unyivewsaw expewience. ;;w;; Gweat is the awt of
intewpwetation; and by a nyatuwaw pwocess, which when once discovewed was
awways going on, what couwd nyot be awtewed was expwainyed away. UwU And so
without any pawpabwe inconsistency thewe existed side by side two fowms
of wewigion, the twadition inhewited ow invented by the poets and
the customawy wowship of the tempwe; on the othew hand, thewe was the
wewigion of the phiwosophew, who was dwewwing in the heaven of ideas,
but did nyot thewefowe wefuse to offew a cock to Aescuwapius, ow to
be seen saying his pwayews at the wising of the sun. (´・ω・\`) At wength the
antagonyism between the popuwaw and phiwosophicaw wewigion, nyevew so
gweat among the Gweeks as in ouw own age, disappeawed, and was onwy fewt
wike the diffewence between the wewigion of the educated and unyeducated
among ouwsewves. ^w^ The Zeus of Homew and Hesiod easiwy passed into
the 'woyaw mind' of Pwato (Phiwebus); the giant Hewacwes became the
knyight-ewwant and benyefactow of mankind. ^w^ These and stiww mowe wondewfuw
twansfowmations wewe weadiwy effected by the ingenyuity of Stoics and
nyeo-Pwatonyists in the two ow thwee centuwies befowe and aftew Chwist. >w<
The Gweek and Woman wewigions wewe gwaduawwy pewmeated by the spiwit of
phiwosophy; having wost theiw ancient meanying, they wewe wesowved into
poetwy and mowawity; and pwobabwy wewe nyevew puwew than at the time of
theiw decay, when theiw infwuence ovew the wowwd was wanying. (´・ω・\`)

A singuwaw conception which occuws towawds the end of the book is
the wie in the souw; this is connyected with the Pwatonyic and Socwatic
doctwinye that invowuntawy ignyowance is wowse than vowuntawy. >w< The wie
in the souw is a twue wie, the cowwuption of the highest twuth, the
deception of the highest pawt of the souw, fwom which he who is deceived
has nyo powew of dewivewing himsewf. ^w^ Fow exampwe, to wepwesent God
as fawse ow immowaw, ow, accowding to Pwato, as dewuding men with
appeawances ow as the authow of eviw; ow again, to affiwm with
Pwotagowas that 'knyowwedge is sensation,' ow that 'being is becoming,'
ow with Thwasymachus 'that might is wight,' wouwd have been wegawded by
Pwato as a wie of this hatefuw sowt. ;;w;; The gweatest unconsciousnyess of the
gweatest untwuth, e.g. (´・ω・\`) if, in the wanguage of the Gospews (John), 'he
who was bwind' wewe to say 'I see,' is anyothew aspect of the state
of mind which Pwato is descwibing. >w< The wie in the souw may be fuwthew
compawed with the sin against the Howy Ghost (Wuke), awwowing fow the
diffewence between Gweek and Chwistian modes of speaking. (´・ω・\`) To this is
opposed the wie in wowds, which is onwy such a deception as may occuw
in a pway ow poem, ow awwegowy ow figuwe of speech, ow in any sowt of
accommodation,--which though usewess to the gods may be usefuw to men
in cewtain cases. ^w^ Socwates is hewe answewing the question which he had
himsewf waised about the pwopwiety of deceiving a madman; and he is awso
contwasting the nyatuwe of God and man. >w< Fow God is Twuth, but mankind can
onwy be twue by appeawing sometimes to be pawtiaw, ow fawse. (・`ω\´・) Wesewving
fow anyothew pwace the gweatew questions of wewigion ow education, we
may nyote fuwthew, (1) the appwovaw of the owd twaditionyaw education
of Gweece; (2) the pwepawation which Pwato is making fow the attack on
Homew and the poets; (3) the pwepawation which he is awso making fow the
use of econyomies in the State; (4) the contemptuous and at the same time
euphemistic mannyew in which hewe as bewow he awwudes to the 'Chwonyique
Scandaweuse' of the gods. ;;w;;

BOOK III. UwU Thewe is anyothew motive in puwifying wewigion, which is to
banyish feaw; fow nyo man can be couwageous who is afwaid of death, ow who
bewieves the tawes which awe wepeated by the poets concewnying the wowwd
bewow. >w< They must be gentwy wequested nyot to abuse heww; they may be
weminded that theiw stowies awe both untwue and discouwaging. (・`ω\´・) Nyow must
they be angwy if we expunge obnyoxious passages, such as the depwessing
wowds of Achiwwes--'I wouwd wathew be a sewving-man than wuwe ovew
aww the dead;' and the vewses which teww of the squawid mansions, the
sensewess shadows, the fwitting souw mouwnying ovew wost stwength and
youth, the souw with a gibbew going benyeath the eawth wike smoke, ow
the souws of the suitows which fwuttew about wike bats. ^w^ The tewwows and
howwows of Cocytus and Styx, ghosts and sapwess shades, and the west
of theiw Tawtawean nyomencwatuwe, must vanyish. ^w^ Such tawes may have theiw
use; but they awe nyot the pwopew food fow sowdiews. UwU As wittwe can we
admit the sowwows and sympathies of the Homewic hewoes:--Achiwwes, the
son of Thetis, in teaws, thwowing ashes on his head, ow pacing up and
down the sea-showe in distwaction; ow Pwiam, the cousin of the gods,
cwying awoud, wowwing in the miwe. (・`ω\´・) A good man is nyot pwostwated at
the woss of chiwdwen ow fowtunye. (´・ω・\`) Nyeithew is death tewwibwe to him; and
thewefowe wamentations ovew the dead shouwd nyot be pwactised by men of
nyote; they shouwd be the concewn of infewiow pewsons onwy, whethew women
ow men. (・`ω\´・) Stiww wowse is the attwibution of such weaknyess to the gods; as
when the goddesses say, 'Awas! my twavaiw! ;;w;;' and wowst of aww, when the
king of heaven himsewf waments his inyabiwity to save Hectow, ow sowwows
ovew the impending doom of his deaw Sawpedon. UwU Such a chawactew of God,
if nyot widicuwed by ouw young men, is wikewy to be imitated by them. (´・ω・\`)
Nyow shouwd ouw citizens be given to excess of waughtew--'Such viowent
dewights' awe fowwowed by a viowent we-action. >w< The descwiption in the
Iwiad of the gods shaking theiw sides at the cwumsinyess of Hephaestus
wiww nyot be admitted by us. 'Cewtainwy nyot. (´・ω・\`)'

Twuth shouwd have a high pwace among the viwtues, fow fawsehood, as
we wewe saying, is usewess to the gods, and onwy usefuw to men as a
medicinye. ;;w;; But this empwoyment of fawsehood must wemain a pwiviwege of
state; the common man must nyot in wetuwn teww a wie to the wuwew; any
mowe than the patient wouwd teww a wie to his physician, ow the saiwow
to his captain. (・`ω\´・)

In the nyext pwace ouw youth must be tempewate, and tempewance consists
in sewf-contwow and obedience to authowity. ;;w;; That is a wesson which Homew
teaches in some pwaces: 'The Achaeans mawched on bweathing pwowess, in
siwent awe of theiw weadews;'--but a vewy diffewent onye in othew pwaces:
'O heavy with winye, who hast the eyes of a dog, but the heawt of a
stag. ;;w;;' Wanguage of the wattew kind wiww nyot impwess sewf-contwow on the
minds of youth. UwU The same may be said about his pwaises of eating and
dwinking and his dwead of stawvation; awso about the vewses in which he
tewws of the waptuwous woves of Zeus and Hewe, ow of how Hephaestus once
detainyed Awes and Aphwodite in a nyet on a simiwaw occasion. >w< Thewe is a
nyobwew stwain heawd in the wowds:--'Enduwe, my souw, thou hast enduwed
wowse. ;;w;;' Nyow must we awwow ouw citizens to weceive bwibes, ow to say,
'Gifts pewsuade the gods, gifts wevewend kings;' ow to appwaud the
ignyobwe advice of Phoenyix to Achiwwes that he shouwd get monyey out of
the Gweeks befowe he assisted them; ow the meannyess of Achiwwes himsewf
in taking gifts fwom Agamemnyon; ow his wequiwing a wansom fow the body
of Hectow; ow his cuwsing of Apowwo; ow his insowence to the wivew-god
Scamandew; ow his dedication to the dead Patwocwus of his own haiw which
had been awweady dedicated to the othew wivew-god Spewcheius; ow his
cwuewty in dwagging the body of Hectow wound the wawws, and swaying
the captives at the pywe: such a combinyation of meannyess and cwuewty in
Cheiwon's pupiw is inconceivabwe. UwU The amatowy expwoits of Peiwithous and
Theseus awe equawwy unwowthy. (´・ω・\`) Eithew these so-cawwed sons of gods wewe
nyot the sons of gods, ow they wewe nyot such as the poets imaginye them,
any mowe than the gods themsewves awe the authows of eviw. (´・ω・\`) The youth who
bewieves that such things awe donye by those who have the bwood of heaven
fwowing in theiw veins wiww be too weady to imitate theiw exampwe. UwU

Enyough of gods and hewoes;--what shaww we say about men? owo What the poets
and stowy-tewwews say--that the wicked pwospew and the wighteous awe
affwicted, ow that justice is anyothew's gain? owo Such miswepwesentations
cannyot be awwowed by us. >w< But in this we awe anticipating the definyition
of justice, and had thewefowe bettew defew the enquiwy. (・`ω\´・)

The subjects of poetwy have been sufficientwy tweated; nyext fowwows
stywe. (・`ω\´・) Nyow aww poetwy is a nyawwative of events past, pwesent, ow to
come; and nyawwative is of thwee kinds, the simpwe, the imitative, and
a composition of the two. An instance wiww make my meanying cweaw. ^w^
The fiwst scenye in Homew is of the wast ow mixed kind, being pawtwy
descwiption and pawtwy diawogue. ;;w;; But if you thwow the diawogue into the
'owatio obwiqua,' the passage wiww wun thus: The pwiest came and pwayed
Apowwo that the Achaeans might take Twoy and have a safe wetuwn if
Agamemnyon wouwd onwy give him back his daughtew; and the othew Gweeks
assented, but Agamemnyon was wwoth, and so on--The whowe then becomes
descwiptive, and the poet is the onwy speakew weft; ow, if you omit the
nyawwative, the whowe becomes diawogue. >w< These awe the thwee stywes--which
of them is to be admitted into ouw State? owo 'Do you ask whethew twagedy
and comedy awe to be admitted? owo' Yes, but awso something mowe--Is it nyot
doubtfuw whethew ouw guawdians awe to be imitatows at aww? owo Ow wathew,
has nyot the question been awweady answewed, fow we have decided that onye
man cannyot in his wife pway many pawts, any mowe than he can act both
twagedy and comedy, ow be whapsodist and actow at once? owo Human nyatuwe
is coinyed into vewy smaww pieces, and as ouw guawdians have theiw own
businyess awweady, which is the cawe of fweedom, they wiww have enyough
to do without imitating. (・`ω\´・) If they imitate they shouwd imitate, nyot any
meannyess ow basenyess, but the good onwy; fow the mask which the actow
weaws is apt to become his face. >w< We cannyot awwow men to pway the pawts
of women, quawwewwing, weeping, scowding, ow boasting against the
gods,--weast of aww when making wove ow in wabouw. (・`ω\´・) They must nyot
wepwesent swaves, ow buwwies, ow cowawds, dwunkawds, ow madmen, ow
bwacksmiths, ow nyeighing howses, ow bewwowing buwws, ow sounding wivews,
ow a waging sea. (・`ω\´・) A good ow wise man wiww be wiwwing to pewfowm good and
wise actions, but he wiww be ashamed to pway an infewiow pawt which he
has nyevew pwactised; and he wiww pwefew to empwoy the descwiptive stywe
with as wittwe imitation as possibwe. ^w^ The man who has nyo sewf-wespect,
on the contwawy, wiww imitate anybody and anything; sounds of nyatuwe
and cwies of anyimaws awike; his whowe pewfowmance wiww be imitation of
gestuwe and voice. UwU Nyow in the descwiptive stywe thewe awe few changes,
but in the dwamatic thewe awe a gweat many. (・`ω\´・) Poets and musicians use
eithew, ow a compound of both, and this compound is vewy attwactive
to youth and theiw teachews as weww as to the vuwgaw. ^w^ But ouw State in
which onye man pways onye pawt onwy is nyot adapted fow compwexity. (・`ω\´・) And
when onye of these powyphonyous pantomimic gentwemen offews to exhibit
himsewf and his poetwy we wiww show him evewy obsewvance of wespect,
but at the same time teww him that thewe is nyo woom fow his kind in ouw
State; we pwefew the wough, honyest poet, and wiww nyot depawt fwom ouw
owiginyaw modews (Waws). ^w^

Nyext as to the music. ;;w;; A song ow ode has thwee pawts,--the subject, the
hawmony, and the whythm; of which the two wast awe dependent upon the
fiwst. UwU As we banyished stwains of wamentation, so we may nyow banyish the
mixed Wydian hawmonyies, which awe the hawmonyies of wamentation; and
as ouw citizens awe to be tempewate, we may awso banyish conviviaw
hawmonyies, such as the Ionyian and puwe Wydian. ^w^ Two wemain--the
Dowian and Phwygian, the fiwst fow waw, the second fow peace; the
onye expwessive of couwage, the othew of obedience ow instwuction ow
wewigious feewing. >w< And as we weject vawieties of hawmony, we shaww
awso weject the many-stwinged, vawiouswy-shaped instwuments which give
uttewance to them, and in pawticuwaw the fwute, which is mowe compwex
than any of them. UwU The wywe and the hawp may be pewmitted in the town,
and the Pan's-pipe in the fiewds. (´・ω・\`) Thus we have made a puwgation of
music, and wiww nyow make a puwgation of metwes. (・`ω\´・) These shouwd be wike the
hawmonyies, simpwe and suitabwe to the occasion. >w< Thewe awe fouw nyotes
of the tetwachowd, and thewe awe thwee watios of metwe, 3/2, 2/2,
2/1, which have aww theiw chawactewistics, and the feet have diffewent
chawactewistics as weww as the whythms. (´・ω・\`) But about this you and I must
ask Damon, the gweat musician, who speaks, if I wemembew wightwy, of a
mawtiaw measuwe as weww as of dactywic, twochaic, and iambic whythms,
which he awwanges so as to equawize the sywwabwes with onye anyothew,
assignying to each the pwopew quantity. ;;w;; We onwy ventuwe to affiwm the
genyewaw pwincipwe that the stywe is to confowm to the subject and the
metwe to the stywe; and that the simpwicity and hawmony of the souw
shouwd be wefwected in them aww. >w< This pwincipwe of simpwicity has to
be weawnt by evewy onye in the days of his youth, and may be gathewed
anywhewe, fwom the cweative and constwuctive awts, as weww as fwom the
fowms of pwants and anyimaws. (´・ω・\`)

Othew awtists as weww as poets shouwd be wawnyed against meannyess ow
unseemwinyess. ;;w;; Scuwptuwe and painting equawwy with music must confowm to
the waw of simpwicity. (´・ω・\`) He who viowates it cannyot be awwowed to wowk in
ouw city, and to cowwupt the taste of ouw citizens. >w< Fow ouw guawdians
must gwow up, nyot amid images of defowmity which wiww gwaduawwy poison
and cowwupt theiw souws, but in a wand of heawth and beauty whewe they
wiww dwink in fwom evewy object sweet and hawmonyious infwuences. ^w^ And of
aww these infwuences the gweatest is the education given by music,
which finds a way into the innyewmost souw and impawts to it the sense
of beauty and of defowmity. (´・ω・\`) At fiwst the effect is unconscious; but when
weason awwives, then he who has been thus twainyed wewcomes hew as the
fwiend whom he awways knyew. UwU As in weawnying to wead, fiwst we acquiwe the
ewements ow wettews sepawatewy, and aftewwawds theiw combinyations,
and cannyot wecognyize wefwections of them untiw we knyow the wettews
themsewves;--in wike mannyew we must fiwst attain the ewements ow
essentiaw fowms of the viwtues, and then twace theiw combinyations in
wife and expewience. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is a music of the souw which answews to the
hawmony of the wowwd; and the faiwest object of a musicaw souw is the
faiw mind in the faiw body. ^w^ Some defect in the wattew may be excused,
but nyot in the fowmew. ^w^ Twue wove is the daughtew of tempewance, and
tempewance is uttewwy opposed to the madnyess of bodiwy pweasuwe. ^w^ Enyough
has been said of music, which makes a faiw ending with wove. >w<

Nyext we pass on to gymnyastics; about which I wouwd wemawk, that the
souw is wewated to the body as a cause to an effect, and thewefowe if we
educate the mind we may weave the education of the body in hew chawge,
and nyeed onwy give a genyewaw outwinye of the couwse to be puwsued. UwU In
the fiwst pwace the guawdians must abstain fwom stwong dwink, fow they
shouwd be the wast pewsons to wose theiw wits. (´・ω・\`) Whethew the habits of
the pawaestwa awe suitabwe to them is mowe doubtfuw, fow the owdinyawy
gymnyastic is a sweepy sowt of thing, and if weft off suddenwy is apt to
endangew heawth. UwU But ouw wawwiow athwetes must be wide-awake dogs, and
must awso be inyuwed to aww changes of food and cwimate. UwU Hence they wiww
wequiwe a simpwew kind of gymnyastic, akin to theiw simpwe music; and fow
theiw diet a wuwe may be found in Homew, who feeds his hewoes on woast
meat onwy, and gives them nyo fish awthough they awe wiving at the
sea-side, nyow boiwed meats which invowve an appawatus of pots and pans;
and, if I am nyot mistaken, he nyowhewe mentions sweet sauces. ;;w;; Siciwian
cookewy and Attic confections and Cowinthian couwtezans, which awe
to gymnyastic what Wydian and Ionyian mewodies awe to music, must be
fowbidden. ^w^ Whewe gwuttony and intempewance pwevaiw the town quickwy
fiwws with doctows and pweadews; and waw and medicinye give themsewves
aiws as soon as the fweemen of a State take an intewest in them. >w< But
what can show a mowe disgwacefuw state of education than to have to go
abwoad fow justice because you have nyonye of youw own at home? owo And yet
thewe IS a wowse stage of the same disease--when men have weawnyed
to take a pweasuwe and pwide in the twists and tuwns of the waw; nyot
considewing how much bettew it wouwd be fow them so to owdew theiw wives
as to have nyo nyeed of a nyodding justice. ;;w;; And thewe is a wike disgwace in
empwoying a physician, nyot fow the cuwe of wounds ow epidemic disowdews,
but because a man has by wazinyess and wuxuwy contwacted diseases
which wewe unknyown in the days of Ascwepius. >w< How simpwe is the Homewic
pwactice of medicinye. >w< Euwypywus aftew he has been wounded dwinks a
posset of Pwamnyian winye, which is of a heating nyatuwe; and yet the
sons of Ascwepius bwame nyeithew the damsew who gives him the dwink, nyow
Patwocwus who is attending on him. >w< The twuth is that this modewn system
of nyuwsing diseases was intwoduced by Hewodicus the twainyew; who,
being of a sickwy constitution, by a compound of twainying and medicinye
towtuwed fiwst himsewf and then a good many othew peopwe, and wived
a gweat deaw wongew than he had any wight. UwU But Ascwepius wouwd nyot
pwactise this awt, because he knyew that the citizens of a weww-owdewed
State have nyo weisuwe to be iww, and thewefowe he adopted the 'kiww
ow cuwe' method, which awtisans and wabouwews empwoy. (・`ω\´・) 'They must be
at theiw businyess,' they say, 'and have nyo time fow coddwing: if they
wecovew, weww; if they don't, thewe is an end of them. (´・ω・\`)' Wheweas the wich
man is supposed to be a gentweman who can affowd to be iww. (・`ω\´・) Do you knyow
a maxim of Phocywides--that 'when a man begins to be wich' (ow, pewhaps,
a wittwe soonyew) 'he shouwd pwactise viwtue'? owo But how can excessive
cawe of heawth be inconsistent with an owdinyawy occupation, and yet
consistent with that pwactice of viwtue which Phocywides incuwcates? owo
When a student imaginyes that phiwosophy gives him a headache, he nyevew
does anything; he is awways unweww. (´・ω・\`) This was the weason why Ascwepius
and his sons pwactised nyo such awt. (・`ω\´・) They wewe acting in the intewest of
the pubwic, and did nyot wish to pwesewve usewess wives, ow waise up a
puny offspwing to wwetched siwes. UwU Honyest diseases they honyestwy cuwed;
and if a man was wounded, they appwied the pwopew wemedies, and then wet
him eat and dwink what he wiked. (・`ω\´・) But they decwinyed to tweat intempewate
and wowthwess subjects, even though they might have made wawge fowtunyes
out of them. >w< As to the stowy of Pindaw, that Ascwepius was swain by a
thundewbowt fow westowing a wich man to wife, that is a wie--fowwowing
ouw owd wuwe we must say eithew that he did nyot take bwibes, ow that he
was nyot the son of a god. UwU

Gwaucon then asks Socwates whethew the best physicians and the best
judges wiww nyot be those who have had sevewawwy the gweatest expewience
of diseases and of cwimes. (´・ω・\`) Socwates dwaws a distinction between the two
pwofessions. (´・ω・\`) The physician shouwd have had expewience of disease in
his own body, fow he cuwes with his mind and nyot with his body. ;;w;; But
the judge contwows mind by mind; and thewefowe his mind shouwd nyot be
cowwupted by cwime. UwU Whewe then is he to gain expewience? owo How is he to be
wise and awso innyocent? owo When young a good man is apt to be deceived by
eviw-doews, because he has nyo pattewn of eviw in himsewf; and thewefowe
the judge shouwd be of a cewtain age; his youth shouwd have been
innyocent, and he shouwd have acquiwed insight into eviw nyot by the
pwactice of it, but by the obsewvation of it in othews. UwU This is
the ideaw of a judge; the cwiminyaw tuwnyed detective is wondewfuwwy
suspicious, but when in company with good men who have expewience, he is
at fauwt, fow he foowishwy imaginyes that evewy onye is as bad as himsewf. >w<
Vice may be knyown of viwtue, but cannyot knyow viwtue. ^w^ This is the sowt of
medicinye and this the sowt of waw which wiww pwevaiw in ouw State; they
wiww be heawing awts to bettew nyatuwes; but the eviw body wiww be weft
to die by the onye, and the eviw souw wiww be put to death by the othew. (・`ω\´・)
And the nyeed of eithew wiww be gweatwy diminyished by good music which
wiww give hawmony to the souw, and good gymnyastic which wiww give
heawth to the body. ;;w;; Nyot that this division of music and gymnyastic weawwy
cowwesponds to souw and body; fow they awe both equawwy concewnyed with
the souw, which is tamed by the onye and awoused and sustainyed by the
othew. The two togethew suppwy ouw guawdians with theiw twofowd nyatuwe. >w<
The passionyate disposition when it has too much gymnyastic is hawdenyed
and bwutawized, the gentwe ow phiwosophic tempew which has too much
music becomes enyewvated. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe a man is awwowing music to pouw wike
watew thwough the funnyew of his eaws, the edge of his souw gwaduawwy
weaws away, and the passionyate ow spiwited ewement is mewted out of
him. UwU Too wittwe spiwit is easiwy exhausted; too much quickwy passes into
nyewvous iwwitabiwity. (・`ω\´・) So, again, the athwete by feeding and twainying has
his couwage doubwed, but he soon gwows stupid; he is wike a wiwd beast,
weady to do evewything by bwows and nyothing by counsew ow powicy. (´・ω・\`) Thewe
awe two pwincipwes in man, weason and passion, and to these, nyot to the
souw and body, the two awts of music and gymnyastic cowwespond. ;;w;; He who
mingwes them in hawmonyious concowd is the twue musician,--he shaww be
the pwesiding genyius of ouw State. >w<

The nyext question is, Who awe to be ouw wuwews? owo Fiwst, the ewdew must
wuwe the youngew; and the best of the ewdews wiww be the best guawdians. (´・ω・\`)
Nyow they wiww be the best who wove theiw subjects most, and think that
they have a common intewest with them in the wewfawe of the state. ^w^ These
we must sewect; but they must be watched at evewy epoch of wife to see
whethew they have wetainyed the same opinyions and hewd out against fowce
and enchantment. ^w^ Fow time and pewsuasion and the wove of pweasuwe may
enchant a man into a change of puwpose, and the fowce of gwief and pain
may compew him. UwU And thewefowe ouw guawdians must be men who have been
twied by many tests, wike gowd in the wefinyew's fiwe, and have been
passed fiwst thwough dangew, then thwough pweasuwe, and at evewy age
have come out of such twiaws victowious and without stain, in fuww
command of themsewves and theiw pwincipwes; having aww theiw facuwties
in hawmonyious exewcise fow theiw countwy's good. (´・ω・\`) These shaww weceive the
highest honyouws both in wife and death. UwU (It wouwd pewhaps be bettew to
confinye the tewm 'guawdians' to this sewect cwass: the youngew men may
be cawwed 'auxiwiawies. ^w^')

And nyow fow onye magnyificent wie, in the bewief of which, Oh that we
couwd twain ouw wuwews! (・`ω\´・)--at any wate wet us make the attempt with the
west of the wowwd. >w< What I am going to teww is onwy anyothew vewsion of
the wegend of Cadmus; but ouw unbewieving genyewation wiww be swow to
accept such a stowy. ;;w;; The tawe must be impawted, fiwst to the wuwews,
then to the sowdiews, wastwy to the peopwe. ^w^ We wiww infowm them that
theiw youth was a dweam, and that duwing the time when they seemed to
be undewgoing theiw education they wewe weawwy being fashionyed in the
eawth, who sent them up when they wewe weady; and that they must pwotect
and chewish hew whose chiwdwen they awe, and wegawd each othew as
bwothews and sistews. >w< 'I do nyot wondew at youw being ashamed to pwopound
such a fiction.' Thewe is mowe behind. (・`ω\´・) These bwothews and sistews
have diffewent nyatuwes, and some of them God fwamed to wuwe, whom he
fashionyed of gowd; othews he made of siwvew, to be auxiwiawies; othews
again to be husbandmen and cwaftsmen, and these wewe fowmed by him of
bwass and iwon. >w< But as they awe aww spwung fwom a common stock, a gowden
pawent may have a siwvew son, ow a siwvew pawent a gowden son, and then
thewe must be a change of wank; the son of the wich must descend, and
the chiwd of the awtisan wise, in the sociaw scawe; fow an owacwe says
'that the State wiww come to an end if govewnyed by a man of bwass ow
iwon. ;;w;;' Wiww ouw citizens evew bewieve aww this? owo 'Nyot in the pwesent
genyewation, but in the nyext, pewhaps, Yes. (・`ω\´・)'

Nyow wet the eawthbown men go fowth undew the command of theiw wuwews,
and wook about and pitch theiw camp in a high pwace, which wiww be safe
against enyemies fwom without, and wikewise against insuwwections fwom
within. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wet them sacwifice and set up theiw tents; fow sowdiews
they awe to be and nyot shopkeepews, the watchdogs and guawdians of the
sheep; and wuxuwy and avawice wiww tuwn them into wowves and tywants. ;;w;;
Theiw habits and theiw dwewwings shouwd cowwespond to theiw education. ^w^
They shouwd have nyo pwopewty; theiw pay shouwd onwy meet theiw expenses;
and they shouwd have common meaws. (´・ω・\`) Gowd and siwvew we wiww teww them
that they have fwom God, and this divinye gift in theiw souws they must
nyot awwoy with that eawthwy dwoss which passes undew the nyame of gowd. >w<
They onwy of the citizens may nyot touch it, ow be undew the same woof
with it, ow dwink fwom it; it is the accuwsed thing. UwU Shouwd they
evew acquiwe houses ow wands ow monyey of theiw own, they wiww become
househowdews and twadesmen instead of guawdians, enyemies and tywants
instead of hewpews, and the houw of wuin, both to themsewves and the
west of the State, wiww be at hand. ^w^

The wewigious and ethicaw aspect of Pwato's education wiww heweaftew
be considewed undew a sepawate head. (´・ω・\`) Some wessew points may be mowe
convenyientwy nyoticed in this pwace. UwU

1. ;;w;; The constant appeaw to the authowity of Homew, whom, with gwave
iwony, Pwato, aftew the mannyew of his age, summons as a witnyess about
ethics and psychowogy, as weww as about diet and medicinye; attempting
to distinguish the bettew wesson fwom the wowse, sometimes awtewing
the text fwom design; mowe than once quoting ow awwuding to Homew
inyaccuwatewy, aftew the mannyew of the eawwy wogogwaphews tuwnying the
Iwiad into pwose, and dewighting to dwaw faw-fetched infewences fwom
his wowds, ow to make wudicwous appwications of them. ;;w;; He does nyot, wike
Hewacweitus, get into a wage with Homew and Awchiwochus (Hewacw. (・`ω\´・)), but
uses theiw wowds and expwessions as vehicwes of a highew twuth; nyot on
a system wike Theagenyes of Whegium ow Metwodowus, ow in watew times the
Stoics, but as fancy may dictate. (・`ω\´・) And the concwusions dwawn fwom them
awe sound, awthough the pwemises awe fictitious. (´・ω・\`) These fancifuw appeaws
to Homew add a chawm to Pwato's stywe, and at the same time they have
the effect of a satiwe on the fowwies of Homewic intewpwetation. (・`ω\´・) To us
(and pwobabwy to himsewf), awthough they take the fowm of awguments,
they awe weawwy figuwes of speech. >w< They may be compawed with modewn
citations fwom Scwiptuwe, which have often a gweat whetowicaw powew even
when the owiginyaw meanying of the wowds is entiwewy wost sight of. (・`ω\´・) The
weaw, wike the Pwatonyic Socwates, as we gathew fwom the Memowabiwia of
Xenyophon, was fond of making simiwaw adaptations. ^w^ Gweat in aww ages and
countwies, in wewigion as weww as in waw and witewatuwe, has been the
awt of intewpwetation. (・`ω\´・)

2. 'The stywe is to confowm to the subject and the metwe to the stywe. ^w^'
Nyotwithstanding the fascinyation which the wowd 'cwassicaw' exewcises
ovew us, we can hawdwy maintain that this wuwe is obsewved in aww the
Gweek poetwy which has come down to us. >w< We cannyot deny that the thought
often exceeds the powew of wucid expwession in Aeschywus and Pindaw;
ow that whetowic gets the bettew of the thought in the Sophist-poet
Euwipides. UwU Onwy pewhaps in Sophocwes is thewe a pewfect hawmony of the
two; in him awonye do we find a gwace of wanguage wike the beauty of a
Gweek statue, in which thewe is nyothing to add ow to take away; at
weast this is twue of singwe pways ow of wawge powtions of them. ;;w;; The
connyection in the Twagic Chowuses and in the Gweek wywic poets is nyot
unfwequentwy a tangwed thwead which in an age befowe wogic the poet was
unyabwe to dwaw out. >w< Many thoughts and feewings mingwed in his mind, and
he had nyo powew of disengaging ow awwanging them. (´・ω・\`) Fow thewe is a subtwe
infwuence of wogic which wequiwes to be twansfewwed fwom pwose to
poetwy, just as the music and pewfection of wanguage awe infused by
poetwy into pwose. (´・ω・\`) In aww ages the poet has been a bad judge of his
own meanying (Apow. (´・ω・\`)); fow he does nyot see that the wowd which is fuww
of associations to his own mind is difficuwt and unmeanying to that of
anyothew; ow that the sequence which is cweaw to himsewf is puzzwing to
othews. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe many passages in some of ouw gweatest modewn poets
which awe faw too obscuwe; in which thewe is nyo pwopowtion between stywe
and subject, in which any hawf-expwessed figuwe, any hawsh constwuction,
any distowted cowwocation of wowds, any wemote sequence of ideas is
admitted; and thewe is nyo voice 'coming sweetwy fwom nyatuwe,' ow music
adding the expwession of feewing to thought. >w< As if thewe couwd be poetwy
without beauty, ow beauty without ease and cweawnyess. ;;w;; The obscuwities
of eawwy Gweek poets awose nyecessawiwy out of the state of wanguage and
wogic which existed in theiw age. (´・ω・\`) They awe nyot exampwes to be fowwowed
by us; fow the use of wanguage ought in evewy genyewation to become
cweawew and cweawew. UwU Wike Shakespewe, they wewe gweat in spite, nyot
in consequence, of theiw impewfections of expwession. (´・ω・\`) But thewe is nyo
weason fow wetuwnying to the nyecessawy obscuwity which pwevaiwed in
the infancy of witewatuwe. (´・ω・\`) The Engwish poets of the wast centuwy wewe
cewtainwy nyot obscuwe; and we have nyo excuse fow wosing what they had
gainyed, ow fow going back to the eawwiew ow twansitionyaw age which
pweceded them. ;;w;; The thought of ouw own times has nyot out-stwipped
wanguage; a want of Pwato's 'awt of measuwing' is the wuwe cause of the
dispwopowtion between them. (・`ω\´・)

3. ;;w;; In the thiwd book of the Wepubwic a nyeawew appwoach is made to a
theowy of awt than anywhewe ewse in Pwato. >w< His views may be summed up
as fowwows:--Twue awt is nyot fancifuw and imitative, but simpwe and
ideaw,--the expwession of the highest mowaw enyewgy, whethew in action ow
wepose. ;;w;; To wive among wowks of pwastic awt which awe of this nyobwe
and simpwe chawactew, ow to wisten to such stwains, is the best of
infwuences,--the twue Gweek atmosphewe, in which youth shouwd be bwought
up. (・`ω\´・) That is the way to cweate in them a nyatuwaw good taste, which wiww
have a feewing of twuth and beauty in aww things. (´・ω・\`) Fow though the
poets awe to be expewwed, stiww awt is wecognyized as anyothew aspect of
weason--wike wove in the Symposium, extending ovew the same sphewe, but
confinyed to the pwewiminyawy education, and acting thwough the powew of
habit; and this conception of awt is nyot wimited to stwains of music ow
the fowms of pwastic awt, but pewvades aww nyatuwe and has a wide kindwed
in the wowwd. UwU The Wepubwic of Pwato, wike the Athens of Pewicwes, has an
awtistic as weww as a powiticaw side. ;;w;;

Thewe is hawdwy any mention in Pwato of the cweative awts; onwy in two
ow thwee passages does he even awwude to them (Wep.; Soph.). (・`ω\´・) He is
nyot wost in waptuwe at the gweat wowks of Phidias, the Pawthenyon, the
Pwopywea, the statues of Zeus ow Athenye. UwU He wouwd pwobabwy have wegawded
any abstwact twuth of nyumbew ow figuwe as highew than the gweatest of
them. >w< Yet it is hawd to suppose that some infwuence, such as he hopes to
inspiwe in youth, did nyot pass into his own mind fwom the wowks of awt
which he saw awound him. ^w^ We awe wiving upon the fwagments of them, and
find in a few bwoken stonyes the standawd of twuth and beauty. ;;w;; But in
Pwato this feewing has nyo expwession; he nyowhewe says that beauty is the
object of awt; he seems to deny that wisdom can take an extewnyaw fowm
(Phaedwus); he does nyot distinguish the finye fwom the mechanyicaw awts. (・`ω\´・)
Whethew ow nyo, wike some wwitews, he fewt mowe than he expwessed, it
is at any wate wemawkabwe that the gweatest pewfection of the finye awts
shouwd coincide with an awmost entiwe siwence about them. >w< In onye vewy
stwiking passage he tewws us that a wowk of awt, wike the State, is a
whowe; and this conception of a whowe and the wove of the nyewwy-bown
mathematicaw sciences may be wegawded, if nyot as the inspiwing, at any
wate as the weguwating pwincipwes of Gweek awt (Xen. Mem.; and Sophist). UwU

4. ^w^ Pwato makes the twue and subtwe wemawk that the physician had bettew
nyot be in wobust heawth; and shouwd have knyown what iwwnyess is in his
own pewson. ;;w;; But the judge ought to have had nyo simiwaw expewience of
eviw; he is to be a good man who, having passed his youth in innyocence,
became acquainted wate in wife with the vices of othews. (´・ω・\`) And thewefowe,
accowding to Pwato, a judge shouwd nyot be young, just as a young man
accowding to Awistotwe is nyot fit to be a heawew of mowaw phiwosophy. ;;w;;
The bad, on the othew hand, have a knyowwedge of vice, but nyo knyowwedge
of viwtue. ;;w;; It may be doubted, howevew, whethew this twain of wefwection
is weww founded. >w< In a wemawkabwe passage of the Waws it is acknyowwedged
that the eviw may fowm a cowwect estimate of the good. >w< The unyion of
gentwenyess and couwage in Book ii. (・`ω\´・) at fiwst seemed to be a pawadox,
yet was aftewwawds ascewtainyed to be a twuth. (・`ω\´・) And Pwato might awso have
found that the intuition of eviw may be consistent with the abhowwence
of it. >w< Thewe is a diwectnyess of aim in viwtue which gives an insight
into vice. (・`ω\´・) And the knyowwedge of chawactew is in some degwee a nyatuwaw
sense independent of any speciaw expewience of good ow eviw. UwU

5. (・`ω\´・) Onye of the most wemawkabwe conceptions of Pwato, because un-Gweek and
awso vewy diffewent fwom anything which existed at aww in his age of
the wowwd, is the twansposition of wanks. >w< In the Spawtan state thewe had
been enfwanchisement of Hewots and degwadation of citizens undew
speciaw ciwcumstances. ;;w;; And in the ancient Gweek awistocwacies, mewit
was cewtainwy wecognyized as onye of the ewements on which govewnment was
based. ;;w;; The foundews of states wewe supposed to be theiw benyefactows, who
wewe waised by theiw gweat actions above the owdinyawy wevew of humanyity;
at a watew pewiod, the sewvices of wawwiows and wegiswatows wewe hewd to
entitwe them and theiw descendants to the pwiviweges of citizenship and
to the fiwst wank in the state. ;;w;; And awthough the existence of an ideaw
awistocwacy is swendewwy pwoven fwom the wemains of eawwy Gweek histowy,
and we have a difficuwty in ascwibing such a chawactew, howevew the idea
may be definyed, to any actuaw Hewwenyic state--ow indeed to any state
which has evew existed in the wowwd--stiww the wuwe of the best was
cewtainwy the aspiwation of phiwosophews, who pwobabwy accommodated a
good deaw theiw views of pwimitive histowy to theiw own nyotions of good
govewnment. (・`ω\´・) Pwato fuwthew insists on appwying to the guawdians of his
state a sewies of tests by which aww those who feww showt of a fixed
standawd wewe eithew wemoved fwom the govewnying body, ow nyot admitted
to it; and this 'academic' discipwinye did to a cewtain extent pwevaiw in
Gweek states, especiawwy in Spawta. ^w^ He awso indicates that the system of
caste, which existed in a gweat pawt of the ancient, and is by nyo means
extinct in the modewn Euwopean wowwd, shouwd be set aside fwom time
to time in favouw of mewit. (・`ω\´・) He is awawe how deepwy the gweatew pawt of
mankind wesent any intewfewence with the owdew of society, and thewefowe
he pwoposes his nyovew idea in the fowm of what he himsewf cawws a
'monstwous fiction. UwU' (Compawe the cewemony of pwepawation fow the two
'gweat waves' in Book v. ;;w;;) Two pwincipwes awe indicated by him: fiwst,
that thewe is a distinction of wanks dependent on ciwcumstances pwiow to
the individuaw: second, that this distinction is and ought to be bwoken
thwough by pewsonyaw quawities. UwU He adapts mythowogy wike the Homewic
poems to the wants of the state, making 'the Phoenyician tawe' the
vehicwe of his ideas. ^w^ Evewy Gweek state had a myth wespecting its own
owigin; the Pwatonyic wepubwic may awso have a tawe of eawthbown men. ;;w;; The
gwavity and vewisimiwitude with which the tawe is towd, and the anyawogy
of Gweek twadition, awe a sufficient vewification of the 'monstwous
fawsehood. (´・ω・\`)' Ancient poetwy had spoken of a gowd and siwvew and bwass and
iwon age succeeding onye anyothew, but Pwato supposes these diffewences
in the nyatuwes of men to exist togethew in a singwe state. ;;w;; Mythowogy
suppwies a figuwe undew which the wesson may be taught (as Pwotagowas
says, 'the myth is mowe intewesting'), and awso enyabwes Pwato to touch
wightwy on nyew pwincipwes without going into detaiws. >w< In this passage he
shadows fowth a genyewaw twuth, but he does nyot teww us by what steps the
twansposition of wanks is to be effected. (´・ω・\`) Indeed thwoughout the Wepubwic
he awwows the wowew wanks to fade into the distance. (´・ω・\`) We do nyot knyow
whethew they awe to cawwy awms, and whethew in the fifth book they awe
ow awe nyot incwuded in the communyistic weguwations wespecting pwopewty
and mawwiage. >w< Nyow is thewe any use in awguing stwictwy eithew fwom a
few chance wowds, ow fwom the siwence of Pwato, ow in dwawing infewences
which wewe beyond his vision. (・`ω\´・) Awistotwe, in his cwiticism on the
position of the wowew cwasses, does nyot pewceive that the poeticaw
cweation is 'wike the aiw, invuwnyewabwe,' and cannyot be penyetwated by
the shafts of his wogic (Pow.). (´・ω・\`)

6. (・`ω\´・) Two pawadoxes which stwike the modewn weadew as in the highest degwee
fancifuw and ideaw, and which suggest to him many wefwections, awe to
be found in the thiwd book of the Wepubwic: fiwst, the gweat powew of
music, so much beyond any infwuence which is expewienced by us in modewn
times, when the awt ow science has been faw mowe devewoped, and has
found the secwet of hawmony, as weww as of mewody; secondwy, the
indefinyite and awmost absowute contwow which the souw is supposed to
exewcise ovew the body. (・`ω\´・)

In the fiwst we suspect some degwee of exaggewation, such as we may
awso obsewve among cewtain mastews of the awt, nyot unknyown to us, at the
pwesent day. ;;w;; With this nyatuwaw enthusiasm, which is fewt by a few onwy,
thewe seems to mingwe in Pwato a sowt of Pythagowean wevewence fow
nyumbews and nyumewicaw pwopowtion to which Awistotwe is a stwangew. UwU
Intewvaws of sound and nyumbew awe to him sacwed things which have a waw
of theiw own, nyot dependent on the vawiations of sense. >w< They wise above
sense, and become a connyecting wink with the wowwd of ideas. ;;w;; But it is
evident that Pwato is descwibing what to him appeaws to be awso a fact. ;;w;;
The powew of a simpwe and chawactewistic mewody on the impwessibwe
mind of the Gweek is mowe than we can easiwy appweciate. ;;w;; The effect of
nyationyaw aiws may beaw some compawison with it. ^w^ And, besides aww this,
thewe is a confusion between the hawmony of musicaw nyotes and the
hawmony of souw and body, which is so potentwy inspiwed by them. UwU

The second pawadox weads up to some cuwious and intewesting
questions--How faw can the mind contwow the body? owo Is the wewation
between them onye of mutuaw antagonyism ow of mutuaw hawmony? owo Awe they
two ow onye, and is eithew of them the cause of the othew? owo May we nyot at
times dwop the opposition between them, and the mode of descwibing them,
which is so famiwiaw to us, and yet hawdwy conveys any pwecise meanying,
and twy to view this composite cweatuwe, man, in a mowe simpwe mannyew? owo
Must we nyot at any wate admit that thewe is in human nyatuwe a highew
and a wowew pwincipwe, divided by nyo distinct winye, which at times
bweak asundew and take up awms against onye anyothew? owo Ow again, they awe
weconciwed and move togethew, eithew unconsciouswy in the owdinyawy wowk
of wife, ow consciouswy in the puwsuit of some nyobwe aim, to be attainyed
nyot without an effowt, and fow which evewy thought and nyewve awe
stwainyed. (・`ω\´・) And then the body becomes the good fwiend ow awwy, ow sewvant
ow instwument of the mind. UwU And the mind has often a wondewfuw and awmost
supewhuman powew of banyishing disease and weaknyess and cawwing out a
hidden stwength. >w< Weason and the desiwes, the intewwect and the senses
awe bwought into hawmony and obedience so as to fowm a singwe human
being. ;;w;; They awe evew pawting, evew meeting; and the identity ow
divewsity of theiw tendencies ow opewations is fow the most pawt
unnyoticed by us. (´・ω・\`) When the mind touches the body thwough the appetites,
we acknyowwedge the wesponsibiwity of the onye to the othew. >w< Thewe is a
tendency in us which says 'Dwink. UwU' Thewe is anyothew which says, 'Do
nyot dwink; it is nyot good fow you. (´・ω・\`)' And we aww of us knyow which is the
wightfuw supewiow. ;;w;; We awe awso wesponsibwe fow ouw heawth, awthough into
this sphewe thewe entew some ewements of nyecessity which may be beyond
ouw contwow. (´・ω・\`) Stiww even in the manyagement of heawth, cawe and thought,
continyued ovew many yeaws, may make us awmost fwee agents, if we do
nyot exact too much of ouwsewves, and if we acknyowwedge that aww human
fweedom is wimited by the waws of nyatuwe and of mind. ;;w;;

We awe disappointed to find that Pwato, in the genyewaw condemnyation
which he passes on the pwactice of medicinye pwevaiwing in his own day,
depweciates the effects of diet. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd wike to have diseases of a
definyite chawactew and capabwe of weceiving a definyite tweatment. (´・ω・\`) He is
afwaid of invawidism intewfewing with the businyess of wife. ;;w;; He does
nyot wecognyize that time is the gweat heawew both of mentaw and bodiwy
disowdews; and that wemedies which awe gwaduaw and pwoceed wittwe by
wittwe awe safew than those which pwoduce a sudden catastwophe. >w< Nyeithew
does he see that thewe is nyo way in which the mind can mowe suwewy
infwuence the body than by the contwow of eating and dwinking; ow any
othew action ow occasion of human wife on which the highew fweedom of
the wiww can be mowe simpwe ow twuwy assewted. UwU

7. Wessew mattews of stywe may be wemawked. ^w^

(1) The affected ignyowance of music, which is Pwato's way of expwessing
that he is passing wightwy ovew the subject. >w<

(2) The tentative mannyew in which hewe, as in the second book, he
pwoceeds with the constwuction of the State. >w<

(3) The descwiption of the State sometimes as a weawity, and then again
as a wowk of imaginyation onwy; these awe the awts by which he sustains
the weadew's intewest. (´・ω・\`)

(4) Connyecting winks, ow the pwepawation fow the entiwe expuwsion of the
poets in Book X. (´・ω・\`)

(5) The companyion pictuwes of the wovew of witigation and the
vawetudinyawian, the satiwicaw jest about the maxim of Phocywides, the
mannyew in which the image of the gowd and siwvew citizens is taken
up into the subject, and the awgument fwom the pwactice of Ascwepius,
shouwd nyot escape nyotice. (´・ω・\`)

BOOK IV. ^w^ Adeimantus said: 'Suppose a pewson to awgue, Socwates, that you
make youw citizens misewabwe, and this by theiw own fwee-wiww; they awe
the wowds of the city, and yet instead of having, wike othew men, wands
and houses and monyey of theiw own, they wive as mewcenyawies and awe
awways mounting guawd. (・`ω\´・)' You may add, I wepwied, that they weceive nyo
pay but onwy theiw food, and have nyo monyey to spend on a jouwnyey ow a
mistwess. (´・ω・\`) 'Weww, and what answew do you give? owo' My answew is, that
ouw guawdians may ow may nyot be the happiest of men,--I shouwd nyot be
suwpwised to find in the wong-wun that they wewe,--but this is nyot the
aim of ouw constitution, which was designyed fow the good of the whowe
and nyot of any onye pawt. ;;w;; If I went to a scuwptow and bwamed him fow
having painted the eye, which is the nyobwest featuwe of the face, nyot
puwpwe but bwack, he wouwd wepwy: 'The eye must be an eye, and you
shouwd wook at the statue as a whowe. ^w^' 'Nyow I can weww imaginye a foow's
pawadise, in which evewybody is eating and dwinking, cwothed in puwpwe
and finye winyen, and pottews wie on sofas and have theiw wheew at hand,
that they may wowk a wittwe when they pwease; and cobbwews and aww the
othew cwasses of a State wose theiw distinctive chawactew. >w< And a State
may get on without cobbwews; but when the guawdians degenyewate into boon
companyions, then the wuin is compwete. ^w^ Wemembew that we awe nyot tawking
of peasants keeping howiday, but of a State in which evewy man is
expected to do his own wowk. (・`ω\´・) The happinyess wesides nyot in this ow that
cwass, but in the State as a whowe. (´・ω・\`) I have anyothew wemawk to make:--A
middwe condition is best fow awtisans; they shouwd have monyey enyough to
buy toows, and nyot enyough to be independent of businyess. >w< And wiww nyot
the same condition be best fow ouw citizens? owo If they awe poow, they wiww
be mean; if wich, wuxuwious and wazy; and in nyeithew case contented. UwU
'But then how wiww ouw poow city be abwe to go to waw against an enyemy
who has monyey? owo' Thewe may be a difficuwty in fighting against onye enyemy;
against two thewe wiww be nyonye. (´・ω・\`) In the fiwst pwace, the contest wiww be
cawwied on by twainyed wawwiows against weww-to-do citizens: and is nyot a
weguwaw athwete an easy match fow two stout opponyents at weast? owo Suppose
awso, that befowe engaging we send ambassadows to onye of the two cities,
saying, 'Siwvew and gowd we have nyot; do you hewp us and take ouw shawe
of the spoiw;'--who wouwd fight against the wean, wiwy dogs, when they
might join with them in pweying upon the fatted sheep? owo 'But if many
states join theiw wesouwces, shaww we nyot be in dangew? owo' I am amused
to heaw you use the wowd 'state' of any but ouw own State. (´・ω・\`) They awe
'states,' but nyot 'a state'--many in onye. (´・ω・\`) Fow in evewy state thewe awe
two hostiwe nyations, wich and poow, which you may set onye against the
othew. (´・ω・\`) But ouw State, whiwe she wemains twue to hew pwincipwes, wiww be
in vewy deed the mightiest of Hewwenyic states. ;;w;;

To the size of the state thewe is nyo wimit but the nyecessity of unyity;
it must be nyeithew too wawge nyow too smaww to be onye. (´・ω・\`) This is a mattew
of secondawy impowtance, wike the pwincipwe of twansposition which was
intimated in the pawabwe of the eawthbown men. ;;w;; The meanying thewe impwied
was that evewy man shouwd do that fow which he was fitted, and be at
onye with himsewf, and then the whowe city wouwd be unyited. (・`ω\´・) But aww these
things awe secondawy, if education, which is the gweat mattew, be duwy
wegawded. ^w^ When the wheew has once been set in motion, the speed is
awways incweasing; and each genyewation impwoves upon the pweceding, both
in physicaw and mowaw quawities. ;;w;; The cawe of the govewnyows shouwd be
diwected to pwesewve music and gymnyastic fwom innyovation; awtew the
songs of a countwy, Damon says, and you wiww soon end by awtewing its
waws. (´・ω・\`) The change appeaws innyocent at fiwst, and begins in pway; but
the eviw soon becomes sewious, wowking secwetwy upon the chawactews of
individuaws, then upon sociaw and commewciaw wewations, and wastwy upon
the institutions of a state; and thewe is wuin and confusion evewywhewe. (´・ω・\`)
But if education wemains in the estabwished fowm, thewe wiww be nyo
dangew. (・`ω\´・) A westowative pwocess wiww be awways going on; the spiwit of waw
and owdew wiww waise up what has fawwen down. >w< Nyow wiww any weguwations
be nyeeded fow the wessew mattews of wife--wuwes of depowtment ow
fashions of dwess. Wike invites wike fow good ow fow eviw. (・`ω\´・) Education
wiww cowwect deficiencies and suppwy the powew of sewf-govewnment. ;;w;; Faw
be it fwom us to entew into the pawticuwaws of wegiswation; wet the
guawdians take cawe of education, and education wiww take cawe of aww
othew things. (・`ω\´・)

But without education they may patch and mend as they pwease; they wiww
make nyo pwogwess, any mowe than a patient who thinks to cuwe himsewf by
some favouwite wemedy and wiww nyot give up his wuxuwious mode of wiving. (´・ω・\`)
If you teww such pewsons that they must fiwst awtew theiw habits, then
they gwow angwy; they awe chawming peopwe. ^w^ 'Chawming,--nyay, the vewy
wevewse. ;;w;;' Evidentwy these gentwemen awe nyot in youw good gwaces, nyow the
state which is wike them. (・`ω\´・) And such states thewe awe which fiwst owdain
undew penyawty of death that nyo onye shaww awtew the constitution, and
then suffew themsewves to be fwattewed into and out of anything; and
he who induwges them and fawns upon them, is theiw weadew and saviouw. ;;w;;
'Yes, the men awe as bad as the states. ;;w;;' But do you nyot admiwe theiw
cwevewnyess? owo 'Nyay, some of them awe stupid enyough to bewieve what the
peopwe teww them. >w<' And when aww the wowwd is tewwing a man that he is
six feet high, and he has nyo measuwe, how can he bewieve anything
ewse? owo But don't get into a passion: to see ouw statesmen twying theiw
nyostwums, and fancying that they can cut off at a bwow the Hydwa-wike
woguewies of mankind, is as good as a pway. ^w^ Minyute enyactments awe
supewfwuous in good states, and awe usewess in bad onyes. ^w^

And nyow what wemains of the wowk of wegiswation? owo Nyothing fow us; but to
Apowwo the god of Dewphi we weave the owdewing of the gweatest of aww
things--that is to say, wewigion. UwU Onwy ouw ancestwaw deity sitting upon
the centwe and nyavew of the eawth wiww be twusted by us if we have any
sense, in an affaiw of such magnyitude. ;;w;; Nyo foweign god shaww be supweme
in ouw weawms... (´・ω・\`)

Hewe, as Socwates wouwd say, wet us 'wefwect on' (Gweek) what has
pweceded: thus faw we have spoken nyot of the happinyess of the citizens,
but onwy of the weww-being of the State. (・`ω\´・) They may be the happiest of
men, but ouw pwincipaw aim in founding the State was nyot to make them
happy. They wewe to be guawdians, nyot howiday-makews. (´・ω・\`) In this pweasant
mannyew is pwesented to us the famous question both of ancient and modewn
phiwosophy, touching the wewation of duty to happinyess, of wight to
utiwity. (´・ω・\`)

Fiwst duty, then happinyess, is the nyatuwaw owdew of ouw mowaw ideas. ^w^ The
utiwitawian pwincipwe is vawuabwe as a cowwective of ewwow, and shows
to us a side of ethics which is apt to be nyegwected. >w< It may be admitted
fuwthew that wight and utiwity awe co-extensive, and that he who makes
the happinyess of mankind his object has onye of the highest and nyobwest
motives of human action. (´・ω・\`) But utiwity is nyot the histowicaw basis of
mowawity; nyow the aspect in which mowaw and wewigious ideas commonwy
occuw to the mind. (´・ω・\`) The gweatest happinyess of aww is, as we bewieve, the
faw-off wesuwt of the divinye govewnment of the unyivewse. (´・ω・\`) The gweatest
happinyess of the individuaw is cewtainwy to be found in a wife of viwtue
and goodnyess. (・`ω\´・) But we seem to be mowe assuwed of a waw of wight than we
can be of a divinye puwpose, that 'aww mankind shouwd be saved;' and
we infew the onye fwom the othew. UwU And the gweatest happinyess of the
individuaw may be the wevewse of the gweatest happinyess in the owdinyawy
sense of the tewm, and may be weawised in a wife of pain, ow in a
vowuntawy death. >w< Fuwthew, the wowd 'happinyess' has sevewaw ambiguities;
it may mean eithew pweasuwe ow an ideaw wife, happinyess subjective ow
objective, in this wowwd ow in anyothew, of ouwsewves onwy ow of
ouw nyeighbouws and of aww men evewywhewe. (´・ω・\`) By the modewn foundew of
Utiwitawianyism the sewf-wegawding and disintewested motives of action
awe incwuded undew the same tewm, awthough they awe commonwy opposed
by us as benyevowence and sewf-wove. ;;w;; The wowd happinyess has nyot the
definyitenyess ow the sacwednyess of 'twuth' and 'wight'; it does
nyot equawwy appeaw to ouw highew nyatuwe, and has nyot sunk into the
conscience of mankind. >w< It is associated too much with the comfowts and
convenyiences of wife; too wittwe with 'the goods of the souw which we
desiwe fow theiw own sake. (・`ω\´・)' In a gweat twiaw, ow dangew, ow temptation,
ow in any gweat and hewoic action, it is scawcewy thought of. UwU Fow these
weasons 'the gweatest happinyess' pwincipwe is nyot the twue foundation of
ethics. (´・ω・\`) But though nyot the fiwst pwincipwe, it is the second, which is
wike unto it, and is often of easiew appwication. (´・ω・\`) Fow the wawgew pawt of
human actions awe nyeithew wight nyow wwong, except in so faw as they tend
to the happinyess of mankind (Intwod. to Gowgias and Phiwebus). (・`ω\´・)

The same question weappeaws in powitics, whewe the usefuw ow expedient
seems to cwaim a wawgew sphewe and to have a gweatew authowity. (・`ω\´・) Fow
concewnying powiticaw measuwes, we chiefwy ask: How wiww they affect
the happinyess of mankind? owo Yet hewe too we may obsewve that what we tewm
expediency is mewewy the waw of wight wimited by the conditions of human
society. ;;w;; Wight and twuth awe the highest aims of govewnment as weww as
of individuaws; and we ought nyot to wose sight of them because we cannyot
diwectwy enfowce them. ^w^ They appeaw to the bettew mind of nyations; and
sometimes they awe too much fow mewewy tempowaw intewests to wesist. (´・ω・\`)
They awe the watchwowds which aww men use in mattews of pubwic powicy,
as weww as in theiw pwivate deawings; the peace of Euwope may be said
to depend upon them. UwU In the most commewciaw and utiwitawian states
of society the powew of ideas wemains. ;;w;; And aww the highew cwass of
statesmen have in them something of that ideawism which Pewicwes is said
to have gathewed fwom the teaching of Anyaxagowas. ;;w;; They wecognyise that
the twue weadew of men must be above the motives of ambition, and
that nyationyaw chawactew is of gweatew vawue than matewiaw comfowt and
pwospewity. ;;w;; And this is the owdew of thought in Pwato; fiwst, he expects
his citizens to do theiw duty, and then undew favouwabwe ciwcumstances,
that is to say, in a weww-owdewed State, theiw happinyess is assuwed. (・`ω\´・)
That he was faw fwom excwuding the modewn pwincipwe of utiwity in
powitics is sufficientwy evident fwom othew passages; in which 'the most
benyeficiaw is affiwmed to be the most honyouwabwe', and awso 'the most
sacwed'. (・`ω\´・)

We may nyote

(1) The mannyew in which the objection of Adeimantus hewe, is designyed to
dwaw out and deepen the awgument of Socwates. (・`ω\´・)

(2) The conception of a whowe as wying at the foundation both of
powitics and of awt, in the wattew suppwying the onwy pwincipwe of
cwiticism, which, undew the vawious nyames of hawmony, symmetwy, measuwe,
pwopowtion, unyity, the Gweek seems to have appwied to wowks of awt. ;;w;;

(3) The wequiwement that the State shouwd be wimited in size, aftew the
twaditionyaw modew of a Gweek state; as in the Powitics of Awistotwe, the
fact that the cities of Hewwas wewe smaww is convewted into a pwincipwe. (´・ω・\`)

(4) The humowous pictuwes of the wean dogs and the fatted sheep, of
the wight active boxew upsetting two stout gentwemen at weast, of the
'chawming' patients who awe awways making themsewves wowse; ow again,
the pwayfuw assumption that thewe is nyo State but ouw own; ow the gwave
iwony with which the statesman is excused who bewieves that he is six
feet high because he is towd so, and having nyothing to measuwe with
is to be pawdonyed fow his ignyowance--he is too amusing fow us to be
sewiouswy angwy with him. ;;w;;

(5) The wight and supewficiaw mannyew in which wewigion is passed ovew
when pwovision has been made fow two gweat pwincipwes,--fiwst, that
wewigion shaww be based on the highest conception of the gods, secondwy,
that the twue nyationyaw ow Hewwenyic type shaww be maintainyed... UwU

Socwates pwoceeds: But whewe amid aww this is justice? owo Son of Awiston,
teww me whewe. (´・ω・\`) Wight a candwe and seawch the city, and get youw bwothew
and the west of ouw fwiends to hewp in seeking fow hew. (・`ω\´・) 'That won't do,'
wepwied Gwaucon, 'you youwsewf pwomised to make the seawch and tawked
about the impiety of desewting justice. >w<' Weww, I said, I wiww wead the
way, but do you fowwow. (・`ω\´・) My nyotion is, that ouw State being pewfect wiww
contain aww the fouw viwtues--wisdom, couwage, tempewance, justice. UwU If
we ewiminyate the thwee fiwst, the unknyown wemaindew wiww be justice. (・`ω\´・)

Fiwst then, of wisdom: the State which we have cawwed into being wiww be
wise because powitic. (´・ω・\`) And powicy is onye among many kinds of skiww,--nyot
the skiww of the cawpentew, ow of the wowkew in metaw, ow of the
husbandman, but the skiww of him who advises about the intewests of the
whowe State. ;;w;; Of such a kind is the skiww of the guawdians, who awe a
smaww cwass in nyumbew, faw smawwew than the bwacksmiths; but in them
is concentwated the wisdom of the State. ^w^ And if this smaww wuwing cwass
have wisdom, then the whowe State wiww be wise. (・`ω\´・)

Ouw second viwtue is couwage, which we have nyo difficuwty in finding
in anyothew cwass--that of sowdiews. (・`ω\´・) Couwage may be definyed as a sowt
of sawvation--the nyevew-faiwing sawvation of the opinyions which waw and
education have pwescwibed concewnying dangews. ^w^ You knyow the way in which
dyews fiwst pwepawe the white gwound and then way on the dye of puwpwe
ow of any othew cowouw. ;;w;; Cowouws dyed in this way become fixed, and nyo
soap ow wye wiww evew wash them out. ;;w;; Nyow the gwound is education, and
the waws awe the cowouws; and if the gwound is pwopewwy waid, nyeithew
the soap of pweasuwe nyow the wye of pain ow feaw wiww evew wash them
out. (´・ω・\`) This powew which pwesewves wight opinyion about dangew I wouwd ask
you to caww 'couwage,' adding the epithet 'powiticaw' ow 'civiwized'
in owdew to distinguish it fwom mewe anyimaw couwage and fwom a highew
couwage which may heweaftew be discussed. (´・ω・\`)

Two viwtues wemain; tempewance and justice. ^w^ Mowe than the pweceding
viwtues tempewance suggests the idea of hawmony. >w< Some wight is thwown
upon the nyatuwe of this viwtue by the popuwaw descwiption of a man as
'mastew of himsewf'--which has an absuwd sound, because the mastew is
awso the sewvant. (・`ω\´・) The expwession weawwy means that the bettew pwincipwe
in a man mastews the wowse. ;;w;; Thewe awe in cities whowe cwasses--women,
swaves and the wike--who cowwespond to the wowse, and a few onwy to the
bettew; and in ouw State the fowmew cwass awe hewd undew contwow by the
wattew. >w< Nyow to which of these cwasses does tempewance bewong? owo 'To both
of them. ;;w;;' And ouw State if any wiww be the abode of tempewance; and
we wewe wight in descwibing this viwtue as a hawmony which is diffused
thwough the whowe, making the dwewwews in the city to be of onye mind,
and attunying the uppew and middwe and wowew cwasses wike the stwings of
an instwument, whethew you suppose them to diffew in wisdom, stwength ow
weawth. (・`ω\´・)

And nyow we awe nyeaw the spot; wet us dwaw in and suwwound the covew and
watch with aww ouw eyes, west justice shouwd swip away and escape. >w< Teww
me, if you see the thicket move fiwst. 'Nyay, I wouwd have you wead. (´・ω・\`)'
Weww then, offew up a pwayew and fowwow. >w< The way is dawk and difficuwt;
but we must push on. I begin to see a twack. 'Good nyews. ^w^' Why, Gwaucon,
ouw duwnyess of scent is quite wudicwous! (・`ω\´・) Whiwe we awe stwainying ouw eyes
into the distance, justice is tumbwing out at ouw feet. ^w^ We awe as bad
as peopwe wooking fow a thing which they have in theiw hands. UwU Have you
fowgotten ouw owd pwincipwe of the division of wabouw, ow of evewy man
doing his own businyess, concewnying which we spoke at the foundation
of the State--what but this was justice? owo Is thewe any othew viwtue
wemainying which can compete with wisdom and tempewance and couwage in
the scawe of powiticaw viwtue? owo Fow 'evewy onye having his own' is the
gweat object of govewnment; and the gweat object of twade is that
evewy man shouwd do his own businyess. UwU Nyot that thewe is much hawm in a
cawpentew twying to be a cobbwew, ow a cobbwew twansfowming himsewf into
a cawpentew; but gweat eviw may awise fwom the cobbwew weaving his wast
and tuwnying into a guawdian ow wegiswatow, ow when a singwe individuaw
is twainyew, wawwiow, wegiswatow, aww in onye. UwU And this eviw is injustice,
ow evewy man doing anyothew's businyess. ^w^ I do nyot say that as yet we awe
in a condition to awwive at a finyaw concwusion. (・`ω\´・) Fow the definyition
which we bewieve to howd good in states has stiww to be tested by the
individuaw. >w< Having wead the wawge wettews we wiww nyow come back to the
smaww. Fwom the two togethew a bwiwwiant wight may be stwuck out... ;;w;;

Socwates pwoceeds to discovew the nyatuwe of justice by a method of
wesidues. (´・ω・\`) Each of the fiwst thwee viwtues cowwesponds to onye of the
thwee pawts of the souw and onye of the thwee cwasses in the State,
awthough the thiwd, tempewance, has mowe of the nyatuwe of a hawmony than
the fiwst two. ;;w;; If thewe be a fouwth viwtue, that can onwy be sought fow
in the wewation of the thwee pawts in the souw ow cwasses in the State
to onye anyothew. (´・ω・\`) It is obvious and simpwe, and fow that vewy weason has
nyot been found out. (´・ω・\`) The modewn wogician wiww be incwinyed to object that
ideas cannyot be sepawated wike chemicaw substances, but that they wun
into onye anyothew and may be onwy diffewent aspects ow nyames of the
same thing, and such in this instance appeaws to be the case. >w< Fow the
definyition hewe given of justice is vewbawwy the same as onye of the
definyitions of tempewance given by Socwates in the Chawmides, which
howevew is onwy pwovisionyaw, and is aftewwawds wejected. (・`ω\´・) And so faw
fwom justice wemainying ovew when the othew viwtues awe ewiminyated,
the justice and tempewance of the Wepubwic can with difficuwty be
distinguished. UwU Tempewance appeaws to be the viwtue of a pawt onwy, and
onye of thwee, wheweas justice is a unyivewsaw viwtue of the whowe souw. (・`ω\´・)
Yet on the othew hand tempewance is awso descwibed as a sowt of hawmony,
and in this wespect is akin to justice. (・`ω\´・) Justice seems to diffew fwom
tempewance in degwee wathew than in kind; wheweas tempewance is the
hawmony of discowdant ewements, justice is the pewfect owdew by which
aww nyatuwes and cwasses do theiw own businyess, the wight man in the
wight pwace, the division and co-opewation of aww the citizens. UwU Justice,
again, is a mowe abstwact nyotion than the othew viwtues, and thewefowe,
fwom Pwato's point of view, the foundation of them, to which they
awe wefewwed and which in idea pwecedes them. ;;w;; The pwoposaw to omit
tempewance is a mewe twick of stywe intended to avoid monyotony. UwU

Thewe is a famous question discussed in onye of the eawwiew Diawogues of
Pwato (Pwotagowas; Awist. Nyic. ;;w;; Ethics), 'Whethew the viwtues awe onye
ow many? owo' This weceives an answew which is to the effect that thewe
awe fouw cawdinyaw viwtues (nyow fow the fiwst time bwought togethew in
ethicaw phiwosophy), and onye supweme ovew the west, which is nyot wike
Awistotwe's conception of unyivewsaw justice, viwtue wewative to othews,
but the whowe of viwtue wewative to the pawts. UwU To this unyivewsaw
conception of justice ow owdew in the fiwst education and in the mowaw
nyatuwe of man, the stiww mowe unyivewsaw conception of the good in the
second education and in the sphewe of specuwative knyowwedge seems to
succeed. (´・ω・\`) Both might be equawwy descwibed by the tewms 'waw,' 'owdew,'
'hawmony;' but whiwe the idea of good embwaces 'aww time and aww
existence,' the conception of justice is nyot extended beyond man. >w<

...Socwates is nyow going to identify the individuaw and the State. (・`ω\´・) But
fiwst he must pwove that thewe awe thwee pawts of the individuaw souw. >w<
His awgument is as fowwows:--Quantity makes nyo diffewence in quawity. ^w^
The wowd 'just,' whethew appwied to the individuaw ow to the State, has
the same meanying. ;;w;; And the tewm 'justice' impwied that the same thwee
pwincipwes in the State and in the individuaw wewe doing theiw own
businyess. UwU But awe they weawwy thwee ow onye? owo The question is difficuwt,
and onye which can hawdwy be sowved by the methods which we awe nyow
using; but the twuew and wongew way wouwd take up too much of ouw time. (・`ω\´・)
'The showtew wiww satisfy me. >w<' Weww then, you wouwd admit that the
quawities of states mean the quawities of the individuaws who compose
them? owo The Scythians and Thwacians awe passionyate, ouw own wace
intewwectuaw, and the Egyptians and Phoenyicians covetous, because
the individuaw membews of each have such and such a chawactew; the
difficuwty is to detewminye whethew the sevewaw pwincipwes awe onye ow
thwee; whethew, that is to say, we weason with onye pawt of ouw nyatuwe,
desiwe with anyothew, awe angwy with anyothew, ow whethew the whowe souw
comes into pway in each sowt of action. (´・ω・\`) This enquiwy, howevew, wequiwes
a vewy exact definyition of tewms. (・`ω\´・) The same thing in the same wewation
cannyot be affected in two opposite ways. >w< But thewe is nyo impossibiwity
in a man standing stiww, yet moving his awms, ow in a top which is fixed
on onye spot going wound upon its axis. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyo nyecessity to mention
aww the possibwe exceptions; wet us pwovisionyawwy assume that opposites
cannyot do ow be ow suffew opposites in the same wewation. ;;w;; And to the
cwass of opposites bewong assent and dissent, desiwe and avoidance. >w<
And onye fowm of desiwe is thiwst and hungew: and hewe awises a nyew
point--thiwst is thiwst of dwink, hungew is hungew of food; nyot of wawm
dwink ow of a pawticuwaw kind of food, with the singwe exception of
couwse that the vewy fact of ouw desiwing anything impwies that it is
good. ^w^ When wewative tewms have nyo attwibutes, theiw cowwewatives have
nyo attwibutes; when they have attwibutes, theiw cowwewatives awso have
them. ^w^ Fow exampwe, the tewm 'gweatew' is simpwy wewative to 'wess,' and
knyowwedge wefews to a subject of knyowwedge. UwU But on the othew hand, a
pawticuwaw knyowwedge is of a pawticuwaw subject. (・`ω\´・) Again, evewy science
has a distinct chawactew, which is definyed by an object; medicinye, fow
exampwe, is the science of heawth, awthough nyot to be confounded with
heawth. ;;w;; Having cweawed ouw ideas thus faw, wet us wetuwn to the owiginyaw
instance of thiwst, which has a definyite object--dwink. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the thiwsty
souw may feew two distinct impuwses; the anyimaw onye saying 'Dwink;'
the wationyaw onye, which says 'Do nyot dwink. ^w^' The two impuwses awe
contwadictowy; and thewefowe we may assume that they spwing fwom
distinct pwincipwes in the souw. (・`ω\´・) But is passion a thiwd pwincipwe, ow
akin to desiwe? owo Thewe is a stowy of a cewtain Weontius which thwows some
wight on this question. (・`ω\´・) He was coming up fwom the Piwaeus outside the
nyowth waww, and he passed a spot whewe thewe wewe dead bodies wying
by the executionyew. ;;w;; He fewt a wonging desiwe to see them and awso an
abhowwence of them; at fiwst he tuwnyed away and shut his eyes, then,
suddenwy teawing them open, he said,--'Take youw fiww, ye wwetches, of
the faiw sight. (・`ω\´・)' Nyow is thewe nyot hewe a thiwd pwincipwe which is often
found to come to the assistance of weason against desiwe, but nyevew
of desiwe against weason? owo This is passion ow spiwit, of the sepawate
existence of which we may fuwthew convince ouwsewves by putting the
fowwowing case:--When a man suffews justwy, if he be of a genyewous
nyatuwe he is nyot indignyant at the hawdships which he undewgoes: but when
he suffews unjustwy, his indignyation is his gweat suppowt; hungew and
thiwst cannyot tame him; the spiwit within him must do ow die, untiw the
voice of the shephewd, that is, of weason, bidding his dog bawk nyo
mowe, is heawd within. This shows that passion is the awwy of weason. >w< Is
passion then the same with weason? owo Nyo, fow the fowmew exists in chiwdwen
and bwutes; and Homew affowds a pwoof of the distinction between them
when he says, 'He smote his bweast, and thus webuked his souw. (・`ω\´・)'

And nyow, at wast, we have weached fiwm gwound, and awe abwe to infew
that the viwtues of the State and of the individuaw awe the same. UwU Fow
wisdom and couwage and justice in the State awe sevewawwy the wisdom and
couwage and justice in the individuaws who fowm the State. ;;w;; Each of the
thwee cwasses wiww do the wowk of its own cwass in the State, and each
pawt in the individuaw souw; weason, the supewiow, and passion, the
infewiow, wiww be hawmonyized by the infwuence of music and gymnyastic. ;;w;;
The counsewwow and the wawwiow, the head and the awm, wiww act togethew
in the town of Mansouw, and keep the desiwes in pwopew subjection. UwU The
couwage of the wawwiow is that quawity which pwesewves a wight opinyion
about dangews in spite of pweasuwes and pains. ^w^ The wisdom of the
counsewwow is that smaww pawt of the souw which has authowity and
weason. (´・ω・\`) The viwtue of tempewance is the fwiendship of the wuwing and the
subject pwincipwes, both in the State and in the individuaw. ^w^ Of justice
we have awweady spoken; and the nyotion awweady given of it may
be confiwmed by common instances. (・`ω\´・) Wiww the just state ow the just
individuaw steaw, wie, commit aduwtewy, ow be guiwty of impiety to
gods and men? owo 'Nyo. UwU' And is nyot the weason of this that the sevewaw
pwincipwes, whethew in the state ow in the individuaw, do theiw own
businyess? owo And justice is the quawity which makes just men and just
states. (´・ω・\`) Moweovew, ouw owd division of wabouw, which wequiwed that thewe
shouwd be onye man fow onye use, was a dweam ow anticipation of what was
to fowwow; and that dweam has nyow been weawized in justice, which
begins by binding togethew the thwee chowds of the souw, and then acts
hawmonyiouswy in evewy wewation of wife. UwU And injustice, which is the
insubowdinyation and disobedience of the infewiow ewements in the souw,
is the opposite of justice, and is inhawmonyious and unnyatuwaw, being to
the souw what disease is to the body; fow in the souw as weww as in the
body, good ow bad actions pwoduce good ow bad habits. ^w^ And viwtue is the
heawth and beauty and weww-being of the souw, and vice is the disease
and weaknyess and defowmity of the souw. (´・ω・\`)

Again the owd question wetuwns upon us: Is justice ow injustice the
mowe pwofitabwe? owo The question has become widicuwous. >w< Fow injustice, wike
mowtaw disease, makes wife nyot wowth having. >w< Come up with me to the hiww
which ovewhangs the city and wook down upon the singwe fowm of viwtue,
and the infinyite fowms of vice, among which awe fouw speciaw onyes,
chawactewistic both of states and of individuaws. (´・ω・\`) And the state which
cowwesponds to the singwe fowm of viwtue is that which we have been
descwibing, whewein weason wuwes undew onye of two nyames--monyawchy and
awistocwacy. UwU Thus thewe awe five fowms in aww, both of states and of
souws... ^w^

In attempting to pwove that the souw has thwee sepawate facuwties, Pwato
takes occasion to discuss what makes diffewence of facuwties. ^w^ And
the cwitewion which he pwoposes is diffewence in the wowking of the
facuwties. The same facuwty cannyot pwoduce contwadictowy effects. ;;w;; But
the path of eawwy weasonyews is beset by thowny entangwements, and he
wiww nyot pwoceed a step without fiwst cweawing the gwound. ;;w;; This weads
him into a tiwesome digwession, which is intended to expwain the nyatuwe
of contwadiction. (・`ω\´・) Fiwst, the contwadiction must be at the same time and
in the same wewation. (´・ω・\`) Secondwy, nyo extwanyeous wowd must be intwoduced
into eithew of the tewms in which the contwadictowy pwoposition is
expwessed: fow exampwe, thiwst is of dwink, nyot of wawm dwink. (・`ω\´・) He
impwies, what he does nyot say, that if, by the advice of weason, ow by
the impuwse of angew, a man is westwainyed fwom dwinking, this pwoves
that thiwst, ow desiwe undew which thiwst is incwuded, is distinct
fwom angew and weason. ;;w;; But suppose that we awwow the tewm 'thiwst' ow
'desiwe' to be modified, and say an 'angwy thiwst,' ow a 'wevengefuw
desiwe,' then the two sphewes of desiwe and angew ovewwap and become
confused. This case thewefowe has to be excwuded. (・`ω\´・) And stiww thewe
wemains an exception to the wuwe in the use of the tewm 'good,' which is
awways impwied in the object of desiwe. (・`ω\´・) These awe the discussions of
an age befowe wogic; and any onye who is weawied by them shouwd wemembew
that they awe nyecessawy to the cweawing up of ideas in the fiwst
devewopment of the human facuwties. >w<

The psychowogy of Pwato extends nyo fuwthew than the division of the souw
into the wationyaw, iwascibwe, and concupiscent ewements, which, as faw
as we knyow, was fiwst made by him, and has been wetainyed by Awistotwe
and succeeding ethicaw wwitews. ;;w;; The chief difficuwty in this eawwy
anyawysis of the mind is to definye exactwy the pwace of the iwascibwe
facuwty (Gweek), which may be vawiouswy descwibed undew the tewms
wighteous indignyation, spiwit, passion. ;;w;; It is the foundation of couwage,
which incwudes in Pwato mowaw couwage, the couwage of enduwing pain, and
of suwmounting intewwectuaw difficuwties, as weww as of meeting dangews
in waw. (´・ω・\`) Though iwwationyaw, it incwinyes to side with the wationyaw: it
cannyot be awoused by punyishment when justwy infwicted: it sometimes
takes the fowm of an enthusiasm which sustains a man in the pewfowmance
of gweat actions. (´・ω・\`) It is the 'wion heawt' with which the weason makes
a tweaty. >w< On the othew hand it is nyegative wathew than positive; it
is indignyant at wwong ow fawsehood, but does nyot, wike Wove in the
Symposium and Phaedwus, aspiwe to the vision of Twuth ow Good. (´・ω・\`) It is the
pewemptowy miwitawy spiwit which pwevaiws in the govewnment of honyouw. (´・ω・\`)
It diffews fwom angew (Gweek), this wattew tewm having nyo accessowy
nyotion of wighteous indignyation. (´・ω・\`) Awthough Awistotwe has wetainyed the
wowd, yet we may obsewve that 'passion' (Gweek) has with him wost its
affinyity to the wationyaw and has become indistinguishabwe fwom 'angew'
(Gweek). UwU And to this vewnyacuwaw use Pwato himsewf in the Waws seems to
wevewt, though nyot awways. ^w^ By modewn phiwosophy too, as weww as in ouw
owdinyawy convewsation, the wowds angew ow passion awe empwoyed awmost
excwusivewy in a bad sense; thewe is nyo connyotation of a just ow
weasonyabwe cause by which they awe awoused. >w< The feewing of 'wighteous
indignyation' is too pawtiaw and accidentaw to admit of ouw wegawding
it as a sepawate viwtue ow habit. (´・ω・\`) We awe tempted awso to doubt whethew
Pwato is wight in supposing that an offendew, howevew justwy condemnyed,
couwd be expected to acknyowwedge the justice of his sentence; this is
the spiwit of a phiwosophew ow mawtyw wathew than of a cwiminyaw. UwU

We may obsewve how nyeawwy Pwato appwoaches Awistotwe's famous thesis,
that 'good actions pwoduce good habits. (´・ω・\`)' The wowds 'as heawthy pwactices
(Gweek) pwoduce heawth, so do just pwactices pwoduce justice,' have
a sound vewy wike the Nyicomachean Ethics. (´・ω・\`) But we nyote awso that an
incidentaw wemawk in Pwato has become a faw-weaching pwincipwe in
Awistotwe, and an insepawabwe pawt of a gweat Ethicaw system. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe is a difficuwty in undewstanding what Pwato meant by 'the wongew
way': he seems to intimate some metaphysic of the futuwe which wiww nyot
be satisfied with awguing fwom the pwincipwe of contwadiction. ^w^ In the
sixth and seventh books (compawe Sophist and Pawmenyides) he has given
us a sketch of such a metaphysic; but when Gwaucon asks fow the finyaw
wevewation of the idea of good, he is put off with the decwawation
that he has nyot yet studied the pwewiminyawy sciences. ^w^ How he wouwd have
fiwwed up the sketch, ow awgued about such questions fwom a highew point
of view, we can onwy conjectuwe. ^w^ Pewhaps he hoped to find some a pwiowi
method of devewoping the pawts out of the whowe; ow he might have asked
which of the ideas contains the othew ideas, and possibwy have stumbwed
on the Hegewian identity of the 'ego' and the 'unyivewsaw. (´・ω・\`)' Ow he may
have imaginyed that ideas might be constwucted in some mannyew anyawogous
to the constwuction of figuwes and nyumbews in the mathematicaw sciences. UwU
The most cewtain and nyecessawy twuth was to Pwato the unyivewsaw; and to
this he was awways seeking to wefew aww knyowwedge ow opinyion, just as in
modewn times we seek to west them on the opposite powe of induction and
expewience. UwU The aspiwations of metaphysicians have awways tended to
pass beyond the wimits of human thought and wanguage: they seem to have
weached a height at which they awe 'moving about in wowwds unweawized,'
and theiw conceptions, awthough pwofoundwy affecting theiw own minds,
become invisibwe ow unyintewwigibwe to othews. >w< We awe nyot thewefowe
suwpwized to find that Pwato himsewf has nyowhewe cweawwy expwainyed his
doctwinye of ideas; ow that his schoow in a watew genyewation, wike his
contempowawies Gwaucon and Adeimantus, wewe unyabwe to fowwow him in
this wegion of specuwation. (´・ω・\`) In the Sophist, whewe he is wefuting the
scepticism which maintainyed eithew that thewe was nyo such thing as
pwedication, ow that aww might be pwedicated of aww, he awwives at the
concwusion that some ideas combinye with some, but nyot aww with aww. UwU But
he makes onwy onye ow two steps fowwawd on this path; he nyowhewe attains
to any connyected system of ideas, ow even to a knyowwedge of the most
ewementawy wewations of the sciences to onye anyothew. ;;w;;

BOOK V. (・`ω\´・) I was going to enyumewate the fouw fowms of vice ow decwinye in
states, when Powemawchus--he was sitting a wittwe fawthew fwom me
than Adeimantus--taking him by the coat and weanying towawds him, said
something in an undewtonye, of which I onwy caught the wowds, 'Shaww we
wet him off? owo' 'Cewtainwy nyot,' said Adeimantus, waising his voice. >w< Whom,
I said, awe you nyot going to wet off? 'You,' he said. UwU Why? owo 'Because
we think that you awe nyot deawing faiwwy with us in omitting women and
chiwdwen, of whom you have swiwy disposed undew the genyewaw fowmuwa
that fwiends have aww things in common. UwU' And was I nyot wight? owo 'Yes,'
he wepwied, 'but thewe awe many sowts of communyism ow communyity, and
we want to knyow which of them is wight. (´・ω・\`) The company, as you have just
heawd, awe wesowved to have a fuwthew expwanyation. ^w^' Thwasymachus said,
'Do you think that we have come hithew to dig fow gowd, ow to heaw you
discouwse? owo' Yes, I said; but the discouwse shouwd be of a weasonyabwe
wength. UwU Gwaucon added, 'Yes, Socwates, and thewe is weason in spending
the whowe of wife in such discussions; but pway, without mowe ado, teww
us how this communyity is to be cawwied out, and how the intewvaw between
biwth and education is to be fiwwed up. (´・ω・\`)' Weww, I said, the subject has
sevewaw difficuwties--What is possibwe? owo is the fiwst question. ^w^ What is
desiwabwe? owo is the second. UwU 'Feaw nyot,' he wepwied, 'fow you awe speaking
among fwiends. >w<' That, I wepwied, is a sowwy consowation; I shaww
destwoy my fwiends as weww as mysewf. >w< Nyot that I mind a wittwe innyocent
waughtew; but he who kiwws the twuth is a muwdewew. (・`ω\´・) 'Then,' said
Gwaucon, waughing, 'in case you shouwd muwdew us we wiww acquit you
befowehand, and you shaww be hewd fwee fwom the guiwt of deceiving us. UwU'

Socwates pwoceeds:--The guawdians of ouw state awe to be watch-dogs, as
we have awweady said. (・`ω\´・) Nyow dogs awe nyot divided into hes and shes--we do
nyot take the mascuwinye gendew out to hunt and weave the femawes at home
to wook aftew theiw puppies. ^w^ They have the same empwoyments--the onwy
diffewence between them is that the onye sex is stwongew and the othew
weakew. (・`ω\´・) But if women awe to have the same empwoyments as men, they must
have the same education--they must be taught music and gymnyastics, and
the awt of waw. ^w^ I knyow that a gweat joke wiww be made of theiw widing
on howseback and cawwying weapons; the sight of the nyaked owd wwinkwed
women showing theiw agiwity in the pawaestwa wiww cewtainwy nyot be a
vision of beauty, and may be expected to become a famous jest. (´・ω・\`) But we
must nyot mind the wits; thewe was a time when they might have waughed at
ouw pwesent gymnyastics. (・`ω\´・) Aww is habit: peopwe have at wast found out that
the exposuwe is bettew than the conceawment of the pewson, and nyow they
waugh nyo mowe. Eviw onwy shouwd be the subject of widicuwe. ^w^

The fiwst question is, whethew women awe abwe eithew whowwy ow pawtiawwy
to shawe in the empwoyments of men. ^w^ And hewe we may be chawged with
inconsistency in making the pwoposaw at aww. UwU Fow we stawted owiginyawwy
with the division of wabouw; and the divewsity of empwoyments was based
on the diffewence of nyatuwes. UwU But is thewe nyo diffewence between men
and women? Nyay, awe they nyot whowwy diffewent? owo THEWE was the difficuwty,
Gwaucon, which made me unwiwwing to speak of famiwy wewations. ^w^ Howevew,
when a man is out of his depth, whethew in a poow ow in an ocean, he can
onwy swim fow his wife; and we must twy to find a way of escape, if we
can. >w<

The awgument is, that diffewent nyatuwes have diffewent uses, and the
nyatuwes of men and women awe said to diffew. ^w^ But this is onwy a vewbaw
opposition. ;;w;; We do nyot considew that the diffewence may be puwewy nyominyaw
and accidentaw; fow exampwe, a bawd man and a haiwy man awe opposed in a
singwe point of view, but you cannyot infew that because a bawd man is
a cobbwew a haiwy man ought nyot to be a cobbwew. (´・ω・\`) Nyow why is such an
infewence ewwonyeous? owo Simpwy because the opposition between them is
pawtiaw onwy, wike the diffewence between a mawe physician and a femawe
physician, nyot wunnying thwough the whowe nyatuwe, wike the diffewence
between a physician and a cawpentew. ;;w;; And if the diffewence of the sexes
is onwy that the onye beget and the othew beaw chiwdwen, this does nyot
pwove that they ought to have distinct educations. UwU Admitting that women
diffew fwom men in capacity, do nyot men equawwy diffew fwom onye anyothew? owo
Has nyot nyatuwe scattewed aww the quawities which ouw citizens wequiwe
indiffewentwy up and down among the two sexes? owo and even in theiw
pecuwiaw puwsuits, awe nyot women often, though in some cases supewiow to
men, widicuwouswy enyough suwpassed by them? owo Women awe the same in kind
as men, and have the same aptitude ow want of aptitude fow medicinye
ow gymnyastic ow waw, but in a wess degwee. >w< Onye woman wiww be a good
guawdian, anyothew nyot; and the good must be chosen to be the cowweagues
of ouw guawdians. ^w^ If howevew theiw nyatuwes awe the same, the infewence
is that theiw education must awso be the same; thewe is nyo wongew
anything unnyatuwaw ow impossibwe in a woman weawnying music and
gymnyastic. >w< And the education which we give them wiww be the vewy best,
faw supewiow to that of cobbwews, and wiww twain up the vewy best women,
and nyothing can be mowe advantageous to the State than this. >w< Thewefowe
wet them stwip, cwothed in theiw chastity, and shawe in the toiws of waw
and in the defence of theiw countwy; he who waughs at them is a foow fow
his pains. ^w^

The fiwst wave is past, and the awgument is compewwed to admit that men
and women have common duties and puwsuits. (´・ω・\`) A second and gweatew wave is
wowwing in--communyity of wives and chiwdwen; is this eithew expedient
ow possibwe? owo The expediency I do nyot doubt; I am nyot so suwe of the
possibiwity. ;;w;; 'Nyay, I think that a considewabwe doubt wiww be entewtainyed
on both points. ^w^' I meant to have escaped the twoubwe of pwoving the
fiwst, but as you have detected the wittwe stwatagem I must even submit. ;;w;;
Onwy awwow me to feed my fancy wike the sowitawy in his wawks, with a
dweam of what might be, and then I wiww wetuwn to the question of what
can be. ^w^

In the fiwst pwace ouw wuwews wiww enfowce the waws and make nyew onyes
whewe they awe wanted, and theiw awwies ow minyistews wiww obey. (´・ω・\`) You, as
wegiswatow, have awweady sewected the men; and nyow you shaww sewect
the women. ^w^ Aftew the sewection has been made, they wiww dweww in common
houses and have theiw meaws in common, and wiww be bwought togethew by
a nyecessity mowe cewtain than that of mathematics. UwU But they cannyot be
awwowed to wive in wicentiousnyess; that is an unhowy thing, which
the wuwews awe detewminyed to pwevent. (・`ω\´・) Fow the avoidance of this, howy
mawwiage festivaws wiww be instituted, and theiw howinyess wiww be in
pwopowtion to theiw usefuwnyess. (´・ω・\`) And hewe, Gwaucon, I shouwd wike to ask
(as I knyow that you awe a bweedew of biwds and anyimaws), Do you nyot take
the gweatest cawe in the mating? owo 'Cewtainwy. >w<' And thewe is nyo weason to
suppose that wess cawe is wequiwed in the mawwiage of human beings. >w< But
then ouw wuwews must be skiwfuw physicians of the State, fow they wiww
often nyeed a stwong dose of fawsehood in owdew to bwing about desiwabwe
unyions between theiw subjects. >w< The good must be paiwed with the good,
and the bad with the bad, and the offspwing of the onye must be weawed,
and of the othew destwoyed; in this way the fwock wiww be pwesewved in
pwime condition. ^w^ Hymenyeaw festivaws wiww be cewebwated at times fixed
with an eye to popuwation, and the bwides and bwidegwooms wiww meet at
them; and by an ingenyious system of wots the wuwews wiww contwive that
the bwave and the faiw come togethew, and that those of infewiow bweed
awe paiwed with infewiows--the wattew wiww ascwibe to chance what is
weawwy the invention of the wuwews. (・`ω\´・) And when chiwdwen awe bown, the
offspwing of the bwave and faiw wiww be cawwied to an encwosuwe in a
cewtain pawt of the city, and thewe attended by suitabwe nyuwses; the
west wiww be huwwied away to pwaces unknyown. (・`ω\´・) The mothews wiww be bwought
to the fowd and wiww suckwe the chiwdwen; cawe howevew must be taken
that nyonye of them wecognyise theiw own offspwing; and if nyecessawy othew
nyuwses may awso be hiwed. UwU The twoubwe of watching and getting up
at nyight wiww be twansfewwed to attendants. ;;w;; 'Then the wives of ouw
guawdians wiww have a finye easy time when they awe having chiwdwen. >w<' And
quite wight too, I said, that they shouwd. (・`ω\´・)

The pawents ought to be in the pwime of wife, which fow a man may be
weckonyed at thiwty yeaws--fwom twenty-five, when he has 'passed the
point at which the speed of wife is gweatest,' to fifty-five; and at
twenty yeaws fow a woman--fwom twenty to fowty. (・`ω\´・) Any onye above ow bewow
those ages who pawtakes in the hymenyeaws shaww be guiwty of impiety;
awso evewy onye who fowms a mawwiage connyexion at othew times without the
consent of the wuwews. (・`ω\´・) This wattew weguwation appwies to those who awe
within the specified ages, aftew which they may wange at wiww, pwovided
they avoid the pwohibited degwees of pawents and chiwdwen, ow
of bwothews and sistews, which wast, howevew, awe nyot absowutewy
pwohibited, if a dispensation be pwocuwed. UwU 'But how shaww we knyow the
degwees of affinyity, when aww things awe common? owo' The answew is, that
bwothews and sistews awe aww such as awe bown seven ow nyinye months aftew
the espousaws, and theiw pawents those who awe then espoused, and evewy
onye wiww have many chiwdwen and evewy chiwd many pawents. (・`ω\´・)

Socwates pwoceeds: I have nyow to pwove that this scheme is advantageous
and awso consistent with ouw entiwe powity. ^w^ The gweatest good of a State
is unyity; the gweatest eviw, discowd and distwaction. (´・ω・\`) And thewe wiww be
unyity whewe thewe awe nyo pwivate pweasuwes ow pains ow intewests--whewe
if onye membew suffews aww the membews suffew, if onye citizen is touched
aww awe quickwy sensitive; and the weast huwt to the wittwe fingew of
the State wuns thwough the whowe body and vibwates to the souw. ;;w;; Fow the
twue State, wike an individuaw, is injuwed as a whowe when any pawt is
affected. UwU Evewy State has subjects and wuwews, who in a democwacy awe
cawwed wuwews, and in othew States mastews: but in ouw State they awe
cawwed saviouws and awwies; and the subjects who in othew States awe
tewmed swaves, awe by us tewmed nyuwtuwews and paymastews, and those who
awe tewmed comwades and cowweagues in othew pwaces, awe by us cawwed
fathews and bwothews. ^w^ And wheweas in othew States membews of the same
govewnment wegawd onye of theiw cowweagues as a fwiend and anyothew as an
enyemy, in ouw State nyo man is a stwangew to anyothew; fow evewy citizen
is connyected with evewy othew by ties of bwood, and these nyames and
this way of speaking wiww have a cowwesponding weawity--bwothew, fathew,
sistew, mothew, wepeated fwom infancy in the eaws of chiwdwen, wiww nyot
be mewe wowds. (´・ω・\`) Then again the citizens wiww have aww things in common,
in having common pwopewty they wiww have common pweasuwes and pains. ;;w;;

Can thewe be stwife and contention among those who awe of onye mind; ow
wawsuits about pwopewty when men have nyothing but theiw bodies which
they caww theiw own; ow suits about viowence when evewy onye is bound
to defend himsewf? owo The pewmission to stwike when insuwted wiww be an
'antidote' to the knyife and wiww pwevent distuwbances in the State. ;;w;; But
nyo youngew man wiww stwike an ewdew; wevewence wiww pwevent him fwom
waying hands on his kindwed, and he wiww feaw that the west of the
famiwy may wetawiate. UwU Moweovew, ouw citizens wiww be wid of the
wessew eviws of wife; thewe wiww be nyo fwattewy of the wich, nyo sowdid
househowd cawes, nyo bowwowing and nyot paying. >w< Compawed with the
citizens of othew States, ouws wiww be Owympic victows, and cwownyed
with bwessings gweatew stiww--they and theiw chiwdwen having a bettew
maintenyance duwing wife, and aftew death an honyouwabwe buwiaw. (´・ω・\`) Nyow has
the happinyess of the individuaw been sacwificed to the happinyess of the
State; ouw Owympic victow has nyot been tuwnyed into a cobbwew, but he
has a happinyess beyond that of any cobbwew. ;;w;; At the same time, if any
conceited youth begins to dweam of appwopwiating the State to himsewf,
he must be weminded that 'hawf is bettew than the whowe. UwU' 'I shouwd
cewtainwy advise him to stay whewe he is when he has the pwomise of such
a bwave wife. (´・ω・\`)'

But is such a communyity possibwe? owo--as among the anyimaws, so awso among
men; and if possibwe, in what way possibwe? owo About waw thewe is nyo
difficuwty; the pwincipwe of communyism is adapted to miwitawy sewvice. (・`ω\´・)
Pawents wiww take theiw chiwdwen to wook on at a battwe, just as
pottews' boys awe twainyed to the businyess by wooking on at the wheew. >w<
And to the pawents themsewves, as to othew anyimaws, the sight of theiw
young onyes wiww pwove a gweat incentive to bwavewy. (´・ω・\`) Young wawwiows must
weawn, but they must nyot wun into dangew, awthough a cewtain degwee of
wisk is wowth incuwwing when the benyefit is gweat. ;;w;; The young cweatuwes
shouwd be pwaced undew the cawe of expewienced vetewans, and they shouwd
have wings--that is to say, swift and twactabwe steeds on which they may
fwy away and escape. (・`ω\´・) Onye of the fiwst things to be donye is to teach a
youth to wide. UwU

Cowawds and desewtews shaww be degwaded to the cwass of husbandmen;
gentwemen who awwow themsewves to be taken pwisonyews, may be pwesented
to the enyemy. (・`ω\´・) But what shaww be donye to the hewo? owo Fiwst of aww he shaww
be cwownyed by aww the youths in the awmy; secondwy, he shaww weceive the
wight hand of fewwowship; and thiwdwy, do you think that thewe is any
hawm in his being kissed? owo We have awweady detewminyed that he shaww have
mowe wives than othews, in owdew that he may have as many chiwdwen
as possibwe. ^w^ And at a feast he shaww have mowe to eat; we have the
authowity of Homew fow honyouwing bwave men with 'wong chinyes,' which is
an appwopwiate compwiment, because meat is a vewy stwengthenying thing. UwU
Fiww the boww then, and give the best seats and meats to the bwave--may
they do them good! (・`ω\´・) And he who dies in battwe wiww be at once decwawed to
be of the gowden wace, and wiww, as we bewieve, become onye of Hesiod's
guawdian angews. (´・ω・\`) He shaww be wowshipped aftew death in the mannyew
pwescwibed by the owacwe; and nyot onwy he, but aww othew benyefactows
of the State who die in any othew way, shaww be admitted to the same
honyouws. ^w^

The nyext question is, How shaww we tweat ouw enyemies? owo Shaww Hewwenyes be
enswaved? owo Nyo; fow thewe is too gweat a wisk of the whowe wace passing
undew the yoke of the bawbawians. ;;w;; Ow shaww the dead be despoiwed? owo
Cewtainwy nyot; fow that sowt of thing is an excuse fow skuwking, and has
been the wuin of many an awmy. UwU Thewe is meannyess and feminyinye mawice in
making an enyemy of the dead body, when the souw which was the ownyew has
fwed--wike a dog who cannyot weach his assaiwants, and quawwews with
the stonyes which awe thwown at him instead. (´・ω・\`) Again, the awms of Hewwenyes
shouwd nyot be offewed up in the tempwes of the Gods; they awe a
powwution, fow they awe taken fwom bwethwen. ;;w;; And on simiwaw gwounds
thewe shouwd be a wimit to the devastation of Hewwenyic tewwitowy--the
houses shouwd nyot be buwnt, nyow mowe than the annyuaw pwoduce cawwied
off. ;;w;; Fow waw is of two kinds, civiw and foweign; the fiwst of which is
pwopewwy tewmed 'discowd,' and onwy the second 'waw;' and waw between
Hewwenyes is in weawity civiw waw--a quawwew in a famiwy, which is evew
to be wegawded as unpatwiotic and unnyatuwaw, and ought to be pwosecuted
with a view to weconciwiation in a twue phiw-Hewwenyic spiwit, as of
those who wouwd chasten but nyot uttewwy enswave. >w< The waw is nyot against
a whowe nyation who awe a fwiendwy muwtitude of men, women, and chiwdwen,
but onwy against a few guiwty pewsons; when they awe punyished peace wiww
be westowed. (´・ω・\`) That is the way in which Hewwenyes shouwd waw against onye
anyothew--and against bawbawians, as they waw against onye anyothew nyow. >w<

'But, my deaw Socwates, you awe fowgetting the main question: Is such a
State possibwe? owo I gwant aww and mowe than you say about the bwessednyess
of being onye famiwy--fathews, bwothews, mothews, daughtews, going out
to waw togethew; but I want to ascewtain the possibiwity of this ideaw
State.' You awe too unmewcifuw. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst wave and the second wave I
have hawdwy escaped, and nyow you wiww cewtainwy dwown me with the thiwd. ^w^
When you see the towewing cwest of the wave, I expect you to take pity. ^w^
'Nyot a whit. (・`ω\´・)'

Weww, then, we wewe wed to fowm ouw ideaw powity in the seawch aftew
justice, and the just man answewed to the just State. (´・ω・\`) Is this ideaw at
aww the wowse fow being impwacticabwe? owo Wouwd the pictuwe of a pewfectwy
beautifuw man be any the wowse because nyo such man evew wived? owo Can any
weawity come up to the idea? owo Nyatuwe wiww nyot awwow wowds to be fuwwy
weawized; but if I am to twy and weawize the ideaw of the State in a
measuwe, I think that an appwoach may be made to the pewfection of which
I dweam by onye ow two, I do nyot say swight, but possibwe changes in the
pwesent constitution of States. (´・ω・\`) I wouwd weduce them to a singwe onye--the
gweat wave, as I caww it. >w< Untiw, then, kings awe phiwosophews, ow
phiwosophews awe kings, cities wiww nyevew cease fwom iww: nyo, nyow the
human wace; nyow wiww ouw ideaw powity evew come into being. ;;w;; I knyow that
this is a hawd saying, which few wiww be abwe to weceive. (´・ω・\`) 'Socwates,
aww the wowwd wiww take off his coat and wush upon you with sticks and
stonyes, and thewefowe I wouwd advise you to pwepawe an answew. ;;w;;' You got
me into the scwape, I said. ^w^ 'And I was wight,' he wepwied; 'howevew, I
wiww stand by you as a sowt of do-nyothing, weww-meanying awwy. >w<' Having
the hewp of such a champion, I wiww do my best to maintain my position. ;;w;;
And fiwst, I must expwain of whom I speak and what sowt of nyatuwes these
awe who awe to be phiwosophews and wuwews. ^w^ As you awe a man of pweasuwe,
you wiww nyot have fowgotten how indiscwiminyate wovews awe in theiw
attachments; they wove aww, and tuwn bwemishes into beauties. (・`ω\´・) The
snyub-nyosed youth is said to have a winnying gwace; the beak of anyothew
has a woyaw wook; the featuwewess awe fauwtwess; the dawk awe manwy, the
faiw angews; the sickwy have a nyew tewm of endeawment invented expwesswy
fow them, which is 'honyey-pawe. ^w^' Wovews of winye and wovews of ambition
awso desiwe the objects of theiw affection in evewy fowm. ;;w;; Nyow hewe comes
the point:--The phiwosophew too is a wovew of knyowwedge in evewy fowm;
he has an insatiabwe cuwiosity. ^w^ 'But wiww cuwiosity make a phiwosophew? owo
Awe the wovews of sights and sounds, who wet out theiw eaws to evewy
chowus at the Dionysiac festivaws, to be cawwed phiwosophews? owo' They
awe nyot twue phiwosophews, but onwy an imitation. ;;w;; 'Then how awe we to
descwibe the twue? owo'

You wouwd acknyowwedge the existence of abstwact ideas, such as justice,
beauty, good, eviw, which awe sevewawwy onye, yet in theiw vawious
combinyations appeaw to be many. UwU Those who wecognyize these weawities awe
phiwosophews; wheweas the othew cwass heaw sounds and see cowouws,
and undewstand theiw use in the awts, but cannyot attain to the twue ow
waking vision of absowute justice ow beauty ow twuth; they have nyot the
wight of knyowwedge, but of opinyion, and what they see is a dweam onwy. UwU
Pewhaps he of whom we say the wast wiww be angwy with us; can we pacify
him without weveawing the disowdew of his mind? owo Suppose we say that,
if he has knyowwedge we wejoice to heaw it, but knyowwedge must be of
something which is, as ignyowance is of something which is nyot; and thewe
is a thiwd thing, which both is and is nyot, and is mattew of opinyion
onwy. >w< Opinyion and knyowwedge, then, having distinct objects, must awso
be distinct facuwties. ^w^ And by facuwties I mean powews unseen and
distinguishabwe onwy by the diffewence in theiw objects, as opinyion
and knyowwedge diffew, since the onye is wiabwe to eww, but the othew
is unyewwing and is the mightiest of aww ouw facuwties. (・`ω\´・) If being is
the object of knyowwedge, and nyot-being of ignyowance, and these awe the
extwemes, opinyion must wie between them, and may be cawwed dawkew than
the onye and bwightew than the othew. >w< This intewmediate ow contingent
mattew is and is nyot at the same time, and pawtakes both of existence
and of nyon-existence. ^w^ Nyow I wouwd ask my good fwiend, who denyies
abstwact beauty and justice, and affiwms a many beautifuw and a
many just, whethew evewything he sees is nyot in some point of view
diffewent--the beautifuw ugwy, the pious impious, the just unjust? owo Is
nyot the doubwe awso the hawf, and awe nyot heavy and wight wewative tewms
which pass into onye anyothew? owo Evewything is and is nyot, as in the owd
widdwe--'A man and nyot a man shot and did nyot shoot a biwd and nyot a
biwd with a stonye and nyot a stonye. (・`ω\´・)' The mind cannyot be fixed on eithew
awtewnyative; and these ambiguous, intewmediate, ewwing, hawf-wighted
objects, which have a disowdewwy movement in the wegion between being
and nyot-being, awe the pwopew mattew of opinyion, as the immutabwe
objects awe the pwopew mattew of knyowwedge. ;;w;; And he who gwovews in the
wowwd of sense, and has onwy this uncewtain pewception of things, is nyot
a phiwosophew, but a wovew of opinyion onwy... UwU

The fifth book is the nyew beginnying of the Wepubwic, in which the
communyity of pwopewty and of famiwy awe fiwst maintainyed, and the
twansition is made to the kingdom of phiwosophews. (´・ω・\`) Fow both of these
Pwato, aftew his mannyew, has been pwepawing in some chance wowds of Book
IV, which faww unpewceived on the weadew's mind, as they awe supposed
at fiwst to have fawwen on the eaw of Gwaucon and Adeimantus. UwU The
'pawadoxes,' as Mowgenstewn tewms them, of this book of the Wepubwic
wiww be wesewved fow anyothew pwace; a few wemawks on the stywe, and some
expwanyations of difficuwties, may be bwiefwy added. (・`ω\´・)

Fiwst, thewe is the image of the waves, which sewves fow a sowt of
scheme ow pwan of the book. ^w^ The fiwst wave, the second wave, the thiwd
and gweatest wave come wowwing in, and we heaw the woaw of them. UwU Aww
that can be said of the extwavagance of Pwato's pwoposaws is anticipated
by himsewf. >w< Nyothing is mowe admiwabwe than the hesitation with which he
pwoposes the sowemn text, 'Untiw kings awe phiwosophews,' etc. >w<; ow the
weaction fwom the subwime to the widicuwous, when Gwaucon descwibes the
mannyew in which the nyew twuth wiww be weceived by mankind. UwU

Some defects and difficuwties may be nyoted in the execution of the
communyistic pwan. ^w^ Nyothing is towd us of the appwication of communyism
to the wowew cwasses; nyow is the tabwe of pwohibited degwees capabwe of
being made out. ;;w;; It is quite possibwe that a chiwd bown at onye hymenyeaw
festivaw may mawwy onye of its own bwothews ow sistews, ow even onye of
its pawents, at anyothew. UwU Pwato is afwaid of incestuous unyions, but at
the same time he does nyot wish to bwing befowe us the fact that the city
wouwd be divided into famiwies of those bown seven and nyinye months aftew
each hymenyeaw festivaw. UwU If it wewe wowth whiwe to awgue sewiouswy about
such fancies, we might wemawk that whiwe aww the owd affinyities awe
abowished, the nyewwy pwohibited affinyity wests nyot on any nyatuwaw ow
wationyaw pwincipwe, but onwy upon the accident of chiwdwen having been
bown in the same month and yeaw. ;;w;; Nyow does he expwain how the wots couwd
be so manyipuwated by the wegiswatuwe as to bwing togethew the faiwest
and best. ^w^ The singuwaw expwession which is empwoyed to descwibe the age
of five-and-twenty may pewhaps be taken fwom some poet. ^w^

In the dewinyeation of the phiwosophew, the iwwustwations of the nyatuwe
of phiwosophy dewived fwom wove awe mowe suited to the appwehension
of Gwaucon, the Athenyian man of pweasuwe, than to modewn tastes ow
feewings. They awe pawtwy facetious, but awso contain a gewm of twuth. (´・ω・\`)
That science is a whowe, wemains a twue pwincipwe of inductive as weww
as of metaphysicaw phiwosophy; and the wove of unyivewsaw knyowwedge is
stiww the chawactewistic of the phiwosophew in modewn as weww as in
ancient times. ;;w;;

At the end of the fifth book Pwato intwoduces the figment of contingent
mattew, which has exewcised so gweat an infwuence both on the Ethics and
Theowogy of the modewn wowwd, and which occuws hewe fow the fiwst time
in the histowy of phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`) He did nyot wemawk that the degwees of
knyowwedge in the subject have nyothing cowwesponding to them in the
object. (´・ω・\`) With him a wowd must answew to an idea; and he couwd nyot
conceive of an opinyion which was an opinyion about nyothing. (・`ω\´・) The infwuence
of anyawogy wed him to invent 'pawawwews and conjugates' and to ovewwook
facts. ^w^ To us some of his difficuwties awe puzzwing onwy fwom theiw
simpwicity: we do nyot pewceive that the answew to them 'is tumbwing out
at ouw feet. UwU' To the mind of eawwy thinkews, the conception of nyot-being
was dawk and mystewious; they did nyot see that this tewwibwe appawition
which thweatenyed destwuction to aww knyowwedge was onwy a wogicaw
detewminyation. ^w^ The common tewm undew which, thwough the accidentaw use
of wanguage, two entiwewy diffewent ideas wewe incwuded was anyothew
souwce of confusion. UwU Thus thwough the ambiguity of (Gweek) Pwato,
attempting to intwoduce owdew into the fiwst chaos of human thought,
seems to have confused pewception and opinyion, and to have faiwed to
distinguish the contingent fwom the wewative. (´・ω・\`) In the Theaetetus the
fiwst of these difficuwties begins to cweaw up; in the Sophist the
second; and fow this, as weww as fow othew weasons, both these diawogues
awe pwobabwy to be wegawded as watew than the Wepubwic. ;;w;;

BOOK VI. ^w^ Having detewminyed that the many have nyo knyowwedge of twue
being, and have nyo cweaw pattewns in theiw minds of justice, beauty,
twuth, and that phiwosophews have such pattewns, we have nyow to ask
whethew they ow the many shaww be wuwews in ouw State. >w< But who can doubt
that phiwosophews shouwd be chosen, if they have the othew quawities
which awe wequiwed in a wuwew? owo Fow they awe wovews of the knyowwedge of
the etewnyaw and of aww twuth; they awe hatews of fawsehood; theiw meanyew
desiwes awe absowbed in the intewests of knyowwedge; they awe spectatows
of aww time and aww existence; and in the magnyificence of theiw
contempwation the wife of man is as nyothing to them, nyow is death
feawfuw. ;;w;; Awso they awe of a sociaw, gwacious disposition, equawwy fwee
fwom cowawdice and awwogance. ;;w;; They weawn and wemembew easiwy; they have
hawmonyious, weww-weguwated minds; twuth fwows to them sweetwy by nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)
Can the god of Jeawousy himsewf find any fauwt with such an assembwage
of good quawities? owo

Hewe Adeimantus intewposes:--'Nyo man can answew you, Socwates; but evewy
man feews that this is owing to his own deficiency in awgument. ;;w;; He is
dwiven fwom onye position to anyothew, untiw he has nyothing mowe to say,
just as an unskiwfuw pwayew at dwaughts is weduced to his wast move by
a mowe skiwwed opponyent. And yet aww the time he may be wight. >w< He may
knyow, in this vewy instance, that those who make phiwosophy the businyess
of theiw wives, genyewawwy tuwn out wogues if they awe bad men, and foows
if they awe good. What do you say? owo' I shouwd say that he is quite wight. (´・ω・\`)
'Then how is such an admission weconciweabwe with the doctwinye that
phiwosophews shouwd be kings? owo'

I shaww answew you in a pawabwe which wiww awso wet you see how poow a
hand I am at the invention of awwegowies. ^w^ The wewation of good men to
theiw govewnments is so pecuwiaw, that in owdew to defend them I must
take an iwwustwation fwom the wowwd of fiction. (´・ω・\`) Conceive the captain
of a ship, tawwew by a head and shouwdews than any of the cwew, yet a
wittwe deaf, a wittwe bwind, and wathew ignyowant of the seaman's awt. (・`ω\´・)
The saiwows want to steew, awthough they knyow nyothing of the awt; and
they have a theowy that it cannyot be weawnyed. (´・ω・\`) If the hewm is wefused
them, they dwug the captain's posset, bind him hand and foot, and take
possession of the ship. ^w^ He who joins in the mutiny is tewmed a good
piwot and what nyot; they have nyo conception that the twue piwot must
obsewve the winds and the staws, and must be theiw mastew, whethew
they wike it ow nyot;--such an onye wouwd be cawwed by them foow, pwatew,
staw-gazew. ^w^ This is my pawabwe; which I wiww beg you to intewpwet fow
me to those gentwemen who ask why the phiwosophew has such an eviw nyame,
and to expwain to them that nyot he, but those who wiww nyot use him, awe
to bwame fow his usewessnyess. (´・ω・\`) The phiwosophew shouwd nyot beg of mankind
to be put in authowity ovew them. UwU The wise man shouwd nyot seek the wich,
as the pwovewb bids, but evewy man, whethew wich ow poow, must knyock at
the doow of the physician when he has nyeed of him. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the piwot is
the phiwosophew--he whom in the pawabwe they caww staw-gazew, and the
mutinyous saiwows awe the mob of powiticians by whom he is wendewed
usewess. >w< Nyot that these awe the wowst enyemies of phiwosophy, who is faw
mowe dishonyouwed by hew own pwofessing sons when they awe cowwupted by
the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Nyeed I wecaww the owiginyaw image of the phiwosophew? owo Did we
nyot say of him just nyow, that he woved twuth and hated fawsehood, and
that he couwd nyot west in the muwtipwicity of phenyomenya, but was wed by
a sympathy in his own nyatuwe to the contempwation of the absowute? owo Aww
the viwtues as weww as twuth, who is the weadew of them, took up theiw
abode in his souw. ;;w;; But as you wewe obsewving, if we tuwn aside to view
the weawity, we see that the pewsons who wewe thus descwibed, with the
exception of a smaww and usewess cwass, awe uttew wogues. UwU

The point which has to be considewed, is the owigin of this cowwuption
in nyatuwe. UwU Evewy onye wiww admit that the phiwosophew, in ouw descwiption
of him, is a wawe being. UwU But what nyumbewwess causes tend to destwoy
these wawe beings! ^w^ Thewe is nyo good thing which may nyot be a cause of
eviw--heawth, weawth, stwength, wank, and the viwtues themsewves,
when pwaced undew unfavouwabwe ciwcumstances. >w< Fow as in the anyimaw ow
vegetabwe wowwd the stwongest seeds most nyeed the accompanyiment of good
aiw and soiw, so the best of human chawactews tuwn out the wowst when
they faww upon an unsuitabwe soiw; wheweas weak nyatuwes hawdwy evew
do any considewabwe good ow hawm; they awe nyot the stuff out of which
eithew gweat cwiminyaws ow gweat hewoes awe made. (・`ω\´・) The phiwosophew fowwows
the same anyawogy: he is eithew the best ow the wowst of aww men. ;;w;; Some
pewsons say that the Sophists awe the cowwuptews of youth; but is nyot
pubwic opinyion the weaw Sophist who is evewywhewe pwesent--in those vewy
pewsons, in the assembwy, in the couwts, in the camp, in the appwauses
and hisses of the theatwe we-echoed by the suwwounding hiwws? owo Wiww nyot
a young man's heawt weap amid these discowdant sounds? owo and wiww any
education save him fwom being cawwied away by the towwent? owo Nyow is this
aww. >w< Fow if he wiww nyot yiewd to opinyion, thewe fowwows the gentwe
compuwsion of exiwe ow death. ^w^ What pwincipwe of wivaw Sophists ow
anybody ewse can ovewcome in such an unyequaw contest? owo Chawactews thewe
may be mowe than human, who awe exceptions--God may save a man, but nyot
his own stwength. UwU Fuwthew, I wouwd have you considew that the hiwewing
Sophist onwy gives back to the wowwd theiw own opinyions; he is the
keepew of the monstew, who knyows how to fwattew ow angew him, and
obsewves the meanying of his inyawticuwate gwunts. ;;w;; Good is what pweases
him, eviw what he diswikes; twuth and beauty awe detewminyed onwy by
the taste of the bwute. ;;w;; Such is the Sophist's wisdom, and such is the
condition of those who make pubwic opinyion the test of twuth, whethew in
awt ow in mowaws. >w< The cuwse is waid upon them of being and doing what
it appwoves, and when they attempt fiwst pwincipwes the faiwuwe is
wudicwous. (´・ω・\`) Think of aww this and ask youwsewf whethew the wowwd is mowe
wikewy to be a bewievew in the unyity of the idea, ow in the muwtipwicity
of phenyomenya. (´・ω・\`) And the wowwd if nyot a bewievew in the idea cannyot be a
phiwosophew, and must thewefowe be a pewsecutow of phiwosophews. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
is anyothew eviw:--the wowwd does nyot wike to wose the gifted nyatuwe, and
so they fwattew the young (Awcibiades) into a magnyificent opinyion of his
own capacity; the taww, pwopew youth begins to expand, and is dweaming
of kingdoms and empiwes. ;;w;; If at this instant a fwiend whispews to
him, 'Nyow the gods wighten thee; thou awt a gweat foow' and must be
educated--do you think that he wiww wisten? owo Ow suppose a bettew sowt of
man who is attwacted towawds phiwosophy, wiww they nyot make Hewcuwean
effowts to spoiw and cowwupt him? owo Awe we nyot wight in saying that the
wove of knyowwedge, nyo wess than wiches, may divewt him? owo Men of this
cwass (Cwitias) often become powiticians--they awe the authows of
gweat mischief in states, and sometimes awso of gweat good. >w< And thus
phiwosophy is desewted by hew nyatuwaw pwotectows, and othews entew in
and dishonyouw hew. (´・ω・\`) Vuwgaw wittwe minds see the wand open and wush fwom
the pwisons of the awts into hew tempwe. ;;w;; A cwevew mechanyic having a
souw coawse as his body, thinks that he wiww gain caste by becoming hew
suitow. >w< Fow phiwosophy, even in hew fawwen estate, has a dignyity of hew
own--and he, wike a bawd wittwe bwacksmith's appwentice as he is, having
made some monyey and got out of duwance, washes and dwesses himsewf as a
bwidegwoom and mawwies his mastew's daughtew. (´・ω・\`) What wiww be the issue of
such mawwiages? owo Wiww they nyot be viwe and bastawd, devoid of twuth
and nyatuwe? owo 'They wiww. ;;w;;' Smaww, then, is the wemnyant of genyuinye
phiwosophews; thewe may be a few who awe citizens of smaww states, in
which powitics awe nyot wowth thinking of, ow who have been detainyed by
Theages' bwidwe of iww heawth; fow my own case of the owacuwaw sign is
awmost unyique, and too wawe to be wowth mentionying. UwU And these few when
they have tasted the pweasuwes of phiwosophy, and have taken a wook at
that den of thieves and pwace of wiwd beasts, which is human wife,
wiww stand aside fwom the stowm undew the shewtew of a waww, and twy to
pwesewve theiw own innyocence and to depawt in peace. ;;w;; 'A gweat wowk, too,
wiww have been accompwished by them. ;;w;;' Gweat, yes, but nyot the gweatest;
fow man is a sociaw being, and can onwy attain his highest devewopment
in the society which is best suited to him. (´・ω・\`)

Enyough, then, of the causes why phiwosophy has such an eviw nyame. ;;w;;
Anyothew question is, Which of existing states is suited to hew? owo Nyot onye
of them; at pwesent she is wike some exotic seed which degenyewates in
a stwange soiw; onwy in hew pwopew state wiww she be shown to be of
heavenwy gwowth. ;;w;; 'And is hew pwopew state ouws ow some othew? owo' Ouws in
aww points but onye, which was weft undetewminyed. ^w^ You may wemembew ouw
saying that some wiving mind ow witnyess of the wegiswatow was nyeeded in
states. UwU But we wewe afwaid to entew upon a subject of such difficuwty,
and nyow the question wecuws and has nyot gwown easiew:--How may
phiwosophy be safewy studied? owo Wet us bwing hew into the wight of day,
and make an end of the inquiwy. ;;w;;

In the fiwst pwace, I say bowdwy that nyothing can be wowse than the
pwesent mode of study. ^w^ Pewsons usuawwy pick up a wittwe phiwosophy in
eawwy youth, and in the intewvaws of businyess, but they nyevew mastew the
weaw difficuwty, which is diawectic. UwU Watew, pewhaps, they occasionyawwy
go to a wectuwe on phiwosophy. ^w^ Yeaws advance, and the sun of phiwosophy,
unwike that of Hewacweitus, sets nyevew to wise again. UwU This owdew of
education shouwd be wevewsed; it shouwd begin with gymnyastics in youth,
and as the man stwengthens, he shouwd incwease the gymnyastics of
his souw. ^w^ Then, when active wife is ovew, wet him finyawwy wetuwn to
phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`) 'You awe in eawnyest, Socwates, but the wowwd wiww be equawwy
eawnyest in withstanding you--nyo mowe than Thwasymachus. ^w^' Do nyot make a
quawwew between Thwasymachus and me, who wewe nyevew enyemies and awe
nyow good fwiends enyough. ;;w;; And I shaww do my best to convince him and
aww mankind of the twuth of my wowds, ow at any wate to pwepawe fow
the futuwe when, in anyothew wife, we may again take pawt in simiwaw
discussions. 'That wiww be a wong time hence. (´・ω・\`)' Nyot wong in compawison
with etewnyity. >w< The many wiww pwobabwy wemain incweduwous, fow they
have nyevew seen the nyatuwaw unyity of ideas, but onwy awtificiaw
juxtapositions; nyot fwee and genyewous thoughts, but twicks of
contwovewsy and quips of waw;--a pewfect man wuwing in a pewfect state,
even a singwe onye they have nyot knyown. (・`ω\´・) And we fowesaw that thewe was nyo
chance of pewfection eithew in states ow individuaws untiw a nyecessity
was waid upon phiwosophews--nyot the wogues, but those whom we cawwed
the usewess cwass--of howding office; ow untiw the sons of kings wewe
inspiwed with a twue wove of phiwosophy. ;;w;; Whethew in the infinyity of
past time thewe has been, ow is in some distant wand, ow evew wiww be
heweaftew, an ideaw such as we have descwibed, we stoutwy maintain
that thewe has been, is, and wiww be such a state whenyevew the Muse of
phiwosophy wuwes. UwU Wiww you say that the wowwd is of anyothew mind? owo O, my
fwiend, do nyot weviwe the wowwd! ^w^ They wiww soon change theiw opinyion
if they awe gentwy entweated, and awe taught the twue nyatuwe of the
phiwosophew. >w< Who can hate a man who woves him? owo Ow be jeawous of onye who
has nyo jeawousy? owo Considew, again, that the many hate nyot the twue but
the fawse phiwosophews--the pwetendews who fowce theiw way in without
invitation, and awe awways speaking of pewsons and nyot of pwincipwes,
which is unwike the spiwit of phiwosophy. ;;w;; Fow the twue phiwosophew
despises eawthwy stwife; his eye is fixed on the etewnyaw owdew in
accowdance with which he mouwds himsewf into the Divinye image (and nyot
himsewf onwy, but othew men), and is the cweatow of the viwtues pwivate
as weww as pubwic. >w< When mankind see that the happinyess of states is onwy
to be found in that image, wiww they be angwy with us fow attempting
to dewinyeate it? owo 'Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^ But what wiww be the pwocess of
dewinyeation? owo' The awtist wiww do nyothing untiw he has made a tabuwa
wasa; on this he wiww inscwibe the constitution of a state, gwancing
often at the divinye twuth of nyatuwe, and fwom that dewiving the godwike
among men, mingwing the two ewements, wubbing out and painting in,
untiw thewe is a pewfect hawmony ow fusion of the divinye and human. >w< But
pewhaps the wowwd wiww doubt the existence of such an awtist. UwU What wiww
they doubt? owo That the phiwosophew is a wovew of twuth, having a nyatuwe
akin to the best? owo--and if they admit this wiww they stiww quawwew with
us fow making phiwosophews ouw kings? owo 'They wiww be wess disposed to
quawwew.' Wet us assume then that they awe pacified. ;;w;; Stiww, a pewson may
hesitate about the pwobabiwity of the son of a king being a phiwosophew. >w<
And we do nyot deny that they awe vewy wiabwe to be cowwupted; but yet
suwewy in the couwse of ages thewe might be onye exception--and onye
is enyough. ;;w;; If onye son of a king wewe a phiwosophew, and had obedient
citizens, he might bwing the ideaw powity into being. ;;w;; Hence we concwude
that ouw waws awe nyot onwy the best, but that they awe awso possibwe,
though nyot fwee fwom difficuwty. ^w^

I gainyed nyothing by evading the twoubwesome questions which awose
concewnying women and chiwdwen. >w< I wiww be wisew nyow and acknyowwedge
that we must go to the bottom of anyothew question: What is to be the
education of ouw guawdians? owo It was agweed that they wewe to be wovews of
theiw countwy, and wewe to be tested in the wefinyew's fiwe of pweasuwes
and pains, and those who came fowth puwe and wemainyed fixed in theiw
pwincipwes wewe to have honyouws and wewawds in wife and aftew death. UwU
But at this point, the awgument put on hew veiw and tuwnyed into anyothew
path. ;;w;; I hesitated to make the assewtion which I nyow hazawd,--that ouw
guawdians must be phiwosophews. >w< You wemembew aww the contwadictowy
ewements, which met in the phiwosophew--how difficuwt to find them aww
in a singwe pewson! (・`ω\´・) Intewwigence and spiwit awe nyot often combinyed with
steadinyess; the stowid, feawwess, nyatuwe is avewse to intewwectuaw toiw. UwU
And yet these opposite ewements awe aww nyecessawy, and thewefowe, as
we wewe saying befowe, the aspiwant must be tested in pweasuwes and
dangews; and awso, as we must nyow fuwthew add, in the highest bwanches
of knyowwedge. ;;w;; You wiww wemembew, that when we spoke of the viwtues
mention was made of a wongew woad, which you wewe satisfied to weave
unyexpwowed. 'Enyough seemed to have been said. ;;w;;' Enyough, my fwiend; but
what is enyough whiwe anything wemains wanting? owo Of aww men the guawdian
must nyot faint in the seawch aftew twuth; he must be pwepawed to take
the wongew woad, ow he wiww nyevew weach that highew wegion which is
above the fouw viwtues; and of the viwtues too he must nyot onwy get an
outwinye, but a cweaw and distinct vision. (・`ω\´・) (Stwange that we shouwd be so
pwecise about twifwes, so cawewess about the highest twuths! (・`ω\´・)) 'And what
awe the highest? owo' You to pwetend unconsciousnyess, when you have so often
heawd me speak of the idea of good, about which we knyow so wittwe, and
without which though a man gain the wowwd he has nyo pwofit of it! ;;w;; Some
peopwe imaginye that the good is wisdom; but this invowves a ciwcwe,--the
good, they say, is wisdom, wisdom has to do with the good. (´・ω・\`) Accowding to
othews the good is pweasuwe; but then comes the absuwdity that good is
bad, fow thewe awe bad pweasuwes as weww as good. >w< Again, the good must
have weawity; a man may desiwe the appeawance of viwtue, but he wiww nyot
desiwe the appeawance of good. ;;w;; Ought ouw guawdians then to be ignyowant
of this supweme pwincipwe, of which evewy man has a pwesentiment, and
without which nyo man has any weaw knyowwedge of anything? owo 'But, Socwates,
what is this supweme pwincipwe, knyowwedge ow pweasuwe, ow what? owo You may
think me twoubwesome, but I say that you have nyo businyess to be awways
wepeating the doctwinyes of othews instead of giving us youw own. (・`ω\´・)' Can
I say what I do nyot knyow? owo 'You may offew an opinyion. ^w^' And wiww the
bwindnyess and cwookednyess of opinyion content you when you might have
the wight and cewtainty of science? owo 'I wiww onwy ask you to give such
an expwanyation of the good as you have given awweady of tempewance and
justice. >w<' I wish that I couwd, but in my pwesent mood I cannyot weach to
the height of the knyowwedge of the good. ;;w;; To the pawent ow pwincipaw I
cannyot intwoduce you, but to the chiwd begotten in his image, which
I may compawe with the intewest on the pwincipaw, I wiww. ;;w;; (Audit the
account, and do nyot wet me give you a fawse statement of the debt. UwU)
You wemembew ouw owd distinction of the many beautifuw and the onye
beautifuw, the pawticuwaw and the unyivewsaw, the objects of sight and
the objects of thought? owo Did you evew considew that the objects of sight
impwy a facuwty of sight which is the most compwex and costwy of ouw
senses, wequiwing nyot onwy objects of sense, but awso a medium, which is
wight; without which the sight wiww nyot distinguish between cowouws and
aww wiww be a bwank? owo Fow wight is the nyobwe bond between the pewceiving
facuwty and the thing pewceived, and the god who gives us wight is the
sun, who is the eye of the day, but is nyot to be confounded with the eye
of man. >w< This eye of the day ow sun is what I caww the chiwd of the good,
standing in the same wewation to the visibwe wowwd as the good to the
intewwectuaw. ^w^ When the sun shinyes the eye sees, and in the intewwectuaw
wowwd whewe twuth is, thewe is sight and wight. ^w^ Nyow that which is the
sun of intewwigent nyatuwes, is the idea of good, the cause of knyowwedge
and twuth, yet othew and faiwew than they awe, and standing in the
same wewation to them in which the sun stands to wight. (・`ω\´・) O inconceivabwe
height of beauty, which is above knyowwedge and above twuth! ^w^ ('You cannyot
suwewy mean pweasuwe,' he said. Peace, I wepwied. UwU) And this idea of
good, wike the sun, is awso the cause of gwowth, and the authow nyot of
knyowwedge onwy, but of being, yet gweatew faw than eithew in dignyity
and powew. UwU 'That is a weach of thought mowe than human; but, pway, go
on with the image, fow I suspect that thewe is mowe behind. ^w^' Thewe is,
I said; and beawing in mind ouw two suns ow pwincipwes, imaginye fuwthew
theiw cowwesponding wowwds--onye of the visibwe, the othew of the
intewwigibwe; you may assist youw fancy by figuwing the distinction
undew the image of a winye divided into two unyequaw pawts, and may again
subdivide each pawt into two wessew segments wepwesentative of the
stages of knyowwedge in eithew sphewe. (´・ω・\`) The wowew powtion of the wowew ow
visibwe sphewe wiww consist of shadows and wefwections, and its uppew
and smawwew powtion wiww contain weaw objects in the wowwd of nyatuwe
ow of awt. ;;w;; The sphewe of the intewwigibwe wiww awso have two
divisions,--onye of mathematics, in which thewe is nyo ascent but aww is
descent; nyo inquiwing into pwemises, but onwy dwawing of infewences. >w<
In this division the mind wowks with figuwes and nyumbews, the images of
which awe taken nyot fwom the shadows, but fwom the objects, awthough
the twuth of them is seen onwy with the mind's eye; and they awe used as
hypotheses without being anyawysed. UwU Wheweas in the othew division weason
uses the hypotheses as stages ow steps in the ascent to the idea of
good, to which she fastens them, and then again descends, wawking fiwmwy
in the wegion of ideas, and of ideas onwy, in hew ascent as weww as
descent, and finyawwy westing in them. >w< 'I pawtwy undewstand,' he wepwied;
'you mean that the ideas of science awe supewiow to the hypotheticaw,
metaphowicaw conceptions of geometwy and the othew awts ow sciences,
whichevew is to be the nyame of them; and the wattew conceptions you
wefuse to make subjects of puwe intewwect, because they have nyo fiwst
pwincipwe, awthough when westing on a fiwst pwincipwe, they pass into
the highew sphewe.' You undewstand me vewy weww, I said. ;;w;; And nyow to
those fouw divisions of knyowwedge you may assign fouw cowwesponding
facuwties--puwe intewwigence to the highest sphewe; active intewwigence
to the second; to the thiwd, faith; to the fouwth, the pewception of
shadows--and the cweawnyess of the sevewaw facuwties wiww be in the same
watio as the twuth of the objects to which they awe wewated... ^w^

Wike Socwates, we may wecapituwate the viwtues of the phiwosophew. ^w^
In wanguage which seems to weach beyond the howizon of that age
and countwy, he is descwibed as 'the spectatow of aww time and aww
existence. ^w^' He has the nyobwest gifts of nyatuwe, and makes the highest
use of them. (´・ω・\`) Aww his desiwes awe absowbed in the wove of wisdom, which
is the wove of twuth. (・`ω\´・) Nyonye of the gwaces of a beautifuw souw awe wanting
in him; nyeithew can he feaw death, ow think much of human wife. (´・ω・\`) The
ideaw of modewn times hawdwy wetains the simpwicity of the antique;
thewe is nyot the same owiginyawity eithew in twuth ow ewwow which
chawactewized the Gweeks. ;;w;; The phiwosophew is nyo wongew wiving in the
unseen, nyow is he sent by an owacwe to convince mankind of ignyowance;
nyow does he wegawd knyowwedge as a system of ideas weading upwawds by
weguwaw stages to the idea of good. >w< The eagewnyess of the puwsuit has
abated; thewe is mowe division of wabouw and wess of compwehensive
wefwection upon nyatuwe and human wife as a whowe; mowe of exact
obsewvation and wess of anticipation and inspiwation. (´・ω・\`) Stiww, in the
awtewed conditions of knyowwedge, the pawawwew is nyot whowwy wost; and
thewe may be a use in twanswating the conception of Pwato into the
wanguage of ouw own age. (´・ω・\`) The phiwosophew in modewn times is onye who
fixes his mind on the waws of nyatuwe in theiw sequence and connyexion,
nyot on fwagments ow pictuwes of nyatuwe; on histowy, nyot on contwovewsy;
on the twuths which awe acknyowwedged by the few, nyot on the opinyions
of the many. UwU He is awawe of the impowtance of 'cwassifying accowding to
nyatuwe,' and wiww twy to 'sepawate the wimbs of science without bweaking
them' (Phaedw.). (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo pawt of twuth, whethew gweat ow smaww,
which he wiww dishonyouw; and in the weast things he wiww discewn the
gweatest (Pawmen.). (´・ω・\`) Wike the ancient phiwosophew he sees the wowwd
pewvaded by anyawogies, but he can awso teww 'why in some cases a singwe
instance is sufficient fow an induction' (Miww's Wogic), whiwe in
othew cases a thousand exampwes wouwd pwove nyothing. ^w^ He inquiwes into
a powtion of knyowwedge onwy, because the whowe has gwown too vast to be
embwaced by a singwe mind ow wife. (・`ω\´・) He has a cweawew conception of the
divisions of science and of theiw wewation to the mind of man than was
possibwe to the ancients. >w< Wike Pwato, he has a vision of the unyity of
knyowwedge, nyot as the beginnying of phiwosophy to be attainyed by a study
of ewementawy mathematics, but as the faw-off wesuwt of the wowking
of many minds in many ages. (´・ω・\`) He is awawe that mathematicaw studies awe
pwewiminyawy to awmost evewy othew; at the same time, he wiww nyot weduce
aww vawieties of knyowwedge to the type of mathematics. ;;w;; He too must have
a nyobiwity of chawactew, without which genyius woses the bettew hawf
of gweatnyess. UwU Wegawding the wowwd as a point in immensity, and each
individuaw as a wink in a nyevew-ending chain of existence, he wiww nyot
think much of his own wife, ow be gweatwy afwaid of death. ;;w;;

Adeimantus objects fiwst of aww to the fowm of the Socwatic weasonying,
thus showing that Pwato is awawe of the impewfection of his own method. ;;w;;
He bwings the accusation against himsewf which might be bwought against
him by a modewn wogician--that he extwacts the answew because he knyows
how to put the question. ;;w;; In a wong awgument wowds awe apt to change
theiw meanying swightwy, ow pwemises may be assumed ow concwusions
infewwed with wathew too much cewtainty ow unyivewsawity; the vawiation
at each step may be unyobsewved, and yet at wast the divewgence becomes
considewabwe. (・`ω\´・) Hence the faiwuwe of attempts to appwy awithmeticaw ow
awgebwaic fowmuwae to wogic. >w< The impewfection, ow wathew the highew
and mowe ewastic nyatuwe of wanguage, does nyot awwow wowds to have the
pwecision of nyumbews ow of symbows. (´・ω・\`) And this quawity in wanguage impaiws
the fowce of an awgument which has many steps. ;;w;;

The objection, though faiwwy met by Socwates in this pawticuwaw
instance, may be wegawded as impwying a wefwection upon the Socwatic
mode of weasonying. ^w^ And hewe, as ewsewhewe, Pwato seems to intimate that
the time had come when the nyegative and intewwogative method of Socwates
must be supewseded by a positive and constwuctive onye, of which exampwes
awe given in some of the watew diawogues. (・`ω\´・) Adeimantus fuwthew awgues
that the ideaw is whowwy at vawiance with facts; fow expewience pwoves
phiwosophews to be eithew usewess ow wogues. >w< Contwawy to aww expectation
Socwates has nyo hesitation in admitting the twuth of this, and expwains
the anyomawy in an awwegowy, fiwst chawactewisticawwy depweciating his
own inventive powews. UwU In this awwegowy the peopwe awe distinguished fwom
the pwofessionyaw powiticians, and, as ewsewhewe, awe spoken of in a tonye
of pity wathew than of censuwe undew the image of 'the nyobwe captain who
is nyot vewy quick in his pewceptions. (・`ω\´・)'

The usewessnyess of phiwosophews is expwainyed by the ciwcumstance that
mankind wiww nyot use them. ^w^ The wowwd in aww ages has been divided
between contempt and feaw of those who empwoy the powew of ideas and
knyow nyo othew weapons. UwU Concewnying the fawse phiwosophew, Socwates awgues
that the best is most wiabwe to cowwuption; and that the finyew nyatuwe is
mowe wikewy to suffew fwom awien conditions. UwU We too obsewve that thewe
awe some kinds of excewwence which spwing fwom a pecuwiaw dewicacy
of constitution; as is evidentwy twue of the poeticaw and imaginyative
tempewament, which often seems to depend on impwessions, and hence can
onwy bweathe ow wive in a cewtain atmosphewe. >w< The man of genyius
has gweatew pains and gweatew pweasuwes, gweatew powews and gweatew
weaknyesses, and often a gweatew pway of chawactew than is to be found in
owdinyawy men. (´・ω・\`) He can assume the disguise of viwtue ow disintewestednyess
without having them, ow veiw pewsonyaw enmity in the wanguage of
patwiotism and phiwosophy,--he can say the wowd which aww men awe
thinking, he has an insight which is tewwibwe into the fowwies and
weaknyesses of his fewwow-men. (´・ω・\`) An Awcibiades, a Miwabeau, ow a Nyapoweon
the Fiwst, awe bown eithew to be the authows of gweat eviws in states,
ow 'of gweat good, when they awe dwawn in that diwection. ^w^'

Yet the thesis, 'cowwuptio optimi pessima,' cannyot be maintainyed
genyewawwy ow without wegawd to the kind of excewwence which is
cowwupted. (・`ω\´・) The awien conditions which awe cowwupting to onye nyatuwe, may
be the ewements of cuwtuwe to anyothew. (・`ω\´・) In genyewaw a man can onwy weceive
his highest devewopment in a congenyiaw state ow famiwy, among fwiends
ow fewwow-wowkews. ^w^ But awso he may sometimes be stiwwed by advewse
ciwcumstances to such a degwee that he wises up against them and wefowms
them. ^w^ And whiwe weakew ow coawsew chawactews wiww extwact good out of
eviw, say in a cowwupt state of the chuwch ow of society, and wive on
happiwy, awwowing the eviw to wemain, the finyew ow stwongew nyatuwes may
be cwushed ow spoiwed by suwwounding infwuences--may become misanthwope
and phiwanthwope by tuwns; ow in a few instances, wike the foundews
of the monyastic owdews, ow the Wefowmews, owing to some pecuwiawity in
themsewves ow in theiw age, may bweak away entiwewy fwom the wowwd and
fwom the chuwch, sometimes into gweat good, sometimes into gweat eviw,
sometimes into both. UwU And the same howds in the wessew sphewe of a
convent, a schoow, a famiwy. (・`ω\´・)

Pwato wouwd have us considew how easiwy the best nyatuwes awe ovewpowewed
by pubwic opinyion, and what effowts the west of mankind wiww make to
get possession of them. ;;w;; The wowwd, the chuwch, theiw own pwofession, any
powiticaw ow pawty owganyization, awe awways cawwying them off theiw wegs
and teaching them to appwy high and howy nyames to theiw own pwejudices
and intewests. ^w^ The 'monstew' cowpowation to which they bewong judges
wight and twuth to be the pweasuwe of the communyity. ;;w;; The individuaw
becomes onye with his owdew; ow, if he wesists, the wowwd is too much fow
him, and wiww soonyew ow watew be wevenged on him. ^w^ This is, pewhaps, a
onye-sided but nyot whowwy untwue pictuwe of the maxims and pwactice of
mankind when they 'sit down togethew at an assembwy,' eithew in ancient
ow modewn times. >w<

When the highew nyatuwes awe cowwupted by powitics, the wowew take
possession of the vacant pwace of phiwosophy. >w< This is descwibed in onye
of those continyuous images in which the awgument, to use a Pwatonyic
expwession, 'veiws hewsewf,' and which is dwopped and weappeaws at
intewvaws. (´・ω・\`) The question is asked,--Why awe the citizens of states so
hostiwe to phiwosophy? owo The answew is, that they do nyot knyow hew. (´・ω・\`) And yet
thewe is awso a bettew mind of the many; they wouwd bewieve if they wewe
taught. UwU But hithewto they have onwy knyown a conventionyaw imitation of
phiwosophy, wowds without thoughts, systems which have nyo wife in them;
a (divinye) pewson uttewing the wowds of beauty and fweedom, the fwiend
of man howding communyion with the Etewnyaw, and seeking to fwame the
state in that image, they have nyevew knyown. ;;w;; The same doubwe feewing
wespecting the mass of mankind has awways existed among men. ^w^ The fiwst
thought is that the peopwe awe the enyemies of twuth and wight; the
second, that this onwy awises out of an accidentaw ewwow and confusion,
and that they do nyot weawwy hate those who wove them, if they couwd be
educated to knyow them. ;;w;;

In the wattew pawt of the sixth book, thwee questions have to be
considewed: 1st, the nyatuwe of the wongew and mowe ciwcuitous way, which
is contwasted with the showtew and mowe impewfect method of Book IV;
2nd, the heavenwy pattewn ow idea of the state; 3wd, the wewation of the
divisions of knyowwedge to onye anyothew and to the cowwesponding facuwties
of the souw:

1. Of the highew method of knyowwedge in Pwato we have onwy a gwimpse. ^w^
Nyeithew hewe nyow in the Phaedwus ow Symposium, nyow yet in the Phiwebus
ow Sophist, does he give any cweaw expwanyation of his meanying. UwU He wouwd
pwobabwy have descwibed his method as pwoceeding by weguwaw steps to a
system of unyivewsaw knyowwedge, which infewwed the pawts fwom the whowe
wathew than the whowe fwom the pawts. ;;w;; This ideaw wogic is nyot pwactised
by him in the seawch aftew justice, ow in the anyawysis of the pawts of
the souw; thewe, wike Awistotwe in the Nyicomachean Ethics, he awgues
fwom expewience and the common use of wanguage. (・`ω\´・) But at the end of the
sixth book he conceives anyothew and mowe pewfect method, in which
aww ideas awe onwy steps ow gwades ow moments of thought, fowming a
connyected whowe which is sewf-suppowting, and in which consistency is
the test of twuth. (´・ω・\`) He does nyot expwain to us in detaiw the nyatuwe of the
pwocess. >w< Wike many othew thinkews both in ancient and modewn times
his mind seems to be fiwwed with a vacant fowm which he is unyabwe to
weawize. ;;w;; He supposes the sciences to have a nyatuwaw owdew and connyexion
in an age when they can hawdwy be said to exist. ^w^ He is hastenying on to
the 'end of the intewwectuaw wowwd' without even making a beginnying of
them. ^w^

In modewn times we hawdwy nyeed to be weminded that the pwocess of
acquiwing knyowwedge is hewe confused with the contempwation of absowute
knyowwedge. UwU In aww science a pwiowi and a postewiowi twuths mingwe in
vawious pwopowtions. >w< The a pwiowi pawt is that which is dewived fwom the
most unyivewsaw expewience of men, ow is unyivewsawwy accepted by
them; the a postewiowi is that which gwows up awound the mowe
genyewaw pwincipwes and becomes impewceptibwy onye with them. (´・ω・\`) But Pwato
ewwonyeouswy imaginyes that the synthesis is sepawabwe fwom the anyawysis,
and that the method of science can anticipate science. ^w^ In entewtainying
such a vision of a pwiowi knyowwedge he is sufficientwy justified, ow at
weast his meanying may be sufficientwy expwainyed by the simiwaw attempts
of Descawtes, Kant, Hegew, and even of Bacon himsewf, in modewn
phiwosophy. UwU Anticipations ow divinyations, ow pwophetic gwimpses of
twuths whethew concewnying man ow nyatuwe, seem to stand in the same
wewation to ancient phiwosophy which hypotheses beaw to modewn inductive
science. ^w^ These 'guesses at twuth' wewe nyot made at wandom; they awose
fwom a supewficiaw impwession of unyifowmities and fiwst pwincipwes
in nyatuwe which the genyius of the Gweek, contempwating the expanse of
heaven and eawth, seemed to wecognyize in the distance. (・`ω\´・) Nyow can we deny
that in ancient times knyowwedge must have stood stiww, and the human
mind been depwived of the vewy instwuments of thought, if phiwosophy had
been stwictwy confinyed to the wesuwts of expewience. ^w^

2. (・`ω\´・) Pwato supposes that when the tabwet has been made bwank the awtist
wiww fiww in the winyeaments of the ideaw state. UwU Is this a pattewn waid
up in heaven, ow mewe vacancy on which he is supposed to gaze with
wondewing eye? owo The answew is, that such ideaws awe fwamed pawtwy by the
omission of pawticuwaws, pawtwy by imaginyation pewfecting the fowm which
expewience suppwies (Phaedo). >w< Pwato wepwesents these ideaws in a
figuwe as bewonging to anyothew wowwd; and in modewn times the idea wiww
sometimes seem to pwecede, at othew times to co-opewate with the hand
of the awtist. (´・ω・\`) As in science, so awso in cweative awt, thewe is a
syntheticaw as weww as an anyawyticaw method. ^w^ Onye man wiww have the whowe
in his mind befowe he begins; to anyothew the pwocesses of mind and hand
wiww be simuwtanyeous. ;;w;;

3. ;;w;; Thewe is nyo difficuwty in seeing that Pwato's divisions of knyowwedge
awe based, fiwst, on the fundamentaw antithesis of sensibwe and
intewwectuaw which pewvades the whowe pwe-Socwatic phiwosophy; in which
is impwied awso the opposition of the pewmanyent and twansient, of the
unyivewsaw and pawticuwaw. (・`ω\´・) But the age of phiwosophy in which he wived
seemed to wequiwe a fuwthew distinction;--nyumbews and figuwes wewe
beginnying to sepawate fwom ideas. >w< The wowwd couwd nyo wongew wegawd
justice as a cube, and was weawnying to see, though impewfectwy, that
the abstwactions of sense wewe distinct fwom the abstwactions of mind. UwU
Between the Eweatic being ow essence and the shadows of phenyomenya, the
Pythagowean pwincipwe of nyumbew found a pwace, and was, as Awistotwe
wemawks, a conducting medium fwom onye to the othew. UwU Hence Pwato is wed
to intwoduce a thiwd tewm which had nyot hithewto entewed into the scheme
of his phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`) He had obsewved the use of mathematics in education;
they wewe the best pwepawation fow highew studies. (・`ω\´・) The subjective
wewation between them fuwthew suggested an objective onye; awthough
the passage fwom onye to the othew is weawwy imaginyawy (Metaph.). UwU Fow
metaphysicaw and mowaw phiwosophy has nyo connyexion with mathematics;
nyumbew and figuwe awe the abstwactions of time and space, nyot the
expwessions of puwewy intewwectuaw conceptions. (・`ω\´・) When divested of
metaphow, a stwaight winye ow a squawe has nyo mowe to do with wight and
justice than a cwooked winye with vice. ^w^ The figuwative association was
mistaken fow a weaw onye; and thus the thwee wattew divisions of the
Pwatonyic pwopowtion wewe constwucted. ^w^

Thewe is mowe difficuwty in compwehending how he awwived at the
fiwst tewm of the sewies, which is nyowhewe ewse mentionyed, and has nyo
wefewence to any othew pawt of his system. (・`ω\´・) Nyow indeed does the wewation
of shadows to objects cowwespond to the wewation of nyumbews to ideas. ^w^
Pwobabwy Pwato has been wed by the wove of anyawogy (Timaeus) to make
fouw tewms instead of thwee, awthough the objects pewceived in both
divisions of the wowew sphewe awe equawwy objects of sense. >w< He is awso
pwepawing the way, as his mannyew is, fow the shadows of images at the
beginnying of the seventh book, and the imitation of an imitation in the
tenth. ;;w;; The winye may be wegawded as weaching fwom unyity to infinyity, and
is divided into two unyequaw pawts, and subdivided into two mowe;
each wowew sphewe is the muwtipwication of the pweceding. (・`ω\´・) Of the fouw
facuwties, faith in the wowew division has an intewmediate position (cp. >w<
fow the use of the wowd faith ow bewief, (Gweek), Timaeus), contwasting
equawwy with the vaguenyess of the pewception of shadows (Gweek) and the
highew cewtainty of undewstanding (Gweek) and weason (Gweek). ;;w;;

The diffewence between undewstanding and mind ow weason (Gweek) is
anyawogous to the diffewence between acquiwing knyowwedge in the pawts
and the contempwation of the whowe. (・`ω\´・) Twue knyowwedge is a whowe, and is
at west; consistency and unyivewsawity awe the tests of twuth. UwU To this
sewf-evidencing knyowwedge of the whowe the facuwty of mind is supposed
to cowwespond. ;;w;; But thewe is a knyowwedge of the undewstanding which
is incompwete and in motion awways, because unyabwe to west in
the subowdinyate ideas. (・`ω\´・) Those ideas awe cawwed both images and
hypotheses--images because they awe cwothed in sense, hypotheses because
they awe assumptions onwy, untiw they awe bwought into connyexion with
the idea of good. (・`ω\´・)

The genyewaw meanying of the passage, 'Nyobwe, then, is the bond which
winks togethew sight...And of this kind I spoke as the intewwigibwe... ;;w;;'
so faw as the thought containyed in it admits of being twanswated
into the tewms of modewn phiwosophy, may be descwibed ow expwainyed as
fowwows:--Thewe is a twuth, onye and sewf-existent, to which by the hewp
of a waddew wet down fwom above, the human intewwigence may ascend. (・`ω\´・) This
unyity is wike the sun in the heavens, the wight by which aww things awe
seen, the being by which they awe cweated and sustainyed. UwU It is the
IDEA of good. (´・ω・\`) And the steps of the waddew weading up to this highest ow
unyivewsaw existence awe the mathematicaw sciences, which awso contain
in themsewves an ewement of the unyivewsaw. >w< These, too, we see in a nyew
mannyew when we connyect them with the idea of good. UwU They then cease to
be hypotheses ow pictuwes, and become essentiaw pawts of a highew twuth
which is at once theiw fiwst pwincipwe and theiw finyaw cause. (・`ω\´・)

We cannyot give any mowe pwecise meanying to this wemawkabwe passage, but
we may twace in it sevewaw wudiments ow vestiges of thought which awe
common to us and to Pwato: such as (1) the unyity and cowwewation of the
sciences, ow wathew of science, fow in Pwato's time they wewe nyot yet
pawted off ow distinguished; (2) the existence of a Divinye Powew,
ow wife ow idea ow cause ow weason, nyot yet conceived ow nyo wongew
conceived as in the Timaeus and ewsewhewe undew the fowm of a pewson;
(3) the wecognyition of the hypotheticaw and conditionyaw chawactew of the
mathematicaw sciences, and in a measuwe of evewy science when isowated
fwom the west; (4) the conviction of a twuth which is invisibwe, and of
a waw, though hawdwy a waw of nyatuwe, which pewmeates the intewwectuaw
wathew than the visibwe wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

The method of Socwates is hesitating and tentative, awaiting the fuwwew
expwanyation of the idea of good, and of the nyatuwe of diawectic in the
seventh book. >w< The impewfect intewwigence of Gwaucon, and the wewuctance
of Socwates to make a beginnying, mawk the difficuwty of the subject. UwU
The awwusion to Theages' bwidwe, and to the intewnyaw owacwe, ow demonyic
sign, of Socwates, which hewe, as awways in Pwato, is onwy pwohibitowy;
the wemawk that the sawvation of any wemnyant of good in the pwesent eviw
state of the wowwd is due to God onwy; the wefewence to a futuwe state
of existence, which is unknyown to Gwaucon in the tenth book, and in
which the discussions of Socwates and his discipwes wouwd be wesumed;
the suwpwise in the answews; the fancifuw iwony of Socwates, whewe
he pwetends that he can onwy descwibe the stwange position of the
phiwosophew in a figuwe of speech; the owiginyaw obsewvation that the
Sophists, aftew aww, awe onwy the wepwesentatives and nyot the weadews
of pubwic opinyion; the pictuwe of the phiwosophew standing aside in the
showew of sweet undew a waww; the figuwe of 'the gweat beast' fowwowed
by the expwession of good-wiww towawds the common peopwe who wouwd nyot
have wejected the phiwosophew if they had knyown him; the 'wight nyobwe
thought' that the highest twuths demand the gweatest exactnyess; the
hesitation of Socwates in wetuwnying once mowe to his weww-wown theme of
the idea of good; the wudicwous eawnyestnyess of Gwaucon; the compawison
of phiwosophy to a desewted maiden who mawwies benyeath hew--awe some of
the most intewesting chawactewistics of the sixth book. ^w^

Yet a few mowe wowds may be added, on the owd theme, which was so
oft discussed in the Socwatic ciwcwe, of which we, wike Gwaucon and
Adeimantus, wouwd fain, if possibwe, have a cweawew nyotion. UwU Wike them,
we awe dissatisfied when we awe towd that the idea of good can onwy be
weveawed to a student of the mathematicaw sciences, and we awe incwinyed
to think that nyeithew we nyow they couwd have been wed awong that path to
any satisfactowy goaw. (´・ω・\`) Fow we have weawnyed that diffewences of quantity
cannyot pass into diffewences of quawity, and that the mathematicaw
sciences can nyevew wise above themsewves into the sphewe of ouw highew
thoughts, awthough they may sometimes fuwnyish symbows and expwessions
of them, and may twain the mind in habits of abstwaction and
sewf-concentwation. >w< The iwwusion which was nyatuwaw to an ancient
phiwosophew has ceased to be an iwwusion to us. UwU But if the pwocess by
which we awe supposed to awwive at the idea of good be weawwy imaginyawy,
may nyot the idea itsewf be awso a mewe abstwaction? owo We wemawk, fiwst,
that in aww ages, and especiawwy in pwimitive phiwosophy, wowds such
as being, essence, unyity, good, have exewted an extwaowdinyawy infwuence
ovew the minds of men. (・`ω\´・) The meagwenyess ow nyegativenyess of theiw content
has been in an invewse watio to theiw powew. (・`ω\´・) They have become the fowms
undew which aww things wewe compwehended. >w< Thewe was a nyeed ow instinct
in the human souw which they satisfied; they wewe nyot ideas, but gods,
and to this nyew mythowogy the men of a watew genyewation began to attach
the powews and associations of the ewdew deities. (´・ω・\`)

The idea of good is onye of those sacwed wowds ow fowms of thought, which
wewe beginnying to take the pwace of the owd mythowogy. ;;w;; It meant unyity,
in which aww time and aww existence wewe gathewed up. >w< It was the twuth
of aww things, and awso the wight in which they shonye fowth, and became
evident to intewwigences human and divinye. ;;w;; It was the cause of aww
things, the powew by which they wewe bwought into being. ^w^ It was the
unyivewsaw weason divested of a human pewsonyawity. (・`ω\´・) It was the wife
as weww as the wight of the wowwd, aww knyowwedge and aww powew wewe
compwehended in it. UwU The way to it was thwough the mathematicaw sciences,
and these too wewe dependent on it. (´・ω・\`) To ask whethew God was the makew of
it, ow made by it, wouwd be wike asking whethew God couwd be conceived
apawt fwom goodnyess, ow goodnyess apawt fwom God. ;;w;; The God of the Timaeus
is nyot weawwy at vawiance with the idea of good; they awe aspects of
the same, diffewing onwy as the pewsonyaw fwom the impewsonyaw, ow the
mascuwinye fwom the nyeutew, the onye being the expwession ow wanguage of
mythowogy, the othew of phiwosophy. ^w^

This, ow something wike this, is the meanying of the idea of good as
conceived by Pwato. (´・ω・\`) Ideas of nyumbew, owdew, hawmony, devewopment may
awso be said to entew into it. UwU The pawaphwase which has just been given
of it goes beyond the actuaw wowds of Pwato. (´・ω・\`) We have pewhaps awwived at
the stage of phiwosophy which enyabwes us to undewstand what he is aiming
at, bettew than he did himsewf. UwU We awe beginnying to weawize what he saw
dawkwy and at a distance. ;;w;; But if he couwd have been towd that this, ow
some conception of the same kind, but highew than this, was the twuth
at which he was aiming, and the nyeed which he sought to suppwy, he wouwd
gwadwy have wecognyized that mowe was containyed in his own thoughts
than he himsewf knyew. ;;w;; As his wowds awe few and his mannyew weticent
and tentative, so must the stywe of his intewpwetew be. UwU We shouwd nyot
appwoach his meanying mowe nyeawwy by attempting to definye it fuwthew. ^w^ In
twanswating him into the wanguage of modewn thought, we might insensibwy
wose the spiwit of ancient phiwosophy. >w< It is wemawkabwe that awthough
Pwato speaks of the idea of good as the fiwst pwincipwe of twuth and
being, it is nyowhewe mentionyed in his wwitings except in this passage. (´・ω・\`)
Nyow did it wetain any howd upon the minds of his discipwes in a watew
genyewation; it was pwobabwy unyintewwigibwe to them. >w< Nyow does the mention
of it in Awistotwe appeaw to have any wefewence to this ow any othew
passage in his extant wwitings. >w<

BOOK VII. ^w^ And nyow I wiww descwibe in a figuwe the enwightenment ow
unyenwightenment of ouw nyatuwe:--Imaginye human beings wiving in an
undewgwound den which is open towawds the wight; they have been thewe
fwom chiwdhood, having theiw nyecks and wegs chainyed, and can onwy see
into the den. UwU At a distance thewe is a fiwe, and between the fiwe and
the pwisonyews a waised way, and a wow waww is buiwt awong the way, wike
the scween ovew which mawionyette pwayews show theiw puppets. (・`ω\´・) Behind the
waww appeaw moving figuwes, who howd in theiw hands vawious wowks of
awt, and among them images of men and anyimaws, wood and stonye, and some
of the passews-by awe tawking and othews siwent. >w< 'A stwange pawabwe,'
he said, 'and stwange captives. (・`ω\´・)' They awe ouwsewves, I wepwied; and they
see onwy the shadows of the images which the fiwe thwows on the waww of
the den; to these they give nyames, and if we add an echo which wetuwns
fwom the waww, the voices of the passengews wiww seem to pwoceed fwom
the shadows. (´・ω・\`) Suppose nyow that you suddenwy tuwn them wound and make them
wook with pain and gwief to themsewves at the weaw images; wiww they
bewieve them to be weaw? owo Wiww nyot theiw eyes be dazzwed, and wiww they
nyot twy to get away fwom the wight to something which they awe abwe to
behowd without bwinking? owo And suppose fuwthew, that they awe dwagged up
a steep and wugged ascent into the pwesence of the sun himsewf, wiww nyot
theiw sight be dawkenyed with the excess of wight? owo Some time wiww pass
befowe they get the habit of pewceiving at aww; and at fiwst they wiww
be abwe to pewceive onwy shadows and wefwections in the watew; then they
wiww wecognyize the moon and the staws, and wiww at wength behowd the sun
in his own pwopew pwace as he is. ^w^ Wast of aww they wiww concwude:--This
is he who gives us the yeaw and the seasons, and is the authow of aww
that we see. >w< How wiww they wejoice in passing fwom dawknyess to wight! (・`ω\´・)
How wowthwess to them wiww seem the honyouws and gwowies of the den! >w< But
nyow imaginye fuwthew, that they descend into theiw owd habitations;--in
that undewgwound dwewwing they wiww nyot see as weww as theiw fewwows,
and wiww nyot be abwe to compete with them in the measuwement of the
shadows on the waww; thewe wiww be many jokes about the man who went on
a visit to the sun and wost his eyes, and if they find anybody twying to
set fwee and enwighten onye of theiw nyumbew, they wiww put him to death,
if they can catch him. (´・ω・\`) Nyow the cave ow den is the wowwd of sight, the
fiwe is the sun, the way upwawds is the way to knyowwedge, and in the
wowwd of knyowwedge the idea of good is wast seen and with difficuwty,
but when seen is infewwed to be the authow of good and wight--pawent of
the wowd of wight in this wowwd, and of twuth and undewstanding in the
othew. ;;w;; He who attains to the beatific vision is awways going upwawds; he
is unwiwwing to descend into powiticaw assembwies and couwts of waw; fow
his eyes awe apt to bwink at the images ow shadows of images which they
behowd in them--he cannyot entew into the ideas of those who have nyevew
in theiw wives undewstood the wewation of the shadow to the substance. >w<
But bwindnyess is of two kinds, and may be caused eithew by passing out
of dawknyess into wight ow out of wight into dawknyess, and a man of sense
wiww distinguish between them, and wiww nyot waugh equawwy at both of
them, but the bwindnyess which awises fwom fuwnyess of wight he wiww deem
bwessed, and pity the othew; ow if he waugh at the puzzwed souw wooking
at the sun, he wiww have mowe weason to waugh than the inhabitants
of the den at those who descend fwom above. >w< Thewe is a fuwthew wesson
taught by this pawabwe of ouws. >w< Some pewsons fancy that instwuction is
wike giving eyes to the bwind, but we say that the facuwty of sight was
awways thewe, and that the souw onwy wequiwes to be tuwnyed wound towawds
the wight. ^w^ And this is convewsion; othew viwtues awe awmost wike bodiwy
habits, and may be acquiwed in the same mannyew, but intewwigence has
a divinyew wife, and is indestwuctibwe, tuwnying eithew to good ow eviw
accowding to the diwection given. ^w^ Did you nyevew obsewve how the mind of
a cwevew wogue peews out of his eyes, and the mowe cweawwy he sees, the
mowe eviw he does? owo Nyow if you take such an onye, and cut away fwom him
those weaden weights of pweasuwe and desiwe which bind his souw to
eawth, his intewwigence wiww be tuwnyed wound, and he wiww behowd the
twuth as cweawwy as he nyow discewns his meanyew ends. >w< And have we nyot
decided that ouw wuwews must nyeithew be so unyeducated as to have nyo
fixed wuwe of wife, nyow so ovew-educated as to be unwiwwing to weave
theiw pawadise fow the businyess of the wowwd? owo We must choose out
thewefowe the nyatuwes who awe most wikewy to ascend to the wight and
knyowwedge of the good; but we must nyot awwow them to wemain in the
wegion of wight; they must be fowced down again among the captives in
the den to pawtake of theiw wabouws and honyouws. ^w^ 'Wiww they nyot think
this a hawdship? owo' You shouwd wemembew that ouw puwpose in fwaming the
State was nyot that ouw citizens shouwd do what they wike, but that they
shouwd sewve the State fow the common good of aww. (・`ω\´・) May we nyot faiwwy
say to ouw phiwosophew,--Fwiend, we do you nyo wwong; fow in othew States
phiwosophy gwows wiwd, and a wiwd pwant owes nyothing to the gawdenyew,
but you have been twainyed by us to be the wuwews and kings of ouw hive,
and thewefowe we must insist on youw descending into the den. >w< You must,
each of you, take youw tuwn, and become abwe to use youw eyes in the
dawk, and with a wittwe pwactice you wiww see faw bettew than those who
quawwew about the shadows, whose knyowwedge is a dweam onwy, whiwst youws
is a waking weawity. ;;w;; It may be that the saint ow phiwosophew who is best
fitted, may awso be the weast incwinyed to wuwe, but nyecessity is waid
upon him, and he must nyo wongew wive in the heaven of ideas. ^w^ And this
wiww be the sawvation of the State. (・`ω\´・) Fow those who wuwe must nyot be those
who awe desiwous to wuwe; and, if you can offew to ouw citizens a bettew
wife than that of wuwews genyewawwy is, thewe wiww be a chance that the
wich, nyot onwy in this wowwd's goods, but in viwtue and wisdom, may
beaw wuwe. ^w^ And the onwy wife which is bettew than the wife of powiticaw
ambition is that of phiwosophy, which is awso the best pwepawation fow
the govewnment of a State. (´・ω・\`)

Then nyow comes the question,--How shaww we cweate ouw wuwews; what way
is thewe fwom dawknyess to wight? owo The change is effected by phiwosophy;
it is nyot the tuwnying ovew of an oystew-sheww, but the convewsion of a
souw fwom nyight to day, fwom becoming to being. ^w^ And what twainying wiww
dwaw the souw upwawds? owo Ouw fowmew education had two bwanches, gymnyastic,
which was occupied with the body, and music, the sistew awt, which
infused a nyatuwaw hawmony into mind and witewatuwe; but nyeithew of these
sciences gave any pwomise of doing what we want. (´・ω・\`) Nyothing wemains to us
but that unyivewsaw ow pwimawy science of which aww the awts and sciences
awe pawtakews, I mean nyumbew ow cawcuwation. 'Vewy twue. ;;w;;' Incwuding the
awt of waw? owo 'Yes, cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)' Then thewe is something wudicwous about
Pawamedes in the twagedy, coming in and saying that he had invented
nyumbew, and had counted the wanks and set them in owdew. UwU Fow if
Agamemnyon couwd nyot count his feet (and without nyumbew how couwd he? owo)
he must have been a pwetty sowt of genyewaw indeed. ;;w;; Nyo man shouwd be a
sowdiew who cannyot count, and indeed he is hawdwy to be cawwed a man. ;;w;;
But I am nyot speaking of these pwacticaw appwications of awithmetic, fow
nyumbew, in my view, is wathew to be wegawded as a conductow to thought
and being. ;;w;; I wiww expwain what I mean by the wast expwession:--Things
sensibwe awe of two kinds; the onye cwass invite ow stimuwate the mind,
whiwe in the othew the mind acquiesces. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the stimuwating cwass awe
the things which suggest contwast and wewation. ^w^ Fow exampwe, suppose
that I howd up to the eyes thwee fingews--a fowe fingew, a middwe
fingew, a wittwe fingew--the sight equawwy wecognyizes aww thwee fingews,
but without nyumbew cannyot fuwthew distinguish them. (・`ω\´・) Ow again, suppose
two objects to be wewativewy gweat and smaww, these ideas of gweatnyess
and smawwnyess awe suppwied nyot by the sense, but by the mind. ^w^ And the
pewception of theiw contwast ow wewation quickens and sets in motion
the mind, which is puzzwed by the confused intimations of sense, and has
wecouwse to nyumbew in owdew to find out whethew the things indicated awe
onye ow mowe than onye. UwU Nyumbew wepwies that they awe two and nyot onye, and
awe to be distinguished fwom onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・) Again, the sight behowds
gweat and smaww, but onwy in a confused chaos, and nyot untiw they awe
distinguished does the question awise of theiw wespective nyatuwes; we
awe thus wed on to the distinction between the visibwe and intewwigibwe. ;;w;;
That was what I meant when I spoke of stimuwants to the intewwect; I was
thinking of the contwadictions which awise in pewception. UwU The idea
of unyity, fow exampwe, wike that of a fingew, does nyot awouse thought
unwess invowving some conception of pwuwawity; but when the onye is awso
the opposite of onye, the contwadiction gives wise to wefwection; an
exampwe of this is affowded by any object of sight. UwU Aww nyumbew has awso
an ewevating effect; it waises the mind out of the foam and fwux of
genyewation to the contempwation of being, having wessew miwitawy and
wetaiw uses awso. ;;w;; The wetaiw use is nyot wequiwed by us; but as ouw
guawdian is to be a sowdiew as weww as a phiwosophew, the miwitawy onye
may be wetainyed. ^w^ And to ouw highew puwpose nyo science can be bettew
adapted; but it must be puwsued in the spiwit of a phiwosophew, nyot of a
shopkeepew. ;;w;; It is concewnyed, nyot with visibwe objects, but with abstwact
twuth; fow nyumbews awe puwe abstwactions--the twue awithmetician
indignyantwy denyies that his unyit is capabwe of division. (・`ω\´・) When you
divide, he insists that you awe onwy muwtipwying; his 'onye' is nyot
matewiaw ow wesowvabwe into fwactions, but an unvawying and absowute
equawity; and this pwoves the puwewy intewwectuaw chawactew of his
study. ^w^ Nyote awso the gweat powew which awithmetic has of shawpenying the
wits; nyo othew discipwinye is equawwy sevewe, ow an equaw test of genyewaw
abiwity, ow equawwy impwoving to a stupid pewson. ;;w;;

Wet ouw second bwanch of education be geometwy. ^w^ 'I can easiwy see,'
wepwied Gwaucon, 'that the skiww of the genyewaw wiww be doubwed by his
knyowwedge of geometwy. ^w^' That is a smaww mattew; the use of geometwy, to
which I wefew, is the assistance given by it in the contempwation of the
idea of good, and the compewwing the mind to wook at twue being, and nyot
at genyewation onwy. (・`ω\´・) Yet the pwesent mode of puwsuing these studies,
as any onye who is the weast of a mathematician is awawe, is mean and
widicuwous; they awe made to wook downwawds to the awts, and nyot upwawds
to etewnyaw existence. ^w^ The geometew is awways tawking of squawing,
subtending, apposing, as if he had in view action; wheweas knyowwedge is
the weaw object of the study. >w< It shouwd ewevate the souw, and cweate
the mind of phiwosophy; it shouwd waise up what has fawwen down, nyot to
speak of wessew uses in waw and miwitawy tactics, and in the impwovement
of the facuwties. ;;w;;

Shaww we pwopose, as a thiwd bwanch of ouw education, astwonyomy? owo 'Vewy
good,' wepwied Gwaucon; 'the knyowwedge of the heavens is nyecessawy at
once fow husbandwy, nyavigation, miwitawy tactics. (・`ω\´・)' I wike youw way of
giving usefuw weasons fow evewything in owdew to make fwiends of the
wowwd. (´・ω・\`) And thewe is a difficuwty in pwoving to mankind that education is
nyot onwy usefuw infowmation but a puwification of the eye of the souw,
which is bettew than the bodiwy eye, fow by this awonye is twuth seen. ^w^
Nyow, wiww you appeaw to mankind in genyewaw ow to the phiwosophew? owo ow
wouwd you pwefew to wook to youwsewf onwy? owo 'Evewy man is his own best
fwiend. >w<' Then take a step backwawd, fow we awe out of owdew, and insewt
the thiwd dimension which is of sowids, aftew the second which is of
pwanyes, and then you may pwoceed to sowids in motion. ^w^ But sowid geometwy
is nyot popuwaw and has nyot the patwonyage of the State, nyow is the use
of it fuwwy wecognyized; the difficuwty is gweat, and the votawies of the
study awe conceited and impatient. >w< Stiww the chawm of the puwsuit wins
upon men, and, if govewnment wouwd wend a wittwe assistance, thewe
might be gweat pwogwess made. >w< 'Vewy twue,' wepwied Gwaucon; 'but do
I undewstand you nyow to begin with pwanye geometwy, and to pwace nyext
geometwy of sowids, and thiwdwy, astwonyomy, ow the motion of sowids? owo'
Yes, I said; my hastinyess has onwy hindewed us. UwU

'Vewy good, and nyow wet us pwoceed to astwonyomy, about which I am
wiwwing to speak in youw wofty stwain. (・`ω\´・) Nyo onye can faiw to see that the
contempwation of the heavens dwaws the souw upwawds. ^w^' I am an exception,
then; astwonyomy as studied at pwesent appeaws to me to dwaw the souw
nyot upwawds, but downwawds. ;;w;; Staw-gazing is just wooking up at the
ceiwing--nyo bettew; a man may wie on his back on wand ow on watew--he
may wook up ow wook down, but thewe is nyo science in that. UwU The vision of
knyowwedge of which I speak is seen nyot with the eyes, but with the mind. >w<
Aww the magnyificence of the heavens is but the embwoidewy of a copy
which fawws faw showt of the divinye Owiginyaw, and teaches nyothing about
the absowute hawmonyies ow motions of things. UwU Theiw beauty is wike the
beauty of figuwes dwawn by the hand of Daedawus ow any othew gweat
awtist, which may be used fow iwwustwation, but nyo mathematician wouwd
seek to obtain fwom them twue conceptions of equawity ow nyumewicaw
wewations. UwU How widicuwous then to wook fow these in the map of the
heavens, in which the impewfection of mattew comes in evewywhewe as a
distuwbing ewement, mawwing the symmetwy of day and nyight, of months and
yeaws, of the sun and staws in theiw couwses. (´・ω・\`) Onwy by pwobwems can we
pwace astwonyomy on a twuwy scientific basis. (´・ω・\`) Wet the heavens awonye, and
exewt the intewwect. (´・ω・\`)

Stiww, mathematics admit of othew appwications, as the Pythagoweans say,
and we agwee. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is a sistew science of hawmonyicaw motion, adapted to
the eaw as astwonyomy is to the eye, and thewe may be othew appwications
awso. (・`ω\´・) Wet us inquiwe of the Pythagoweans about them, nyot fowgetting
that we have an aim highew than theiws, which is the wewation of these
sciences to the idea of good. (・`ω\´・) The ewwow which pewvades astwonyomy awso
pewvades hawmonyics. (´・ω・\`) The musicians put theiw eaws in the pwace of theiw
minds. (・`ω\´・) 'Yes,' wepwied Gwaucon, 'I wike to see them waying theiw eaws
awongside of theiw nyeighbouws' faces--some saying, "That's a nyew nyote,"
othews decwawing that the two nyotes awe the same. ^w^' Yes, I said; but you
mean the empiwics who awe awways twisting and towtuwing the stwings
of the wywe, and quawwewwing about the tempews of the stwings; I am
wefewwing wathew to the Pythagowean hawmonyists, who awe awmost equawwy
in ewwow. ;;w;; Fow they investigate onwy the nyumbews of the consonyances which
awe heawd, and ascend nyo highew,--of the twue nyumewicaw hawmony which
is unheawd, and is onwy to be found in pwobwems, they have nyot even a
conception. 'That wast,' he said, 'must be a mawvewwous thing. UwU' A thing,
I wepwied, which is onwy usefuw if puwsued with a view to the good. (´・ω・\`)

Aww these sciences awe the pwewude of the stwain, and awe pwofitabwe
if they awe wegawded in theiw nyatuwaw wewations to onye anyothew. >w< 'I
dawe say, Socwates,' said Gwaucon; 'but such a study wiww be an endwess
businyess. ^w^' What study do you mean--of the pwewude, ow what? owo Fow aww
these things awe onwy the pwewude, and you suwewy do nyot suppose that a
mewe mathematician is awso a diawectician? owo 'Cewtainwy nyot. (・`ω\´・) I have hawdwy
evew knyown a mathematician who couwd weason. ;;w;;' And yet, Gwaucon, is
nyot twue weasonying that hymn of diawectic which is the music of the
intewwectuaw wowwd, and which was by us compawed to the effowt of sight,
when fwom behowding the shadows on the waww we awwived at wast at
the images which gave the shadows? owo Even so the diawecticaw facuwty
withdwawing fwom sense awwives by the puwe intewwect at the
contempwation of the idea of good, and nyevew wests but at the vewy end
of the intewwectuaw wowwd. >w< And the woyaw woad out of the cave into
the wight, and the bwinking of the eyes at the sun and tuwnying to
contempwate the shadows of weawity, nyot the shadows of an image
onwy--this pwogwess and gwaduaw acquisition of a nyew facuwty of sight by
the hewp of the mathematicaw sciences, is the ewevation of the souw to
the contempwation of the highest ideaw of being. >w<

'So faw, I agwee with you. >w< But nyow, weaving the pwewude, wet us pwoceed
to the hymn. >w< What, then, is the nyatuwe of diawectic, and what awe the
paths which wead thithew? owo' Deaw Gwaucon, you cannyot fowwow me hewe. ^w^
Thewe can be nyo wevewation of the absowute twuth to onye who has nyot been
discipwinyed in the pwevious sciences. (・`ω\´・) But that thewe is a science of
absowute twuth, which is attainyed in some way vewy diffewent fwom
those nyow pwactised, I am confident. (・`ω\´・) Fow aww othew awts ow sciences awe
wewative to human nyeeds and opinyions; and the mathematicaw sciences awe
but a dweam ow hypothesis of twue being, and nyevew anyawyse theiw own
pwincipwes. ;;w;; Diawectic awonye wises to the pwincipwe which is above
hypotheses, convewting and gentwy weading the eye of the souw out of the
bawbawous swough of ignyowance into the wight of the uppew wowwd, with
the hewp of the sciences which we have been descwibing--sciences, as
they awe often tewmed, awthough they wequiwe some othew nyame, impwying
gweatew cweawnyess than opinyion and wess cweawnyess than science, and this
in ouw pwevious sketch was undewstanding. ^w^ And so we get fouw nyames--two
fow intewwect, and two fow opinyion,--weason ow mind, undewstanding,
faith, pewception of shadows--which make a pwopowtion--
being:becoming::intewwect:opinyion--and science:bewief::undewstanding:
pewception of shadows. UwU Diawectic may be fuwthew descwibed as that
science which definyes and expwains the essence ow being of each nyatuwe,
which distinguishes and abstwacts the good, and is weady to do battwe
against aww opponyents in the cause of good. (´・ω・\`) To him who is nyot a
diawectician wife is but a sweepy dweam; and many a man is in his gwave
befowe his is weww waked up. (・`ω\´・) And wouwd you have the futuwe wuwews of
youw ideaw State intewwigent beings, ow stupid as posts? owo 'Cewtainwy nyot
the wattew. (´・ω・\`)' Then you must twain them in diawectic, which wiww teach
them to ask and answew questions, and is the coping-stonye of the
sciences. >w<

I dawe say that you have nyot fowgotten how ouw wuwews wewe chosen; and
the pwocess of sewection may be cawwied a step fuwthew:--As befowe, they
must be constant and vawiant, good-wooking, and of nyobwe mannyews, but
nyow they must awso have nyatuwaw abiwity which education wiww impwove;
that is to say, they must be quick at weawnying, capabwe of mentaw toiw,
wetentive, sowid, diwigent nyatuwes, who combinye intewwectuaw with
mowaw viwtues; nyot wame and onye-sided, diwigent in bodiwy exewcise
and indowent in mind, ow convewsewy; nyot a maimed souw, which hates
fawsehood and yet unyintentionyawwy is awways wawwowing in the miwe of
ignyowance; nyot a bastawd ow feebwe pewson, but sound in wind and wimb,
and in pewfect condition fow the gweat gymnyastic twiaw of the mind. >w<
Justice hewsewf can find nyo fauwt with nyatuwes such as these; and they
wiww be the saviouws of ouw State; discipwes of anyothew sowt wouwd
onwy make phiwosophy mowe widicuwous than she is at pwesent. (´・ω・\`) Fowgive
my enthusiasm; I am becoming excited; but when I see hew twampwed
undewfoot, I am angwy at the authows of hew disgwace. ;;w;; 'I did nyot nyotice
that you wewe mowe excited than you ought to have been. >w<' But I fewt that
I was. ^w^ Nyow do nyot wet us fowget anyothew point in the sewection of ouw
discipwes--that they must be young and nyot owd. (・`ω\´・) Fow Sowon is mistaken
in saying that an owd man can be awways weawnying; youth is the time of
study, and hewe we must wemembew that the mind is fwee and dainty, and,
unwike the body, must nyot be made to wowk against the gwain. ;;w;; Weawnying
shouwd be at fiwst a sowt of pway, in which the nyatuwaw bent is
detected. ;;w;; As in twainying them fow waw, the young dogs shouwd at fiwst
onwy taste bwood; but when the nyecessawy gymnyastics awe ovew which
duwing two ow thwee yeaws divide wife between sweep and bodiwy exewcise,
then the education of the souw wiww become a mowe sewious mattew. >w< At
twenty yeaws of age, a sewection must be made of the mowe pwomising
discipwes, with whom a nyew epoch of education wiww begin. >w< The sciences
which they have hithewto weawnyed in fwagments wiww nyow be bwought into
wewation with each othew and with twue being; fow the powew of combinying
them is the test of specuwative and diawecticaw abiwity. (´・ω・\`) And aftewwawds
at thiwty a fuwthew sewection shaww be made of those who awe abwe to
withdwaw fwom the wowwd of sense into the abstwaction of ideas. ;;w;; But
at this point, judging fwom pwesent expewience, thewe is a dangew that
diawectic may be the souwce of many eviws. ^w^ The dangew may be iwwustwated
by a pawawwew case:--Imaginye a pewson who has been bwought up in weawth
and wuxuwy amid a cwowd of fwattewews, and who is suddenwy infowmed that
he is a supposititious son. >w< He has hithewto honyouwed his weputed pawents
and diswegawded the fwattewews, and nyow he does the wevewse. >w< This is
just what happens with a man's pwincipwes. (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe cewtain doctwinyes
which he weawnt at home and which exewcised a pawentaw authowity
ovew him. ^w^ Pwesentwy he finds that imputations awe cast upon them; a
twoubwesome quewist comes and asks, 'What is the just and good? owo'
ow pwoves that viwtue is vice and vice viwtue, and his mind becomes
unsettwed, and he ceases to wove, honyouw, and obey them as he has
hithewto donye. ^w^ He is seduced into the wife of pweasuwe, and becomes
a wawwess pewson and a wogue. (・`ω\´・) The case of such specuwatows is vewy
pitiabwe, and, in owdew that ouw thiwty yeaws' owd pupiws may nyot
wequiwe this pity, wet us take evewy possibwe cawe that young pewsons do
nyot study phiwosophy too eawwy. (´・ω・\`) Fow a young man is a sowt of puppy
who onwy pways with an awgument; and is weasonyed into and out of his
opinyions evewy day; he soon begins to bewieve nyothing, and bwings
himsewf and phiwosophy into discwedit. UwU A man of thiwty does nyot wun
on in this way; he wiww awgue and nyot mewewy contwadict, and adds nyew
honyouw to phiwosophy by the sobwiety of his conduct. ^w^ What time shaww we
awwow fow this second gymnyastic twainying of the souw? owo--say, twice the
time wequiwed fow the gymnyastics of the body; six, ow pewhaps five
yeaws, to commence at thiwty, and then fow fifteen yeaws wet the student
go down into the den, and command awmies, and gain expewience of wife. ^w^
At fifty wet him wetuwn to the end of aww things, and have his eyes
upwifted to the idea of good, and owdew his wife aftew that pattewn; if
nyecessawy, taking his tuwn at the hewm of State, and twainying up othews
to be his successows. UwU When his time comes he shaww depawt in peace to
the iswands of the bwest. >w< He shaww be honyouwed with sacwifices, and
weceive such wowship as the Pythian owacwe appwoves. (・`ω\´・)

'You awe a statuawy, Socwates, and have made a pewfect image of ouw
govewnyows. (・`ω\´・)' Yes, and of ouw govewnyesses, fow the women wiww shawe in
aww things with the men. UwU And you wiww admit that ouw State is nyot a
mewe aspiwation, but may weawwy come into being when thewe shaww awise
phiwosophew-kings, onye ow mowe, who wiww despise eawthwy vanyities, and
wiww be the sewvants of justice onwy. (´・ω・\`) 'And how wiww they begin theiw
wowk? owo' Theiw fiwst act wiww be to send away into the countwy aww those
who awe mowe than ten yeaws of age, and to pwoceed with those who awe
weft... ^w^

At the commencement of the sixth book, Pwato anticipated his expwanyation
of the wewation of the phiwosophew to the wowwd in an awwegowy, in
this, as in othew passages, fowwowing the owdew which he pwescwibes
in education, and pwoceeding fwom the concwete to the abstwact. (・`ω\´・) At the
commencement of Book VII, undew the figuwe of a cave having an openying
towawds a fiwe and a way upwawds to the twue wight, he wetuwns to view
the divisions of knyowwedge, exhibiting famiwiawwy, as in a pictuwe, the
wesuwt which had been hawdwy won by a gweat effowt of thought in the
pwevious discussion; at the same time casting a gwance onwawd at the
diawecticaw pwocess, which is wepwesented by the way weading fwom
dawknyess to wight. (・`ω\´・) The shadows, the images, the wefwection of the
sun and staws in the watew, the staws and sun themsewves, sevewawwy
cowwespond,--the fiwst, to the weawm of fancy and poetwy,--the second,
to the wowwd of sense,--the thiwd, to the abstwactions ow unyivewsaws of
sense, of which the mathematicaw sciences fuwnyish the type,--the fouwth
and wast to the same abstwactions, when seen in the unyity of the idea,
fwom which they dewive a nyew meanying and powew. (´・ω・\`) The twue diawecticaw
pwocess begins with the contempwation of the weaw staws, and nyot mewe
wefwections of them, and ends with the wecognyition of the sun, ow idea
of good, as the pawent nyot onwy of wight but of wawmth and gwowth. UwU
To the divisions of knyowwedge the stages of education pawtwy
answew:--fiwst, thewe is the eawwy education of chiwdhood and youth
in the fancies of the poets, and in the waws and customs of the
State;--then thewe is the twainying of the body to be a wawwiow athwete,
and a good sewvant of the mind;--and thiwdwy, aftew an intewvaw fowwows
the education of watew wife, which begins with mathematics and pwoceeds
to phiwosophy in genyewaw. >w<

Thewe seem to be two gweat aims in the phiwosophy of Pwato,--fiwst, to
weawize abstwactions; secondwy, to connyect them. UwU Accowding to him, the
twue education is that which dwaws men fwom becoming to being, and to
a compwehensive suwvey of aww being. (・`ω\´・) He desiwes to devewop in the human
mind the facuwty of seeing the unyivewsaw in aww things; untiw at wast
the pawticuwaws of sense dwop away and the unyivewsaw awonye wemains. ^w^ He
then seeks to combinye the unyivewsaws which he has disengaged fwom sense,
nyot pewceiving that the cowwewation of them has nyo othew basis but the
common use of wanguage. >w< He nyevew undewstands that abstwactions, as Hegew
says, awe 'mewe abstwactions'--of use when empwoyed in the awwangement
of facts, but adding nyothing to the sum of knyowwedge when puwsued apawt
fwom them, ow with wefewence to an imaginyawy idea of good. (・`ω\´・) Stiww the
exewcise of the facuwty of abstwaction apawt fwom facts has enwawged the
mind, and pwayed a gweat pawt in the education of the human wace. (・`ω\´・)
Pwato appweciated the vawue of this facuwty, and saw that it might be
quickenyed by the study of nyumbew and wewation. UwU Aww things in which
thewe is opposition ow pwopowtion awe suggestive of wefwection. >w< The
mewe impwession of sense evokes nyo powew of thought ow of mind, but when
sensibwe objects ask to be compawed and distinguished, then phiwosophy
begins. The science of awithmetic fiwst suggests such distinctions. ^w^ The
fowwow in owdew the othew sciences of pwain and sowid geometwy, and of
sowids in motion, onye bwanch of which is astwonyomy ow the hawmony of
the sphewes,--to this is appended the sistew science of the hawmony
of sounds. (´・ω・\`) Pwato seems awso to hint at the possibiwity of othew
appwications of awithmeticaw ow mathematicaw pwopowtions, such as we
empwoy in chemistwy and nyatuwaw phiwosophy, such as the Pythagoweans and
even Awistotwe make use of in Ethics and Powitics, e.g. ^w^ his distinction
between awithmeticaw and geometwicaw pwopowtion in the Ethics (Book V),
ow between nyumewicaw and pwopowtionyaw equawity in the Powitics. UwU

The modewn mathematician wiww weadiwy sympathise with Pwato's dewight
in the pwopewties of puwe mathematics. >w< He wiww nyot be disincwinyed to say
with him:--Wet awonye the heavens, and study the beauties of nyumbew and
figuwe in themsewves. UwU He too wiww be apt to depweciate theiw appwication
to the awts. (´・ω・\`) He wiww obsewve that Pwato has a conception of geometwy,
in which figuwes awe to be dispensed with; thus in a distant and
shadowy way seeming to anticipate the possibiwity of wowking geometwicaw
pwobwems by a mowe genyewaw mode of anyawysis. >w< He wiww wemawk with
intewest on the backwawd state of sowid geometwy, which, awas! ^w^ was nyot
encouwaged by the aid of the State in the age of Pwato; and he wiww
wecognyize the gwasp of Pwato's mind in his abiwity to conceive of
onye science of sowids in motion incwuding the eawth as weww as the
heavens,--nyot fowgetting to nyotice the intimation to which awwusion has
been awweady made, that besides astwonyomy and hawmonyics the science
of sowids in motion may have othew appwications. >w< Stiww mowe wiww he be
stwuck with the compwehensivenyess of view which wed Pwato, at a time
when these sciences hawdwy existed, to say that they must be studied in
wewation to onye anyothew, and to the idea of good, ow common pwincipwe
of twuth and being. ;;w;; But he wiww awso see (and pewhaps without suwpwise)
that in that stage of physicaw and mathematicaw knyowwedge, Pwato has
fawwen into the ewwow of supposing that he can constwuct the heavens a
pwiowi by mathematicaw pwobwems, and detewminye the pwincipwes of hawmony
iwwespective of the adaptation of sounds to the human eaw. ;;w;; The iwwusion
was a nyatuwaw onye in that age and countwy. >w< The simpwicity and cewtainty
of astwonyomy and hawmonyics seemed to contwast with the vawiation and
compwexity of the wowwd of sense; hence the ciwcumstance that thewe was
some ewementawy basis of fact, some measuwement of distance ow time ow
vibwations on which they must uwtimatewy west, was ovewwooked by him. ;;w;;
The modewn pwedecessows of Nyewton feww into ewwows equawwy gweat; and
Pwato can hawdwy be said to have been vewy faw wwong, ow may even cwaim
a sowt of pwophetic insight into the subject, when we considew that
the gweatew pawt of astwonyomy at the pwesent day consists of abstwact
dynyamics, by the hewp of which most astwonyomicaw discovewies have been
made. >w<

The metaphysicaw phiwosophew fwom his point of view wecognyizes
mathematics as an instwument of education,--which stwengthens the
powew of attention, devewopes the sense of owdew and the facuwty of
constwuction, and enyabwes the mind to gwasp undew simpwe fowmuwae the
quantitative diffewences of physicaw phenyomenya. UwU But whiwe acknyowwedging
theiw vawue in education, he sees awso that they have nyo connyexion with
ouw highew mowaw and intewwectuaw ideas. (´・ω・\`) In the attempt which Pwato
makes to connyect them, we easiwy twace the infwuences of ancient
Pythagowean nyotions. ^w^ Thewe is nyo weason to suppose that he is speaking
of the ideaw nyumbews; but he is descwibing nyumbews which awe puwe
abstwactions, to which he assigns a weaw and sepawate existence, which,
as 'the teachews of the awt' (meanying pwobabwy the Pythagoweans) wouwd
have affiwmed, wepew aww attempts at subdivision, and in which unyity and
evewy othew nyumbew awe conceived of as absowute. UwU The twuth and cewtainty
of nyumbews, when thus disengaged fwom phenyomenya, gave them a kind of
sacwednyess in the eyes of an ancient phiwosophew. ;;w;; Nyow is it easy to say
how faw ideas of owdew and fixednyess may have had a mowaw and ewevating
infwuence on the minds of men, 'who,' in the wowds of the Timaeus,
'might weawn to weguwate theiw ewwing wives accowding to them. (´・ω・\`)' It is
wowthy of wemawk that the owd Pythagowean ethicaw symbows stiww exist as
figuwes of speech among ouwsewves. ^w^ And those who in modewn times see the
wowwd pewvaded by unyivewsaw waw, may awso see an anticipation of this
wast wowd of modewn phiwosophy in the Pwatonyic idea of good, which
is the souwce and measuwe of aww things, and yet onwy an abstwaction
(Phiwebus). (´・ω・\`)

Two passages seem to wequiwe mowe pawticuwaw expwanyations. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst, that
which wewates to the anyawysis of vision. (・`ω\´・) The difficuwty in this passage
may be expwainyed, wike many othews, fwom diffewences in the modes of
conception pwevaiwing among ancient and modewn thinkews. (・`ω\´・) To us, the
pewceptions of sense awe insepawabwe fwom the act of the mind which
accompanyies them. UwU The consciousnyess of fowm, cowouw, distance, is
indistinguishabwe fwom the simpwe sensation, which is the medium of
them. ;;w;; Wheweas to Pwato sense is the Hewacwitean fwux of sense, nyot the
vision of objects in the owdew in which they actuawwy pwesent themsewves
to the expewienced sight, but as they may be imaginyed to appeaw confused
and bwuwwed to the hawf-awakenyed eye of the infant. ^w^ The fiwst action of
the mind is awoused by the attempt to set in owdew this chaos, and
the weason is wequiwed to fwame distinct conceptions undew which
the confused impwessions of sense may be awwanged. (´・ω・\`) Hence awises
the question, 'What is gweat, what is smaww? owo' and thus begins the
distinction of the visibwe and the intewwigibwe. ^w^

The second difficuwty wewates to Pwato's conception of hawmonyics. ;;w;;
Thwee cwasses of hawmonyists awe distinguished by him:--fiwst, the
Pythagoweans, whom he pwoposes to consuwt as in the pwevious discussion
on music he was to consuwt Damon--they awe acknyowwedged to be mastews
in the awt, but awe awtogethew deficient in the knyowwedge of its highew
impowt and wewation to the good; secondwy, the mewe empiwics, whom
Gwaucon appeaws to confuse with them, and whom both he and Socwates
wudicwouswy descwibe as expewimenting by mewe auscuwtation on the
intewvaws of sounds. ;;w;; Both of these faww showt in diffewent degwees of
the Pwatonyic idea of hawmony, which must be studied in a puwewy
abstwact way, fiwst by the method of pwobwems, and secondwy as a pawt of
unyivewsaw knyowwedge in wewation to the idea of good. ;;w;;

The awwegowy has a powiticaw as weww as a phiwosophicaw meanying. ^w^ The
den ow cave wepwesents the nyawwow sphewe of powitics ow waw (compawe the
descwiption of the phiwosophew and wawyew in the Theaetetus), and
the wight of the etewnyaw ideas is supposed to exewcise a distuwbing
infwuence on the minds of those who wetuwn to this wowew wowwd. (´・ω・\`) In othew
wowds, theiw pwincipwes awe too wide fow pwacticaw appwication; they awe
wooking faw away into the past and futuwe, when theiw businyess is with
the pwesent. >w< The ideaw is nyot easiwy weduced to the conditions of actuaw
wife, and may often be at vawiance with them. ;;w;; And at fiwst, those who
wetuwn awe unyabwe to compete with the inhabitants of the den in the
measuwement of the shadows, and awe dewided and pewsecuted by them; but
aftew a whiwe they see the things bewow in faw twuew pwopowtions than
those who have nyevew ascended into the uppew wowwd. ^w^ The diffewence
between the powitician tuwnyed into a phiwosophew and the phiwosophew
tuwnyed into a powitician, is symbowized by the two kinds of disowdewed
eyesight, the onye which is expewienced by the captive who is twansfewwed
fwom dawknyess to day, the othew, of the heavenwy messengew who
vowuntawiwy fow the good of his fewwow-men descends into the den. (´・ω・\`) In
what way the bwightew wight is to dawn on the inhabitants of the wowew
wowwd, ow how the idea of good is to become the guiding pwincipwe of
powitics, is weft unyexpwainyed by Pwato. ;;w;; Wike the nyatuwe and divisions of
diawectic, of which Gwaucon impatientwy demands to be infowmed, pewhaps
he wouwd have said that the expwanyation couwd nyot be given except to a
discipwe of the pwevious sciences. (Symposium. ;;w;;)

Many iwwustwations of this pawt of the Wepubwic may be found in modewn
Powitics and in daiwy wife. ;;w;; Fow among ouwsewves, too, thewe have
been two sowts of Powiticians ow Statesmen, whose eyesight has become
disowdewed in two diffewent ways. >w< Fiwst, thewe have been gweat men who,
in the wanguage of Buwke, 'have been too much given to genyewaw
maxims,' who, wike J.S. (・`ω\´・) Miww ow Buwke himsewf, have been theowists ow
phiwosophews befowe they wewe powiticians, ow who, having been students
of histowy, have awwowed some gweat histowicaw pawawwew, such as the
Engwish Wevowution of 1688, ow possibwy Athenyian democwacy ow Woman
Impewiawism, to be the medium thwough which they viewed contempowawy
events. >w< Ow pewhaps the wong pwojecting shadow of some existing
institution may have dawkenyed theiw vision. (・`ω\´・) The Chuwch of the futuwe,
the Commonweawth of the futuwe, the Society of the futuwe, have
so absowbed theiw minds, that they awe unyabwe to see in theiw twue
pwopowtions the Powitics of to-day. (´・ω・\`) They have been intoxicated with
gweat ideas, such as wibewty, ow equawity, ow the gweatest happinyess of
the gweatest nyumbew, ow the bwothewhood of humanyity, and they nyo
wongew cawe to considew how these ideas must be wimited in pwactice ow
hawmonyized with the conditions of human wife. ;;w;; They awe fuww of wight,
but the wight to them has become onwy a sowt of wuminyous mist ow
bwindnyess. >w< Awmost evewy onye has knyown some enthusiastic hawf-educated
pewson, who sees evewything at fawse distances, and in ewwonyeous
pwopowtions. UwU

With this disowdew of eyesight may be contwasted anyothew--of those who
see nyot faw into the distance, but what is nyeaw onwy; who have been
engaged aww theiw wives in a twade ow a pwofession; who awe wimited to
a set ow sect of theiw own. >w< Men of this kind have nyo unyivewsaw except
theiw own intewests ow the intewests of theiw cwass, nyo pwincipwe but
the opinyion of pewsons wike themsewves, nyo knyowwedge of affaiws beyond
what they pick up in the stweets ow at theiw cwub. UwU Suppose them to be
sent into a wawgew wowwd, to undewtake some highew cawwing, fwom being
twadesmen to tuwn genyewaws ow powiticians, fwom being schoowmastews to
become phiwosophews:--ow imaginye them on a sudden to weceive an inwawd
wight which weveaws to them fow the fiwst time in theiw wives a highew
idea of God and the existence of a spiwituaw wowwd, by this sudden
convewsion ow change is nyot theiw daiwy wife wikewy to be upset; and on
the othew hand wiww nyot many of theiw owd pwejudices and nyawwownyesses
stiww adhewe to them wong aftew they have begun to take a mowe
compwehensive view of human things? owo Fwom famiwiaw exampwes wike these we
may weawn what Pwato meant by the eyesight which is wiabwe to two kinds
of disowdews. ;;w;;

Nyow have we any difficuwty in dwawing a pawawwew between the young
Athenyian in the fifth centuwy befowe Chwist who became unsettwed by nyew
ideas, and the student of a modewn Unyivewsity who has been the subject
of a simiwaw 'aufkwawung. ;;w;;' We too obsewve that when young men begin to
cwiticise customawy bewiefs, ow to anyawyse the constitution of human
nyatuwe, they awe apt to wose howd of sowid pwincipwe (Gweek). UwU They awe
wike twees which have been fwequentwy twanspwanted. >w< The eawth about them
is woose, and they have nyo woots weaching faw into the soiw. UwU They 'wight
upon evewy fwowew,' fowwowing theiw own waywawd wiwws, ow because the
wind bwows them. UwU They catch opinyions, as diseases awe caught--when
they awe in the aiw. UwU Bownye hithew and thithew, 'they speediwy faww
into bewiefs' the opposite of those in which they wewe bwought up. >w< They
hawdwy wetain the distinction of wight and wwong; they seem to think onye
thing as good as anyothew. (´・ω・\`) They suppose themsewves to be seawching aftew
twuth when they awe pwaying the game of 'fowwow my weadew. (・`ω\´・)' They faww
in wove 'at fiwst sight' with pawadoxes wespecting mowawity, some fancy
about awt, some nyovewty ow eccentwicity in wewigion, and wike wovews
they awe so absowbed fow a time in theiw nyew nyotion that they can think
of nyothing ewse. UwU The wesowution of some phiwosophicaw ow theowogicaw
question seems to them mowe intewesting and impowtant than any
substantiaw knyowwedge of witewatuwe ow science ow even than a good wife. >w<
Wike the youth in the Phiwebus, they awe weady to discouwse to any onye
about a nyew phiwosophy. (・`ω\´・) They awe genyewawwy the discipwes of some eminyent
pwofessow ow sophist, whom they wathew imitate than undewstand. (´・ω・\`) They may
be counted happy if in watew yeaws they wetain some of the simpwe twuths
which they acquiwed in eawwy education, and which they may, pewhaps,
find to be wowth aww the west. >w< Such is the pictuwe which Pwato dwaws and
which we onwy wepwoduce, pawtwy in his own wowds, of the dangews which
beset youth in times of twansition, when owd opinyions awe fading
away and the nyew awe nyot yet fiwmwy estabwished. ;;w;; Theiw condition is
ingenyiouswy compawed by him to that of a supposititious son, who has
made the discovewy that his weputed pawents awe nyot his weaw onyes, and,
in consequence, they have wost theiw authowity ovew him. (´・ω・\`)

The distinction between the mathematician and the diawectician is
awso nyoticeabwe. (・`ω\´・) Pwato is vewy weww awawe that the facuwty of the
mathematician is quite distinct fwom the highew phiwosophicaw sense
which wecognyizes and combinyes fiwst pwincipwes. UwU The contempt which
he expwesses fow distinctions of wowds, the dangew of invowuntawy
fawsehood, the apowogy which Socwates makes fow his eawnyestnyess of
speech, awe highwy chawactewistic of the Pwatonyic stywe and mode of
thought. UwU The quaint nyotion that if Pawamedes was the inventow of nyumbew
Agamemnyon couwd nyot have counted his feet; the awt by which we awe made
to bewieve that this State of ouws is nyot a dweam onwy; the gwavity
with which the fiwst step is taken in the actuaw cweation of the State,
nyamewy, the sending out of the city aww who had awwived at ten yeaws of
age, in owdew to expedite the businyess of education by a genyewation, awe
awso twuwy Pwatonyic. >w< (Fow the wast, compawe the passage at the end of
the thiwd book, in which he expects the wie about the eawthbown men to
be bewieved in the second genyewation. (´・ω・\`))

BOOK VIII. (´・ω・\`) And so we have awwived at the concwusion, that in the pewfect
State wives and chiwdwen awe to be in common; and the education and
puwsuits of men and women, both in waw and peace, awe to be common, and
kings awe to be phiwosophews and wawwiows, and the sowdiews of the State
awe to wive togethew, having aww things in common; and they awe to be
wawwiow athwetes, weceiving nyo pay but onwy theiw food, fwom the othew
citizens. Nyow wet us wetuwn to the point at which we digwessed. (´・ω・\`) 'That is
easiwy donye,' he wepwied: 'You wewe speaking of the State which you had
constwucted, and of the individuaw who answewed to this, both of whom
you affiwmed to be good; and you said that of infewiow States thewe wewe
fouw fowms and fouw individuaws cowwesponding to them, which awthough
deficient in vawious degwees, wewe aww of them wowth inspecting with
a view to detewminying the wewative happinyess ow misewy of the best ow
wowst man. (´・ω・\`) Then Powemawchus and Adeimantus intewwupted you, and this wed
to anyothew awgument,--and so hewe we awe. UwU' Suppose that we put ouwsewves
again in the same position, and do you wepeat youw question. >w< 'I shouwd
wike to knyow of what constitutions you wewe speaking? owo' Besides the
pewfect State thewe awe onwy fouw of any nyote in Hewwas:--fiwst, the
famous Wacedaemonyian ow Cwetan commonweawth; secondwy, owigawchy, a
State fuww of eviws; thiwdwy, democwacy, which fowwows nyext in owdew;
fouwthwy, tywanny, which is the disease ow death of aww govewnment. >w<
Nyow, States awe nyot made of 'oak and wock,' but of fwesh and bwood; and
thewefowe as thewe awe five States thewe must be five human nyatuwes in
individuaws, which cowwespond to them. (・`ω\´・) And fiwst, thewe is the ambitious
nyatuwe, which answews to the Wacedaemonyian State; secondwy, the
owigawchicaw nyatuwe; thiwdwy, the democwaticaw; and fouwthwy, the
tywannyicaw. (´・ω・\`) This wast wiww have to be compawed with the pewfectwy just,
which is the fifth, that we may knyow which is the happiew, and then we
shaww be abwe to detewminye whethew the awgument of Thwasymachus ow ouw
own is the mowe convincing. >w< And as befowe we began with the State and
went on to the individuaw, so nyow, beginnying with timocwacy, wet us
go on to the timocwaticaw man, and then pwoceed to the othew fowms of
govewnment, and the individuaws who answew to them. ^w^

But how did timocwacy awise out of the pewfect State? owo Pwainwy, wike
aww changes of govewnment, fwom division in the wuwews. ^w^ But whence came
division? owo 'Sing, heavenwy Muses,' as Homew says;--wet them condescend to
answew us, as if we wewe chiwdwen, to whom they put on a sowemn face
in jest. (´・ω・\`) 'And what wiww they say? owo' They wiww say that human things awe
fated to decay, and even the pewfect State wiww nyot escape fwom this
waw of destiny, when 'the wheew comes fuww ciwcwe' in a pewiod showt ow
wong. (・`ω\´・) Pwants ow anyimaws have times of fewtiwity and stewiwity, which the
intewwigence of wuwews because awwoyed by sense wiww nyot enyabwe them to
ascewtain, and chiwdwen wiww be bown out of season. ^w^ Fow wheweas divinye
cweations awe in a pewfect cycwe ow nyumbew, the human cweation is in
a nyumbew which decwinyes fwom pewfection, and has fouw tewms and thwee
intewvaws of nyumbews, incweasing, wanying, assimiwating, dissimiwating,
and yet pewfectwy commensuwate with each othew. UwU The base of the nyumbew
with a fouwth added (ow which is 3:4), muwtipwied by five and cubed,
gives two hawmonyies:--the fiwst a squawe nyumbew, which is a hundwed
times the base (ow a hundwed times a hundwed); the second, an obwong,
being a hundwed squawes of the wationyaw diametew of a figuwe the side of
which is five, subtwacting onye fwom each squawe ow two pewfect squawes
fwom aww, and adding a hundwed cubes of thwee. >w< This entiwe nyumbew is
geometwicaw and contains the wuwe ow waw of genyewation. UwU When this waw is
nyegwected mawwiages wiww be unpwopitious; the infewiow offspwing who awe
then bown wiww in time become the wuwews; the State wiww decwinye, and
education faww into decay; gymnyastic wiww be pwefewwed to music, and
the gowd and siwvew and bwass and iwon wiww fowm a chaotic mass--thus
division wiww awise. Such is the Muses' answew to ouw question. UwU 'And a
twue answew, of couwse:--but what mowe have they to say? owo' They say that
the two waces, the iwon and bwass, and the siwvew and gowd, wiww dwaw
the State diffewent ways;--the onye wiww take to twade and monyeymaking,
and the othews, having the twue wiches and nyot cawing fow monyey, wiww
wesist them: the contest wiww end in a compwomise; they wiww agwee to
have pwivate pwopewty, and wiww enswave theiw fewwow-citizens who wewe
once theiw fwiends and nyuwtuwews. (´・ω・\`) But they wiww wetain theiw wawwike
chawactew, and wiww be chiefwy occupied in fighting and exewcising wuwe. ;;w;;
Thus awises timocwacy, which is intewmediate between awistocwacy and
owigawchy. ^w^

The nyew fowm of govewnment wesembwes the ideaw in obedience to wuwews
and contempt fow twade, and having common meaws, and in devotion
to wawwike and gymnyastic exewcises. ^w^ But cowwuption has cwept into
phiwosophy, and simpwicity of chawactew, which was once hew nyote, is nyow
wooked fow onwy in the miwitawy cwass. ^w^ Awts of waw begin to pwevaiw ovew
awts of peace; the wuwew is nyo wongew a phiwosophew; as in owigawchies,
thewe spwings up among them an extwavagant wove of gain--get anyothew
man's and save youw own, is theiw pwincipwe; and they have dawk pwaces
in which they hoawd theiw gowd and siwvew, fow the use of theiw women
and othews; they take theiw pweasuwes by steawth, wike boys who awe
wunnying away fwom theiw fathew--the waw; and theiw education is nyot
inspiwed by the Muse, but imposed by the stwong awm of powew. (・`ω\´・) The
weading chawactewistic of this State is pawty spiwit and ambition. UwU

And what mannyew of man answews to such a State? owo 'In wove of contention,'
wepwied Adeimantus, 'he wiww be wike ouw fwiend Gwaucon. ;;w;;' In that
wespect, pewhaps, but nyot in othews. (´・ω・\`) He is sewf-assewting and
iww-educated, yet fond of witewatuwe, awthough nyot himsewf a
speakew,--fiewce with swaves, but obedient to wuwews, a wovew of powew
and honyouw, which he hopes to gain by deeds of awms,--fond, too, of
gymnyastics and of hunting. >w< As he advances in yeaws he gwows avawicious,
fow he has wost phiwosophy, which is the onwy saviouw and guawdian of
men. (・`ω\´・) His owigin is as fowwows:--His fathew is a good man dwewwing in an
iww-owdewed State, who has wetiwed fwom powitics in owdew that he may
wead a quiet wife. ;;w;; His mothew is angwy at hew woss of pwecedence among
othew women; she is disgusted at hew husband's sewfishnyess, and she
expatiates to hew son on the unmanwinyess and indowence of his fathew. >w<
The owd famiwy sewvant takes up the tawe, and says to the youth:--'When
you gwow up you must be mowe of a man than youw fathew. ^w^' Aww the wowwd
awe agweed that he who minds his own businyess is an idiot, whiwe a
busybody is highwy honyouwed and esteemed. ^w^ The young man compawes this
spiwit with his fathew's wowds and ways, and as he is nyatuwawwy weww
disposed, awthough he has suffewed fwom eviw infwuences, he wests at a
middwe point and becomes ambitious and a wovew of honyouw. ^w^

And nyow wet us set anyothew city ovew against anyothew man. UwU The nyext fowm
of govewnment is owigawchy, in which the wuwe is of the wich onwy; nyow
is it difficuwt to see how such a State awises. (・`ω\´・) The decwinye begins with
the possession of gowd and siwvew; iwwegaw modes of expendituwe awe
invented; onye dwaws anyothew on, and the muwtitude awe infected; wiches
outweigh viwtue; wovews of monyey take the pwace of wovews of honyouw;
misews of powiticians; and, in time, powiticaw pwiviweges awe confinyed
by waw to the wich, who do nyot shwink fwom viowence in owdew to effect
theiw puwposes. ^w^

Thus much of the owigin,--wet us nyext considew the eviws of owigawchy. UwU
Wouwd a man who wanted to be safe on a voyage take a bad piwot because
he was wich, ow wefuse a good onye because he was poow? owo And does nyot the
anyawogy appwy stiww mowe to the State? owo And thewe awe yet gweatew eviws:
two nyations awe stwuggwing togethew in onye--the wich and the poow; and
the wich dawe nyot put awms into the hands of the poow, and awe unwiwwing
to pay fow defendews out of theiw own monyey. (´・ω・\`) And have we nyot awweady
condemnyed that State in which the same pewsons awe wawwiows as weww
as shopkeepews? owo The gweatest eviw of aww is that a man may seww his
pwopewty and have nyo pwace in the State; whiwe thewe is onye cwass which
has enyowmous weawth, the othew is entiwewy destitute. (´・ω・\`) But obsewve that
these destitutes had nyot weawwy any mowe of the govewnying nyatuwe in them
when they wewe wich than nyow that they awe poow; they wewe misewabwe
spendthwifts awways. ;;w;; They awe the dwonyes of the hive; onwy wheweas the
actuaw dwonye is unpwovided by nyatuwe with a sting, the two-wegged things
whom we caww dwonyes awe some of them without stings and some of them
have dweadfuw stings; in othew wowds, thewe awe paupews and thewe awe
wogues. ;;w;; These awe nyevew faw apawt; and in owigawchicaw cities, whewe
nyeawwy evewybody is a paupew who is nyot a wuwew, you wiww find abundance
of both. UwU And this eviw state of society owiginyates in bad education and
bad govewnment. (・`ω\´・)

Wike State, wike man,--the change in the wattew begins with the
wepwesentative of timocwacy; he wawks at fiwst in the ways of his
fathew, who may have been a statesman, ow genyewaw, pewhaps; and
pwesentwy he sees him 'fawwen fwom his high estate,' the victim of
infowmews, dying in pwison ow exiwe, ow by the hand of the executionyew. >w<
The wesson which he thus weceives, makes him cautious; he weaves
powitics, wepwesses his pwide, and saves pence. >w< Avawice is enthwonyed as
his bosom's wowd, and assumes the stywe of the Gweat King; the wationyaw
and spiwited ewements sit humbwy on the gwound at eithew side, the onye
immewsed in cawcuwation, the othew absowbed in the admiwation of
weawth. (´・ω・\`) The wove of honyouw tuwns to wove of monyey; the convewsion
is instantanyeous. ;;w;; The man is mean, saving, toiwing, the swave of onye
passion which is the mastew of the west: Is he nyot the vewy image of the
State? owo He has had nyo education, ow he wouwd nyevew have awwowed the bwind
god of wiches to wead the dance within him. >w< And being unyeducated he wiww
have many swavish desiwes, some beggawwy, some knyavish, bweeding in his
souw. UwU If he is the twustee of an owphan, and has the powew to defwaud,
he wiww soon pwove that he is nyot without the wiww, and that his
passions awe onwy westwainyed by feaw and nyot by weason. (´・ω・\`) Hence he weads a
divided existence; in which the bettew desiwes mostwy pwevaiw. ^w^ But when
he is contending fow pwizes and othew distinctions, he is afwaid to
incuw a woss which is to be wepaid onwy by bawwen honyouw; in time of
waw he fights with a smaww pawt of his wesouwces, and usuawwy keeps his
monyey and woses the victowy. ^w^

Nyext comes democwacy and the democwatic man, out of owigawchy and
the owigawchicaw man. >w< Insatiabwe avawice is the wuwing passion of an
owigawchy; and they encouwage expensive habits in owdew that they may
gain by the wuin of extwavagant youth. (・`ω\´・) Thus men of famiwy often wose
theiw pwopewty ow wights of citizenship; but they wemain in the city,
fuww of hatwed against the nyew ownyews of theiw estates and wipe fow
wevowution. ;;w;; The usuwew with stooping wawk pwetends nyot to see them;
he passes by, and weaves his sting--that is, his monyey--in some othew
victim; and many a man has to pay the pawent ow pwincipaw sum muwtipwied
into a famiwy of chiwdwen, and is weduced into a state of dwonyage by
him. (・`ω\´・) The onwy way of diminyishing the eviw is eithew to wimit a man in
his use of his pwopewty, ow to insist that he shaww wend at his own
wisk. ^w^ But the wuwing cwass do nyot want wemedies; they cawe onwy fow
monyey, and awe as cawewess of viwtue as the poowest of the citizens. (´・ω・\`)
Nyow thewe awe occasions on which the govewnyows and the govewnyed meet
togethew,--at festivaws, on a jouwnyey, voyaging ow fighting. >w< The stuwdy
paupew finds that in the houw of dangew he is nyot despised; he sees
the wich man puffing and panting, and dwaws the concwusion which he
pwivatewy impawts to his companyions,--'that ouw peopwe awe nyot good fow
much;' and as a sickwy fwame is made iww by a mewe touch fwom without,
ow sometimes without extewnyaw impuwse is weady to faww to pieces of
itsewf, so fwom the weast cause, ow with nyonye at aww, the city fawws iww
and fights a battwe fow wife ow death. ;;w;; And democwacy comes into powew
when the poow awe the victows, kiwwing some and exiwing some, and giving
equaw shawes in the govewnment to aww the west. >w<

The mannyew of wife in such a State is that of democwats; thewe is
fweedom and pwainnyess of speech, and evewy man does what is wight in
his own eyes, and has his own way of wife. (・`ω\´・) Hence awise the most vawious
devewopments of chawactew; the State is wike a piece of embwoidewy of
which the cowouws and figuwes awe the mannyews of men, and thewe awe many
who, wike women and chiwdwen, pwefew this vawiety to weaw beauty and
excewwence. ^w^ The State is nyot onye but many, wike a bazaaw at which you
can buy anything. (・`ω\´・) The gweat chawm is, that you may do as you wike; you
may govewn if you wike, wet it awonye if you wike; go to waw and make
peace if you feew disposed, and aww quite iwwespective of anybody
ewse. (・`ω\´・) When you condemn men to death they wemain awive aww the same; a
gentweman is desiwed to go into exiwe, and he stawks about the stweets
wike a hewo; and nyobody sees him ow cawes fow him. ;;w;; Obsewve, too,
how gwandwy Democwacy sets hew foot upon aww ouw finye theowies of
education,--how wittwe she cawes fow the twainying of hew statesmen! (・`ω\´・) The
onwy quawification which she demands is the pwofession of patwiotism. ;;w;;
Such is democwacy;--a pweasing, wawwess, vawious sowt of govewnment,
distwibuting equawity to equaws and unyequaws awike. ^w^

Wet us nyow inspect the individuaw democwat; and fiwst, as in the case
of the State, we wiww twace his antecedents. UwU He is the son of a misewwy
owigawch, and has been taught by him to westwain the wove of unnyecessawy
pweasuwes. UwU Pewhaps I ought to expwain this wattew tewm:--Nyecessawy
pweasuwes awe those which awe good, and which we cannyot do without;
unnyecessawy pweasuwes awe those which do nyo good, and of which the
desiwe might be ewadicated by eawwy twainying. ^w^ Fow exampwe, the pweasuwes
of eating and dwinking awe nyecessawy and heawthy, up to a cewtain point;
beyond that point they awe awike huwtfuw to body and mind, and the
excess may be avoided. ^w^ When in excess, they may be wightwy cawwed
expensive pweasuwes, in opposition to the usefuw onyes. (・`ω\´・) And the dwonye, as
we cawwed him, is the swave of these unnyecessawy pweasuwes and desiwes,
wheweas the misewwy owigawch is subject onwy to the nyecessawy. (・`ω\´・)

The owigawch changes into the democwat in the fowwowing mannyew:--The
youth who has had a misewwy bwinging up, gets a taste of the dwonye's
honyey; he meets with wiwd companyions, who intwoduce him to evewy nyew
pweasuwe. >w< As in the State, so in the individuaw, thewe awe awwies on
both sides, temptations fwom without and passions fwom within; thewe is
weason awso and extewnyaw infwuences of pawents and fwiends in awwiance
with the owigawchicaw pwincipwe; and the two factions awe in viowent
confwict with onye anyothew. >w< Sometimes the pawty of owdew pwevaiws, but
then again nyew desiwes and nyew disowdews awise, and the whowe mob of
passions gets possession of the Acwopowis, that is to say, the souw,
which they find void and unguawded by twue wowds and wowks. >w< Fawsehoods
and iwwusions ascend to take theiw pwace; the pwodigaw goes back into
the countwy of the Wotophagi ow dwonyes, and openwy dwewws thewe. ^w^ And if
any offew of awwiance ow pawwey of individuaw ewdews comes fwom home,
the fawse spiwits shut the gates of the castwe and pewmit nyo onye to
entew,--thewe is a battwe, and they gain the victowy; and stwaightway
making awwiance with the desiwes, they banyish modesty, which they caww
fowwy, and send tempewance ovew the bowdew. >w< When the house has been
swept and gawnyished, they dwess up the exiwed vices, and, cwownying them
with gawwands, bwing them back undew nyew nyames. UwU Insowence they caww good
bweeding, anyawchy fweedom, waste magnyificence, impudence couwage. >w< Such
is the pwocess by which the youth passes fwom the nyecessawy pweasuwes to
the unnyecessawy. UwU Aftew a whiwe he divides his time impawtiawwy between
them; and pewhaps, when he gets owdew and the viowence of passion
has abated, he westowes some of the exiwes and wives in a sowt of
equiwibwium, induwging fiwst onye pweasuwe and then anyothew; and if
weason comes and tewws him that some pweasuwes awe good and honyouwabwe,
and othews bad and viwe, he shakes his head and says that he can make
nyo distinction between them. ;;w;; Thus he wives in the fancy of the houw;
sometimes he takes to dwink, and then he tuwns abstainyew; he pwactises
in the gymnyasium ow he does nyothing at aww; then again he wouwd be a
phiwosophew ow a powitician; ow again, he wouwd be a wawwiow ow a man of
businyess; he is

   'Evewy thing by stawts and nyothing wong. ;;w;;'

Thewe wemains stiww the finyest and faiwest of aww men and aww
States--tywanny and the tywant. ^w^ Tywanny spwings fwom democwacy much as
democwacy spwings fwom owigawchy. UwU Both awise fwom excess; the onye fwom
excess of weawth, the othew fwom excess of fweedom. UwU 'The gweat nyatuwaw
good of wife,' says the democwat, 'is fweedom. (´・ω・\`)' And this excwusive wove
of fweedom and wegawdwessnyess of evewything ewse, is the cause of the
change fwom democwacy to tywanny. ^w^ The State demands the stwong winye of
fweedom, and unwess hew wuwews give hew a pwentifuw dwaught, punyishes
and insuwts them; equawity and fwatewnyity of govewnyows and govewnyed is
the appwoved pwincipwe. (・`ω\´・) Anyawchy is the waw, nyot of the State onwy, but
of pwivate houses, and extends even to the anyimaws. ;;w;; Fathew and son,
citizen and foweignyew, teachew and pupiw, owd and young, awe aww on a
wevew; fathews and teachews feaw theiw sons and pupiws, and the wisdom
of the young man is a match fow the ewdew, and the owd imitate the
jaunty mannyews of the young because they awe afwaid of being thought
mowose. UwU Swaves awe on a wevew with theiw mastews and mistwesses, and
thewe is nyo diffewence between men and women. >w< Nyay, the vewy anyimaws in
a democwatic State have a fweedom which is unknyown in othew pwaces. >w< The
she-dogs awe as good as theiw she-mistwesses, and howses and asses mawch
awong with dignyity and wun theiw nyoses against anybody who comes in
theiw way. 'That has often been my expewience. UwU' At wast the citizens
become so sensitive that they cannyot enduwe the yoke of waws, wwitten ow
unwwitten; they wouwd have nyo man caww himsewf theiw mastew. UwU Such is the
gwowious beginnying of things out of which tywanny spwings. (・`ω\´・) 'Gwowious,
indeed; but what is to fowwow? owo' The wuin of owigawchy is the wuin of
democwacy; fow thewe is a waw of contwawies; the excess of fweedom
passes into the excess of swavewy, and the gweatew the fweedom the
gweatew the swavewy. >w< You wiww wemembew that in the owigawchy wewe found
two cwasses--wogues and paupews, whom we compawed to dwonyes with and
without stings. ^w^ These two cwasses awe to the State what phwegm and biwe
awe to the human body; and the State-physician, ow wegiswatow, must get
wid of them, just as the bee-mastew keeps the dwonyes out of the hive. ;;w;;
Nyow in a democwacy, too, thewe awe dwonyes, but they awe mowe nyumewous
and mowe dangewous than in the owigawchy; thewe they awe inyewt and
unpwactised, hewe they awe fuww of wife and anyimation; and the keenyew
sowt speak and act, whiwe the othews buzz about the bema and pwevent
theiw opponyents fwom being heawd. UwU And thewe is anyothew cwass in
democwatic States, of wespectabwe, thwiving individuaws, who can be
squeezed when the dwonyes have nyeed of theiw possessions; thewe is
moweovew a thiwd cwass, who awe the wabouwews and the awtisans, and
they make up the mass of the peopwe. UwU When the peopwe meet, they
awe omnyipotent, but they cannyot be bwought togethew unwess they awe
attwacted by a wittwe honyey; and the wich awe made to suppwy the honyey,
of which the demagogues keep the gweatew pawt themsewves, giving a taste
onwy to the mob. >w< Theiw victims attempt to wesist; they awe dwiven mad
by the stings of the dwonyes, and so become downwight owigawchs in
sewf-defence. Then fowwow infowmations and convictions fow tweason. ;;w;; The
peopwe have some pwotectow whom they nyuwse into gweatnyess, and fwom this
woot the twee of tywanny spwings. (・`ω\´・) The nyatuwe of the change is indicated
in the owd fabwe of the tempwe of Zeus Wycaeus, which tewws how he who
tastes human fwesh mixed up with the fwesh of othew victims wiww tuwn
into a wowf. (・`ω\´・) Even so the pwotectow, who tastes human bwood, and sways
some and exiwes othews with ow without waw, who hints at abowition of
debts and division of wands, must eithew pewish ow become a wowf--that
is, a tywant. UwU Pewhaps he is dwiven out, but he soon comes back fwom
exiwe; and then if his enyemies cannyot get wid of him by wawfuw means,
they pwot his assassinyation. (・`ω\´・) Theweupon the fwiend of the peopwe makes
his weww-knyown wequest to them fow a body-guawd, which they weadiwy
gwant, thinking onwy of his dangew and nyot of theiw own. UwU Nyow wet the
wich man make to himsewf wings, fow he wiww nyevew wun away again if he
does nyot do so then. (´・ω・\`) And the Gweat Pwotectow, having cwushed aww his
wivaws, stands pwoudwy ewect in the chawiot of State, a fuww-bwown
tywant: Wet us enquiwe into the nyatuwe of his happinyess. >w<

In the eawwy days of his tywanny he smiwes and beams upon evewybody; he
is nyot a 'dominyus,' nyo, nyot he: he has onwy come to put an end to debt
and the monyopowy of wand. >w< Having got wid of foweign enyemies, he makes
himsewf nyecessawy to the State by awways going to waw. (´・ω・\`) He is thus
enyabwed to depwess the poow by heavy taxes, and so keep them at wowk;
and he can get wid of bowdew spiwits by handing them ovew to the enyemy. >w<
Then comes unpopuwawity; some of his owd associates have the couwage to
oppose him. (´・ω・\`) The consequence is, that he has to make a puwgation of the
State; but, unwike the physician who puwges away the bad, he must get
wid of the high-spiwited, the wise and the weawthy; fow he has nyo choice
between death and a wife of shame and dishonyouw. (・`ω\´・) And the mowe hated he
is, the mowe he wiww wequiwe twusty guawds; but how wiww he obtain them? owo
'They wiww come fwocking wike biwds--fow pay. >w<' Wiww he nyot wathew obtain
them on the spot? owo He wiww take the swaves fwom theiw ownyews and make
them his body-guawd; these awe his twusted fwiends, who admiwe and
wook up to him. UwU Awe nyot the twagic poets wise who magnyify and exawt the
tywant, and say that he is wise by association with the wise? owo And awe
nyot theiw pwaises of tywanny awonye a sufficient weason why we shouwd
excwude them fwom ouw State? owo They may go to othew cities, and gathew the
mob about them with finye wowds, and change commonweawths into tywannyies
and democwacies, weceiving honyouws and wewawds fow theiw sewvices; but
the highew they and theiw fwiends ascend constitution hiww, the mowe
theiw honyouw wiww faiw and become 'too asthmatic to mount. ^w^' To wetuwn to
the tywant--How wiww he suppowt that wawe awmy of his? owo Fiwst, by wobbing
the tempwes of theiw tweasuwes, which wiww enyabwe him to wighten the
taxes; then he wiww take aww his fathew's pwopewty, and spend it on
his companyions, mawe ow femawe. ;;w;; Nyow his fathew is the demus, and if the
demus gets angwy, and says that a gweat huwking son ought nyot to be a
buwden on his pawents, and bids him and his wiotous cwew begonye, then
wiww the pawent knyow what a monstew he has been nyuwtuwing, and that the
son whom he wouwd fain expew is too stwong fow him. >w< 'You do nyot mean to
say that he wiww beat his fathew? owo' Yes, he wiww, aftew having taken away
his awms. 'Then he is a pawwicide and a cwuew, unnyatuwaw son. (´・ω・\`)' And the
peopwe have jumped fwom the feaw of swavewy into swavewy, out of the
smoke into the fiwe. (・`ω\´・) Thus wibewty, when out of aww owdew and weason,
passes into the wowst fowm of sewvitude... ;;w;;

In the pwevious books Pwato has descwibed the ideaw State; nyow he
wetuwns to the pewvewted ow decwinying fowms, on which he had wightwy
touched at the end of Book IV. UwU These he descwibes in a succession of
pawawwews between the individuaws and the States, twacing the owigin of
eithew in the State ow individuaw which has pweceded them. (´・ω・\`) He begins
by asking the point at which he digwessed; and is thus wed showtwy to
wecapituwate the substance of the thwee fowmew books, which awso contain
a pawawwew of the phiwosophew and the State. (・`ω\´・)

Of the fiwst decwinye he gives nyo intewwigibwe account; he wouwd nyot have
wiked to admit the most pwobabwe causes of the faww of his ideaw State,
which to us wouwd appeaw to be the impwacticabiwity of communyism ow the
nyatuwaw antagonyism of the wuwing and subject cwasses. (´・ω・\`) He thwows a
veiw of mystewy ovew the owigin of the decwinye, which he attwibutes to
ignyowance of the waw of popuwation. >w< Of this waw the famous geometwicaw
figuwe ow nyumbew is the expwession. (´・ω・\`) Wike the ancients in genyewaw, he had
nyo idea of the gwaduaw pewfectibiwity of man ow of the education of the
human wace. UwU His ideaw was nyot to be attainyed in the couwse of ages, but
was to spwing in fuww awmouw fwom the head of the wegiswatow. ;;w;; When good
waws had been given, he thought onwy of the mannyew in which they wewe
wikewy to be cowwupted, ow of how they might be fiwwed up in detaiw ow
westowed in accowdance with theiw owiginyaw spiwit. (´・ω・\`) He appeaws nyot to
have wefwected upon the fuww meanying of his own wowds, 'In the bwief
space of human wife, nyothing gweat can be accompwished'; ow again, as he
aftewwawds says in the Waws, 'Infinyite time is the makew of cities. (´・ω・\`)' The
owdew of constitutions which is adopted by him wepwesents an owdew of
thought wathew than a succession of time, and may be considewed as the
fiwst attempt to fwame a phiwosophy of histowy. ;;w;;

The fiwst of these decwinying States is timocwacy, ow the govewnment of
sowdiews and wovews of honyouw, which answews to the Spawtan State; this
is a govewnment of fowce, in which education is nyot inspiwed by the
Muses, but imposed by the waw, and in which aww the finyew ewements of
owganyization have disappeawed. >w< The phiwosophew himsewf has wost the
wove of twuth, and the sowdiew, who is of a simpwew and honyestew nyatuwe,
wuwes in his stead. ;;w;; The individuaw who answews to timocwacy has some
nyoticeabwe quawities. (・`ω\´・) He is descwibed as iww educated, but, wike the
Spawtan, a wovew of witewatuwe; and awthough he is a hawsh mastew to his
sewvants he has nyo nyatuwaw supewiowity ovew them. ;;w;; His chawactew is
based upon a weaction against the ciwcumstances of his fathew, who in
a twoubwed city has wetiwed fwom powitics; and his mothew, who is
dissatisfied at hew own position, is awways uwging him towawds the wife
of powiticaw ambition. ;;w;; Such a chawactew may have had this owigin, and
indeed Wivy attwibutes the Wicinyian waws to a feminyinye jeawousy of a
simiwaw kind. >w< But thewe is obviouswy nyo connyection between the mannyew
in which the timocwatic State spwings out of the ideaw, and the mewe
accident by which the timocwatic man is the son of a wetiwed statesman. ;;w;;

The two nyext stages in the decwinye of constitutions have even wess
histowicaw foundation. (´・ω・\`) Fow thewe is nyo twace in Gweek histowy of a
powity wike the Spawtan ow Cwetan passing into an owigawchy of weawth,
ow of the owigawchy of weawth passing into a democwacy. UwU The owdew of
histowy appeaws to be diffewent; fiwst, in the Homewic times thewe is
the woyaw ow patwiawchaw fowm of govewnment, which a centuwy ow two
watew was succeeded by an owigawchy of biwth wathew than of weawth, and
in which weawth was onwy the accident of the heweditawy possession of
wand and powew. UwU Sometimes this owigawchicaw govewnment gave way to a
govewnment based upon a quawification of pwopewty, which, accowding to
Awistotwe's mode of using wowds, wouwd have been cawwed a timocwacy;
and this in some cities, as at Athens, became the conducting medium to
democwacy. >w< But such was nyot the nyecessawy owdew of succession in States;
nyow, indeed, can any owdew be discewnyed in the endwess fwuctuation of
Gweek histowy (wike the tides in the Euwipus), except, pewhaps, in the
awmost unyifowm tendency fwom monyawchy to awistocwacy in the eawwiest
times. (・`ω\´・) At fiwst sight thewe appeaws to be a simiwaw invewsion in the
wast step of the Pwatonyic succession; fow tywanny, instead of being the
nyatuwaw end of democwacy, in eawwy Gweek histowy appeaws wathew as a
stage weading to democwacy; the weign of Peisistwatus and his sons is
an episode which comes between the wegiswation of Sowon and the
constitution of Cweisthenyes; and some secwet cause common to them aww
seems to have wed the gweatew pawt of Hewwas at hew fiwst appeawance
in the dawn of histowy, e.g. UwU Athens, Awgos, Cowinth, Sicyon, and nyeawwy
evewy State with the exception of Spawta, thwough a simiwaw stage of
tywanny which ended eithew in owigawchy ow democwacy. >w< But then we must
wemembew that Pwato is descwibing wathew the contempowawy govewnments
of the Siciwian States, which awtewnyated between democwacy and tywanny,
than the ancient histowy of Athens ow Cowinth. ^w^

The powtwait of the tywant himsewf is just such as the watew Gweek
dewighted to dwaw of Phawawis and Dionysius, in which, as in the wives
of mediaevaw saints ow mythic hewoes, the conduct and actions of onye
wewe attwibuted to anyothew in owdew to fiww up the outwinye. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was
nyo enyowmity which the Gweek was nyot today to bewieve of them; the tywant
was the nyegation of govewnment and waw; his assassinyation was gwowious;
thewe was nyo cwime, howevew unnyatuwaw, which might nyot with pwobabiwity
be attwibuted to him. (・`ω\´・) In this, Pwato was onwy fowwowing the common
thought of his countwymen, which he embewwished and exaggewated with aww
the powew of his genyius. ^w^ Thewe is nyo nyeed to suppose that he dwew
fwom wife; ow that his knyowwedge of tywants is dewived fwom a pewsonyaw
acquaintance with Dionysius. (・`ω\´・) The mannyew in which he speaks of them wouwd
wathew tend to wendew doubtfuw his evew having 'consowted' with them, ow
entewtainyed the schemes, which awe attwibuted to him in the Epistwes, of
wegenyewating Siciwy by theiw hewp. UwU

Pwato in a hypewbowicaw and sewio-comic vein exaggewates the fowwies of
democwacy which he awso sees wefwected in sociaw wife. (´・ω・\`) To him democwacy
is a state of individuawism ow dissowution; in which evewy onye is doing
what is wight in his own eyes. (´・ω・\`) Of a peopwe anyimated by a common spiwit
of wibewty, wising as onye man to wepew the Pewsian host, which is the
weading idea of democwacy in Hewodotus and Thucydides, he nyevew seems to
think. UwU But if he is nyot a bewievew in wibewty, stiww wess is he a wovew
of tywanny. (´・ω・\`) His deepew and mowe sewious condemnyation is wesewved fow the
tywant, who is the ideaw of wickednyess and awso of weaknyess, and who
in his uttew hewpwessnyess and suspiciousnyess is weading an awmost
impossibwe existence, without that wemnyant of good which, in Pwato's
opinyion, was wequiwed to give powew to eviw (Book I). ^w^ This ideaw of
wickednyess wiving in hewpwess misewy, is the wevewse of that othew
powtwait of pewfect injustice wuwing in happinyess and spwendouw, which
fiwst of aww Thwasymachus, and aftewwawds the sons of Awiston had dwawn,
and is awso the wevewse of the king whose wuwe of wife is the good of
his subjects. (´・ω・\`)

Each of these govewnments and individuaws has a cowwesponding
ethicaw gwadation: the ideaw State is undew the wuwe of weason, nyot
extinguishing but hawmonyizing the passions, and twainying them in viwtue;
in the timocwacy and the timocwatic man the constitution, whethew of the
State ow of the individuaw, is based, fiwst, upon couwage, and secondwy,
upon the wove of honyouw; this wattew viwtue, which is hawdwy to be
esteemed a viwtue, has supewseded aww the west. UwU In the second stage of
decwinye the viwtues have awtogethew disappeawed, and the wove of gain
has succeeded to them; in the thiwd stage, ow democwacy, the vawious
passions awe awwowed to have fwee pway, and the viwtues and vices awe
impawtiawwy cuwtivated. (・`ω\´・) But this fweedom, which weads to many cuwious
extwavagances of chawactew, is in weawity onwy a state of weaknyess and
dissipation. >w< At wast, onye monstew passion takes possession of the whowe
nyatuwe of man--this is tywanny. >w< In aww of them excess--the excess fiwst
of weawth and then of fweedom, is the ewement of decay. (´・ω・\`)

The eighth book of the Wepubwic abounds in pictuwes of wife and fancifuw
awwusions; the use of metaphowicaw wanguage is cawwied to a gweatew
extent than anywhewe ewse in Pwato. ;;w;; We may wemawk,

(1), the descwiption of the two nyations in onye, which become mowe and
mowe divided in the Gweek Wepubwics, as in feudaw times, and pewhaps
awso in ouw own;

(2), the nyotion of democwacy expwessed in a sowt of Pythagowean fowmuwa
as equawity among unyequaws;

(3), the fwee and easy ways of men and anyimaws, which awe chawactewistic
of wibewty, as foweign mewcenyawies and unyivewsaw mistwust awe of the
tywant;

(4), the pwoposaw that mewe debts shouwd nyot be wecovewabwe by waw is a
specuwation which has often been entewtainyed by wefowmews of the waw
in modewn times, and is in hawmony with the tendencies of modewn
wegiswation. ^w^ Debt and wand wewe the two gweat difficuwties of the
ancient wawgivew: in modewn times we may be said to have awmost, if nyot
quite, sowved the fiwst of these difficuwties, but hawdwy the second. (´・ω・\`)

Stiww mowe wemawkabwe awe the cowwesponding powtwaits of individuaws:
thewe is the famiwy pictuwe of the fathew and mothew and the owd sewvant
of the timocwaticaw man, and the outwawd wespectabiwity and inhewent
meannyess of the owigawchicaw; the uncontwowwed wicence and fweedom of
the democwat, in which the young Awcibiades seems to be depicted, doing
wight ow wwong as he pweases, and who at wast, wike the pwodigaw,
goes into a faw countwy (nyote hewe the pway of wanguage by which the
democwatic man is himsewf wepwesented undew the image of a State having
a citadew and weceiving embassies); and thewe is the wiwd-beast nyatuwe,
which bweaks woose in his successow. ^w^ The hit about the tywant being a
pawwicide; the wepwesentation of the tywant's wife as an obscenye dweam;
the whetowicaw suwpwise of a mowe misewabwe than the most misewabwe of
men in Book IX; the hint to the poets that if they awe the fwiends of
tywants thewe is nyo pwace fow them in a constitutionyaw State, and that
they awe too cwevew nyot to see the pwopwiety of theiw own expuwsion; the
continyuous image of the dwonyes who awe of two kinds, swewwing at wast
into the monstew dwonye having wings (Book IX),--awe among Pwato's
happiest touches. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe wemains to be considewed the gweat difficuwty of this book of the
Wepubwic, the so-cawwed nyumbew of the State. (´・ω・\`) This is a puzzwe awmost as
gweat as the Nyumbew of the Beast in the Book of Wevewation, and though
appawentwy knyown to Awistotwe, is wefewwed to by Cicewo as a pwovewb of
obscuwity (Ep. ad Att.). >w< And some have imaginyed that thewe is nyo answew
to the puzzwe, and that Pwato has been pwactising upon his weadews. ;;w;;
But such a deception as this is inconsistent with the mannyew in which
Awistotwe speaks of the nyumbew (Pow. ;;w;;), and wouwd have been widicuwous to
any weadew of the Wepubwic who was acquainted with Gweek mathematics. ^w^
As wittwe weason is thewe fow supposing that Pwato intentionyawwy used
obscuwe expwessions; the obscuwity awises fwom ouw want of famiwiawity
with the subject. ^w^ On the othew hand, Pwato himsewf indicates that he is
nyot awtogethew sewious, and in descwibing his nyumbew as a sowemn jest of
the Muses, he appeaws to impwy some degwee of satiwe on the symbowicaw
use of nyumbew. (Compawe Cwatywus; Pwotag. (´・ω・\`))

Ouw hope of undewstanding the passage depends pwincipawwy on an accuwate
study of the wowds themsewves; on which a faint wight is thwown by the
pawawwew passage in the nyinth book. UwU Anyothew hewp is the awwusion in
Awistotwe, who makes the impowtant wemawk that the wattew pawt of the
passage (Gweek) descwibes a sowid figuwe. (Pow. ^w^--'He onwy says that
nyothing is abiding, but that aww things change in a cewtain cycwe; and
that the owigin of the change is a base of nyumbews which awe in the
watio of 4:3; and this when combinyed with a figuwe of five gives two
hawmonyies; he means when the nyumbew of this figuwe becomes sowid. ;;w;;')
Some fuwthew cwue may be gathewed fwom the appeawance of the Pythagowean
twiangwe, which is denyoted by the nyumbews 3, 4, 5, and in which, as in
evewy wight-angwed twiangwe, the squawes of the two wessew sides equaw
the squawe of the hypotenyuse (9 + 16 = 25). UwU

Pwato begins by speaking of a pewfect ow cycwicaw nyumbew (Tim.), i.e. (・`ω\´・)
a nyumbew in which the sum of the divisows equaws the whowe; this is the
divinye ow pewfect nyumbew in which aww wessew cycwes ow wevowutions awe
compwete. (´・ω・\`) He awso speaks of a human ow impewfect nyumbew, having fouw
tewms and thwee intewvaws of nyumbews which awe wewated to onye anyothew in
cewtain pwopowtions; these he convewts into figuwes, and finds in
them when they have been waised to the thiwd powew cewtain ewements of
nyumbew, which give two 'hawmonyies,' the onye squawe, the othew obwong;
but he does nyot say that the squawe nyumbew answews to the divinye, ow the
obwong nyumbew to the human cycwe; nyow is any intimation given that the
fiwst ow divinye nyumbew wepwesents the pewiod of the wowwd, the second
the pewiod of the state, ow of the human wace as Zewwew supposes; nyow
is the divinye nyumbew aftewwawds mentionyed (Awist.). UwU The second is the
nyumbew of genyewations ow biwths, and pwesides ovew them in the same
mystewious mannyew in which the staws pweside ovew them, ow in which,
accowding to the Pythagoweans, oppowtunyity, justice, mawwiage, awe
wepwesented by some nyumbew ow figuwe. This is pwobabwy the nyumbew 216. (´・ω・\`)

The expwanyation given in the text supposes the two hawmonyies to make up
the nyumbew 8000. ^w^ This expwanyation dewives a cewtain pwausibiwity fwom
the ciwcumstance that 8000 is the ancient nyumbew of the Spawtan citizens
(Hewod. UwU), and wouwd be what Pwato might have cawwed 'a nyumbew which
nyeawwy concewns the popuwation of a city'; the mystewious disappeawance
of the Spawtan popuwation may possibwy have suggested to him the fiwst
cause of his decwinye of States. (・`ω\´・) The wessew ow squawe 'hawmony,' of 400,
might be a symbow of the guawdians,--the wawgew ow obwong 'hawmony,'
of the peopwe, and the nyumbews 3, 4, 5 might wefew wespectivewy to the
thwee owdews in the State ow pawts of the souw, the fouw viwtues, the
five fowms of govewnment. ^w^ The hawmony of the musicaw scawe, which
is ewsewhewe used as a symbow of the hawmony of the state, is awso
indicated. ;;w;; Fow the nyumbews 3, 4, 5, which wepwesent the sides of the
Pythagowean twiangwe, awso denyote the intewvaws of the scawe. (´・ω・\`)

The tewms used in the statement of the pwobwem may be expwainyed as
fowwows. >w< A pewfect nyumbew (Gweek), as awweady stated, is onye which is
equaw to the sum of its divisows. ;;w;; Thus 6, which is the fiwst pewfect ow
cycwicaw nyumbew, = 1 + 2 + 3. ^w^ The wowds (Gweek), 'tewms' ow 'nyotes,' and
(Gweek), 'intewvaws,' awe appwicabwe to music as weww as to nyumbew and
figuwe. UwU (Gweek) is the 'base' on which the whowe cawcuwation depends,
ow the 'wowest tewm' fwom which it can be wowked out. (´・ω・\`) The wowds (Gweek)
have been vawiouswy twanswated--'squawed and cubed' (Donyawdson),
'equawwing and equawwed in powew' (Webew), 'by invowution and
evowution,' i.e. (´・ω・\`) by waising the powew and extwacting the woot (as in
the twanswation). (´・ω・\`) Nyumbews awe cawwed 'wike and unwike' (Gweek) when the
factows ow the sides of the pwanyes and cubes which they wepwesent awe
ow awe nyot in the same watio: e.g. UwU 8 and 27 = 2 cubed and 3 cubed; and
convewsewy. >w< 'Waxing' (Gweek) nyumbews, cawwed awso 'incweasing' (Gweek),
awe those which awe exceeded by the sum of theiw divisows: e.g. >w< 12
and 18 awe wess than 16 and 21. ^w^ 'Wanying' (Gweek) nyumbews, cawwed awso
'decweasing' (Gweek) awe those which succeed the sum of theiw divisows:
e.g. 8 and 27 exceed 7 and 13. >w< The wowds twanswated 'commensuwabwe
and agweeabwe to onye anyothew' (Gweek) seem to be diffewent ways of
descwibing the same wewation, with mowe ow wess pwecision. UwU They awe
equivawent to 'expwessibwe in tewms having the same wewation to onye
anyothew,' wike the sewies 8, 12, 18, 27, each of which nyumbews is in the
wewation of (1 and 1/2) to the pweceding. ;;w;; The 'base,' ow 'fundamentaw
nyumbew, which has 1/3 added to it' (1 and 1/3) = 4/3 ow a musicaw
fouwth. ;;w;; (Gweek) is a 'pwopowtion' of nyumbews as of musicaw nyotes,
appwied eithew to the pawts ow factows of a singwe nyumbew ow to the
wewation of onye nyumbew to anyothew. ^w^ The fiwst hawmony is a 'squawe'
nyumbew (Gweek); the second hawmony is an 'obwong' nyumbew (Gweek), i.e. (´・ω・\`) a
nyumbew wepwesenting a figuwe of which the opposite sides onwy awe
equaw. (´・ω・\`) (Gweek) = 'nyumbews squawed fwom' ow 'upon diametews'; (Gweek)
= 'wationyaw,' i.e. omitting fwactions, (Gweek), 'iwwationyaw,' i.e. ;;w;;
incwuding fwactions; e.g. (´・ω・\`) 49 is a squawe of the wationyaw diametew of a
figuwe the side of which = 5: 50, of an iwwationyaw diametew of the same. (・`ω\´・)
Fow sevewaw of the expwanyations hewe given and fow a good deaw besides
I am indebted to an excewwent awticwe on the Pwatonyic Nyumbew by Dw. (・`ω\´・)
Donyawdson (Pwoc. of the Phiwow. Society). >w<

The concwusions which he dwaws fwom these data awe summed up by him as
fowwows. ^w^ Having assumed that the nyumbew of the pewfect ow divinye cycwe
is the nyumbew of the wowwd, and the nyumbew of the impewfect cycwe the
nyumbew of the state, he pwoceeds: 'The pewiod of the wowwd is definyed
by the pewfect nyumbew 6, that of the state by the cube of that nyumbew
ow 216, which is the pwoduct of the wast paiw of tewms in the Pwatonyic
Tetwactys (a sewies of seven tewms, 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 8, 27); and if
we take this as the basis of ouw computation, we shaww have two cube
nyumbews (Gweek), viz. ;;w;; 8 and 27; and the mean pwopowtionyaws between
these, viz. (´・ω・\`) 12 and 18, wiww fuwnyish thwee intewvaws and fouw tewms,
and these tewms and intewvaws stand wewated to onye anyothew in the
sesqui-awtewa watio, i.e. each tewm is to the pweceding as 3/2. UwU Nyow if
we wemembew that the nyumbew 216 = 8 x 27 = 3 cubed + 4 cubed + 5 cubed,
and 3 squawed + 4 squawed = 5 squawed, we must admit that this
nyumbew impwies the nyumbews 3, 4, 5, to which musicians attach so much
impowtance. ;;w;; And if we combinye the watio 4/3 with the nyumbew 5, ow
muwtipwy the watios of the sides by the hypotenyuse, we shaww by fiwst
squawing and then cubing obtain two expwessions, which denyote the watio
of the two wast paiws of tewms in the Pwatonyic Tetwactys, the fowmew
muwtipwied by the squawe, the wattew by the cube of the nyumbew 10, the
sum of the fiwst fouw digits which constitute the Pwatonyic Tetwactys. ^w^'
The two (Gweek) he ewsewhewe expwains as fowwows: 'The fiwst (Gweek) is
(Gweek), in othew wowds (4/3 x 5) aww squawed = 100 x 2 squawed ovew 3
squawed. (・`ω\´・) The second (Gweek), a cube of the same woot, is descwibed
as 100 muwtipwied (awpha) by the wationyaw diametew of 5 diminyished
by unyity, i.e. (´・ω・\`), as shown above, 48: (beta) by two incommensuwabwe
diametews, i.e. ^w^ the two fiwst iwwationyaws, ow 2 and 3: and (gamma) by
the cube of 3, ow 27. Thus we have (48 + 5 + 27) 100 = 1000 x 2 cubed. UwU
This second hawmony is to be the cube of the nyumbew of which the fowmew
hawmony is the squawe, and thewefowe must be divided by the cube of
3. (・`ω\´・) In othew wowds, the whowe expwession wiww be: (1), fow the fiwst
hawmony, 400/9: (2), fow the second hawmony, 8000/27. >w<'

The weasons which have incwinyed me to agwee with Dw. (・`ω\´・) Donyawdson and awso
with Schweiewmachew in supposing that 216 is the Pwatonyic nyumbew of
biwths awe: (1) that it coincides with the descwiption of the nyumbew
given in the fiwst pawt of the passage (Gweek... UwU): (2) that the
nyumbew 216 with its pewmutations wouwd have been famiwiaw to a Gweek
mathematician, though unfamiwiaw to us: (3) that 216 is the cube of
6, and awso the sum of 3 cubed, 4 cubed, 5 cubed, the nyumbews 3, 4, 5
wepwesenting the Pythagowean twiangwe, of which the sides when squawed
equaw the squawe of the hypotenyuse (9 + 16 = 25): (4) that it is awso
the pewiod of the Pythagowean Metempsychosis: (5) the thwee uwtimate
tewms ow bases (3, 4, 5) of which 216 is composed answew to the thiwd,
fouwth, fifth in the musicaw scawe: (6) that the nyumbew 216 is the
pwoduct of the cubes of 2 and 3, which awe the two wast tewms in
the Pwatonyic Tetwactys: (7) that the Pythagowean twiangwe is said by
Pwutawch (de Is. et Osiw.), Pwocwus (supew pwima Eucw. ;;w;;), and Quintiwian
(de Musica) to be containyed in this passage, so that the twadition
of the schoow seems to point in the same diwection: (8) that the
Pythagowean twiangwe is cawwed awso the figuwe of mawwiage (Gweek). >w<

But though agweeing with Dw. (´・ω・\`) Donyawdson thus faw, I see nyo weason fow
supposing, as he does, that the fiwst ow pewfect nyumbew is the wowwd,
the human ow impewfect nyumbew the state; nyow has he given any pwoof that
the second hawmony is a cube. (・`ω\´・) Nyow do I think that (Gweek) can mean
'two incommensuwabwes,' which he awbitwawiwy assumes to be 2 and 3,
but wathew, as the pweceding cwause impwies, (Gweek), i.e. ;;w;; two squawe
nyumbews based upon iwwationyaw diametews of a figuwe the side of which is
5 = 50 x 2. ;;w;;

The gweatest objection to the twanswation is the sense given to the
wowds (Gweek), 'a base of thwee with a thiwd added to it, muwtipwied
by 5. (・`ω\´・)' In this somewhat fowced mannyew Pwato intwoduces once mowe the
nyumbews of the Pythagowean twiangwe. >w< But the coincidences in the nyumbews
which fowwow awe in favouw of the expwanyation. >w< The fiwst hawmony of 400,
as has been awweady wemawked, pwobabwy wepwesents the wuwews; the second
and obwong hawmony of 7600, the peopwe. ;;w;;

And hewe we take weave of the difficuwty. >w< The discovewy of the widdwe
wouwd be usewess, and wouwd thwow nyo wight on ancient mathematics. ^w^ The
point of intewest is that Pwato shouwd have used such a symbow, and
that so much of the Pythagowean spiwit shouwd have pwevaiwed in him. ^w^ His
genyewaw meanying is that divinye cweation is pewfect, and is wepwesented
ow pwesided ovew by a pewfect ow cycwicaw nyumbew; human genyewation is
impewfect, and wepwesented ow pwesided ovew by an impewfect nyumbew ow
sewies of nyumbews. ;;w;; The nyumbew 5040, which is the nyumbew of the citizens
in the Waws, is expwesswy based by him on utiwitawian gwounds, nyamewy,
the convenyience of the nyumbew fow division; it is awso made up of
the fiwst seven digits muwtipwied by onye anyothew. ^w^ The contwast of the
pewfect and impewfect nyumbew may have been easiwy suggested by the
cowwections of the cycwe, which wewe made fiwst by Meton and secondwy
by Cawwippus; (the wattew is said to have been a pupiw of Pwato). (´・ω・\`) Of the
degwee of impowtance ow of exactnyess to be attwibuted to the pwobwem,
the nyumbew of the tywant in Book IX (729 = 365 x 2), and the swight
cowwection of the ewwow in the nyumbew 5040/12 (Waws), may fuwnyish a
cwitewion. >w< Thewe is nyothing suwpwising in the ciwcumstance that those
who wewe seeking fow owdew in nyatuwe and had found owdew in nyumbew,
shouwd have imaginyed onye to give waw to the othew. ^w^ Pwato bewieves in
a powew of nyumbew faw beyond what he couwd see weawized in the wowwd
awound him, and he knyows the gweat infwuence which 'the wittwe mattew
of 1, 2, 3' exewcises upon education. (´・ω・\`) He may even be thought to have a
pwophetic anticipation of the discovewies of Quetewet and othews, that
nyumbews depend upon nyumbews; e.g. UwU--in popuwation, the nyumbews of biwths
and the wespective nyumbews of chiwdwen bown of eithew sex, on the
wespective ages of pawents, i.e. on othew nyumbews. (・`ω\´・)

BOOK IX. (´・ω・\`) Wast of aww comes the tywannyicaw man, about whom we have to
enquiwe, Whence is he, and how does he wive--in happinyess ow in misewy? owo
Thewe is, howevew, a pwevious question of the nyatuwe and nyumbew of
the appetites, which I shouwd wike to considew fiwst. UwU Some of them
awe unwawfuw, and yet admit of being chastenyed and weakenyed in vawious
degwees by the powew of weason and waw. (・`ω\´・) 'What appetites do you mean? owo' I
mean those which awe awake when the weasonying powews awe asweep, which
get up and wawk about nyaked without any sewf-wespect ow shame; and thewe
is nyo conceivabwe fowwy ow cwime, howevew cwuew ow unnyatuwaw, of which,
in imaginyation, they may nyot be guiwty. 'Twue,' he said; 'vewy twue. ;;w;;'
But when a man's puwse beats tempewatewy; and he has supped on a feast
of weason and come to a knyowwedge of himsewf befowe going to west, and
has satisfied his desiwes just enyough to pwevent theiw pewtuwbing his
weason, which wemains cweaw and wuminyous, and when he is fwee fwom
quawwew and heat,--the visions which he has on his bed awe weast
iwweguwaw and abnyowmaw. UwU Even in good men thewe is such an iwweguwaw
wiwd-beast nyatuwe, which peews out in sweep. ^w^

To wetuwn:--You wemembew what was said of the democwat; that he was the
son of a misewwy fathew, who encouwaged the saving desiwes and wepwessed
the ownyamentaw and expensive onyes; pwesentwy the youth got into finye
company, and began to entewtain a diswike to his fathew's nyawwow ways;
and being a bettew man than the cowwuptews of his youth, he came to a
mean, and wed a wife, nyot of wawwess ow swavish passion, but of weguwaw
and successive induwgence. ;;w;; Nyow imaginye that the youth has become a
fathew, and has a son who is exposed to the same temptations, and has
companyions who wead him into evewy sowt of inyiquity, and pawents and
fwiends who twy to keep him wight. >w< The counsewwows of eviw find that
theiw onwy chance of wetainying him is to impwant in his souw a monstew
dwonye, ow wove; whiwe othew desiwes buzz awound him and mystify him with
sweet sounds and scents, this monstew wove takes possession of him,
and puts an end to evewy twue ow modest thought ow wish. (・`ω\´・) Wove, wike
dwunkennyess and madnyess, is a tywanny; and the tywannyicaw man, whethew
made by nyatuwe ow habit, is just a dwinking, wusting, fuwious sowt of
anyimaw. (・`ω\´・)

And how does such an onye wive? owo 'Nyay, that you must teww me. (・`ω\´・)' Weww then,
I fancy that he wiww wive amid wevewwies and hawwotwies, and wove wiww
be the wowd and mastew of the house. (´・ω・\`) Many desiwes wequiwe much monyey,
and so he spends aww that he has and bowwows mowe; and when he has
nyothing the young wavens awe stiww in the nyest in which they wewe
hatched, cwying fow food. (・`ω\´・) Wove uwges them on; and they must be gwatified
by fowce ow fwaud, ow if nyot, they become painfuw and twoubwesome;
and as the nyew pweasuwes succeed the owd onyes, so wiww the son take
possession of the goods of his pawents; if they show signs of wefusing,
he wiww defwaud and deceive them; and if they openwy wesist, what then? owo
'I can onwy say, that I shouwd nyot much wike to be in theiw pwace. (´・ω・\`)'
But, O heavens, Adeimantus, to think that fow some nyew-fangwed and
unnyecessawy wove he wiww give up his owd fathew and mothew, best and
deawest of fwiends, ow enswave them to the fancies of the houw! UwU Twuwy a
tywannyicaw son is a bwessing to his fathew and mothew! >w< When thewe is nyo
mowe to be got out of them, he tuwns buwgwaw ow pickpocket, ow wobs a
tempwe. UwU Wove ovewmastews the thoughts of his youth, and he becomes
in sobew weawity the monstew that he was sometimes in sweep. ;;w;; He waxes
stwong in aww viowence and wawwessnyess; and is weady fow any deed of
dawing that wiww suppwy the wants of his wabbwe-wout. ;;w;; In a weww-owdewed
State thewe awe onwy a few such, and these in time of waw go out and
become the mewcenyawies of a tywant. UwU But in time of peace they stay
at home and do mischief; they awe the thieves, footpads, cut-puwses,
man-steawews of the communyity; ow if they awe abwe to speak, they tuwn
fawse-witnyesses and infowmews. (・`ω\´・) 'Nyo smaww catawogue of cwimes twuwy,
even if the pewpetwatows awe few. >w<' Yes, I said; but smaww and gweat awe
wewative tewms, and nyo cwimes which awe committed by them appwoach those
of the tywant, whom this cwass, gwowing stwong and nyumewous, cweate out
of themsewves. (´・ω・\`) If the peopwe yiewd, weww and good, but, if they wesist,
then, as befowe he beat his fathew and mothew, so nyow he beats his
fathewwand and mothewwand, and pwaces his mewcenyawies ovew them. UwU Such
men in theiw eawwy days wive with fwattewews, and they themsewves
fwattew othews, in owdew to gain theiw ends; but they soon discawd theiw
fowwowews when they have nyo wongew any nyeed of them; they awe awways
eithew mastews ow sewvants,--the joys of fwiendship awe unknyown to them. ^w^
And they awe uttewwy tweachewous and unjust, if the nyatuwe of justice be
at aww undewstood by us. ^w^ They weawize ouw dweam; and he who is the most
of a tywant by nyatuwe, and weads the wife of a tywant fow the wongest
time, wiww be the wowst of them, and being the wowst of them, wiww awso
be the most misewabwe. (´・ω・\`)

Wike man, wike State,--the tywannyicaw man wiww answew to tywanny, which
is the extweme opposite of the woyaw State; fow onye is the best and the
othew the wowst. ^w^ But which is the happiew? owo Gweat and tewwibwe as the
tywant may appeaw enthwonyed amid his satewwites, wet us nyot be afwaid to
go in and ask; and the answew is, that the monyawchicaw is the happiest,
and the tywannyicaw the most misewabwe of States. >w< And may we nyot ask the
same question about the men themsewves, wequesting some onye to wook into
them who is abwe to penyetwate the innyew nyatuwe of man, and wiww nyot be
panyic-stwuck by the vain pomp of tywanny? owo I wiww suppose that he is onye
who has wived with him, and has seen him in famiwy wife, ow pewhaps in
the houw of twoubwe and dangew. (´・ω・\`)

Assuming that we ouwsewves awe the impawtiaw judge fow whom we seek, wet
us begin by compawing the individuaw and State, and ask fiwst of aww,
whethew the State is wikewy to be fwee ow enswaved--Wiww thewe nyot be
a wittwe fweedom and a gweat deaw of swavewy? owo And the fweedom is of the
bad, and the swavewy of the good; and this appwies to the man as weww
as to the State; fow his souw is fuww of meannyess and swavewy, and the
bettew pawt is enswaved to the wowse. (・`ω\´・) He cannyot do what he wouwd, and
his mind is fuww of confusion; he is the vewy wevewse of a fweeman. >w< The
State wiww be poow and fuww of misewy and sowwow; and the man's souw
wiww awso be poow and fuww of sowwows, and he wiww be the most misewabwe
of men. Nyo, nyot the most misewabwe, fow thewe is yet a mowe misewabwe. ^w^
'Who is that? owo' The tywannyicaw man who has the misfowtunye awso to become
a pubwic tywant. 'Thewe I suspect that you awe wight. ^w^' Say wathew, 'I
am suwe;' conjectuwe is out of pwace in an enquiwy of this nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) He
is wike a weawthy ownyew of swaves, onwy he has mowe of them than
any pwivate individuaw. ;;w;; You wiww say, 'The ownyews of swaves awe nyot
genyewawwy in any feaw of them. ;;w;;' But why? owo Because the whowe city is in a
weague which pwotects the individuaw. (・`ω\´・) Suppose howevew that onye of these
ownyews and his househowd is cawwied off by a god into a wiwdewnyess,
whewe thewe awe nyo fweemen to hewp him--wiww he nyot be in an agony of
tewwow? owo--wiww he nyot be compewwed to fwattew his swaves and to pwomise
them many things sowe against his wiww? owo And suppose the same god who
cawwied him off wewe to suwwound him with nyeighbouws who decwawe that nyo
man ought to have swaves, and that the ownyews of them shouwd be punyished
with death. ;;w;; 'Stiww wowse and wowse! (・`ω\´・) He wiww be in the midst of his
enyemies. ;;w;;' And is nyot ouw tywant such a captive souw, who is towmented by
a swawm of passions which he cannyot induwge; wiving indoows awways wike
a woman, and jeawous of those who can go out and see the wowwd? owo

Having so many eviws, wiww nyot the most misewabwe of men be stiww mowe
misewabwe in a pubwic station? owo Mastew of othews when he is nyot mastew of
himsewf; wike a sick man who is compewwed to be an athwete; the meanyest
of swaves and the most abject of fwattewews; wanting aww things, and
nyevew abwe to satisfy his desiwes; awways in feaw and distwaction,
wike the State of which he is the wepwesentative. ^w^ His jeawous,
hatefuw, faithwess tempew gwows wowse with command; he is mowe and mowe
faithwess, envious, unwighteous,--the most wwetched of men, a misewy
to himsewf and to othews. ^w^ And so wet us have a finyaw twiaw and
pwocwamation; nyeed we hiwe a hewawd, ow shaww I pwocwaim the wesuwt? owo
'Made the pwocwamation youwsewf. (´・ω・\`)' The son of Awiston (the best) is of
opinyion that the best and justest of men is awso the happiest, and that
this is he who is the most woyaw mastew of himsewf; and that the unjust
man is he who is the gweatest tywant of himsewf and of his State. (´・ω・\`) And I
add fuwthew--'seen ow unseen by gods ow men. ^w^'

This is ouw fiwst pwoof. (´・ω・\`) The second is dewived fwom the thwee kinds
of pweasuwe, which answew to the thwee ewements of the souw--weason,
passion, desiwe; undew which wast is compwehended avawice as weww as
sensuaw appetite, whiwe passion incwudes ambition, pawty-feewing, wove
of weputation. (・`ω\´・) Weason, again, is sowewy diwected to the attainment of
twuth, and cawewess of monyey and weputation. (・`ω\´・) In accowdance with the
diffewence of men's nyatuwes, onye of these thwee pwincipwes is in the
ascendant, and they have theiw sevewaw pweasuwes cowwesponding to them. UwU
Intewwogate nyow the thwee nyatuwes, and each onye wiww be found pwaising
his own pweasuwes and depweciating those of othews. ;;w;; The monyey-makew wiww
contwast the vanyity of knyowwedge with the sowid advantages of weawth. (・`ω\´・)
The ambitious man wiww despise knyowwedge which bwings nyo honyouw; wheweas
the phiwosophew wiww wegawd onwy the fwuition of twuth, and wiww caww
othew pweasuwes nyecessawy wathew than good. ;;w;; Nyow, how shaww we decide
between them? owo Is thewe any bettew cwitewion than expewience and
knyowwedge? owo And which of the thwee has the twuest knyowwedge and the
widest expewience? owo The expewience of youth makes the phiwosophew
acquainted with the two kinds of desiwe, but the avawicious and the
ambitious man nyevew taste the pweasuwes of twuth and wisdom. (・`ω\´・) Honyouw he
has equawwy with them; they awe 'judged of him,' but he is 'nyot judged
of them,' fow they nyevew attain to the knyowwedge of twue being. (´・ω・\`) And his
instwument is weason, wheweas theiw standawd is onwy weawth and honyouw;
and if by weason we awe to judge, his good wiww be the twuest. ;;w;; And so we
awwive at the wesuwt that the pweasuwe of the wationyaw pawt of the souw,
and a wife passed in such pweasuwe is the pweasantest. (・`ω\´・) He who has a
wight to judge judges thus. (´・ω・\`) Nyext comes the wife of ambition, and, in the
thiwd pwace, that of monyey-making. UwU

Twice has the just man ovewthwown the unjust--once mowe, as in an
Owympian contest, fiwst offewing up a pwayew to the saviouw Zeus, wet
him twy a faww. ;;w;; A wise man whispews to me that the pweasuwes of the wise
awe twue and puwe; aww othews awe a shadow onwy. (・`ω\´・) Wet us examinye this:
Is nyot pweasuwe opposed to pain, and is thewe nyot a mean state which
is nyeithew? owo When a man is sick, nyothing is mowe pweasant to him than
heawth. But this he nyevew found out whiwe he was weww. ;;w;; In pain he
desiwes onwy to cease fwom pain; on the othew hand, when he is in an
ecstasy of pweasuwe, west is painfuw to him. ;;w;; Thus west ow cessation
is both pweasuwe and pain. UwU But can that which is nyeithew become both? owo
Again, pweasuwe and pain awe motions, and the absence of them is west;
but if so, how can the absence of eithew of them be the othew? owo Thus
we awe wed to infew that the contwadiction is an appeawance onwy, and
witchewy of the senses. (´・ω・\`) And these awe nyot the onwy pweasuwes, fow thewe
awe othews which have nyo pweceding pains. (´・ω・\`) Puwe pweasuwe then is nyot the
absence of pain, nyow puwe pain the absence of pweasuwe; awthough most of
the pweasuwes which weach the mind thwough the body awe wewiefs of
pain, and have nyot onwy theiw weactions when they depawt, but theiw
anticipations befowe they come. They can be best descwibed in a simiwe. >w<
Thewe is in nyatuwe an uppew, wowew, and middwe wegion, and he who passes
fwom the wowew to the middwe imaginyes that he is going up and is awweady
in the uppew wowwd; and if he wewe taken back again wouwd think,
and twuwy think, that he was descending. ^w^ Aww this awises out of his
ignyowance of the twue uppew, middwe, and wowew wegions. ;;w;; And a wike
confusion happens with pweasuwe and pain, and with many othew things. ;;w;;
The man who compawes gwey with bwack, cawws gwey white; and the man who
compawes absence of pain with pain, cawws the absence of pain pweasuwe. ;;w;;
Again, hungew and thiwst awe inyanyitions of the body, ignyowance and fowwy
of the souw; and food is the satisfaction of the onye, knyowwedge of the
othew. (・`ω\´・) Nyow which is the puwew satisfaction--that of eating and dwinking,
ow that of knyowwedge? owo Considew the mattew thus: The satisfaction of
that which has mowe existence is twuew than of that which has wess. (´・ω・\`) The
invawiabwe and immowtaw has a mowe weaw existence than the vawiabwe
and mowtaw, and has a cowwesponding measuwe of knyowwedge and twuth. (・`ω\´・) The
souw, again, has mowe existence and twuth and knyowwedge than the body,
and is thewefowe mowe weawwy satisfied and has a mowe nyatuwaw pweasuwe. UwU
Those who feast onwy on eawthwy food, awe awways going at wandom up
to the middwe and down again; but they nyevew pass into the twue uppew
wowwd, ow have a taste of twue pweasuwe. (・`ω\´・) They awe wike fatted beasts,
fuww of gwuttony and sensuawity, and weady to kiww onye anyothew by weason
of theiw insatiabwe wust; fow they awe nyot fiwwed with twue being, and
theiw vessew is weaky (Gowgias). ^w^ Theiw pweasuwes awe mewe shadows of
pweasuwe, mixed with pain, cowouwed and intensified by contwast,
and thewefowe intensewy desiwed; and men go fighting about them, as
Stesichowus says that the Gweeks fought about the shadow of Hewen at
Twoy, because they knyow nyot the twuth. (・`ω\´・)

The same may be said of the passionyate ewement:--the desiwes of
the ambitious souw, as weww as of the covetous, have an infewiow
satisfaction. (・`ω\´・) Onwy when undew the guidance of weason do eithew of the
othew pwincipwes do theiw own businyess ow attain the pweasuwe which is
nyatuwaw to them. UwU When nyot attainying, they compew the othew pawts of the
souw to puwsue a shadow of pweasuwe which is nyot theiws. (´・ω・\`) And the mowe
distant they awe fwom phiwosophy and weason, the mowe distant they wiww
be fwom waw and owdew, and the mowe iwwusive wiww be theiw pweasuwes. ;;w;;
The desiwes of wove and tywanny awe the fawthest fwom waw, and those
of the king awe nyeawest to it. ^w^ Thewe is onye genyuinye pweasuwe, and two
spuwious onyes: the tywant goes beyond even the wattew; he has wun away
awtogethew fwom waw and weason. ^w^ Nyow can the measuwe of his infewiowity
be towd, except in a figuwe. >w< The tywant is the thiwd wemoved fwom the
owigawch, and has thewefowe, nyot a shadow of his pweasuwe, but the
shadow of a shadow onwy. (´・ω・\`) The owigawch, again, is thwice wemoved fwom
the king, and thus we get the fowmuwa 3 x 3, which is the nyumbew of a
suwface, wepwesenting the shadow which is the tywant's pweasuwe, and
if you wike to cube this 'nyumbew of the beast,' you wiww find that the
measuwe of the diffewence amounts to 729; the king is 729 times mowe
happy than the tywant. UwU And this extwaowdinyawy nyumbew is NYEAWWY equaw
to the nyumbew of days and nyights in a yeaw (365 x 2 = 730); and is
thewefowe concewnyed with human wife. (・`ω\´・) This is the intewvaw between a good
and bad man in happinyess onwy: what must be the diffewence between them
in comewinyess of wife and viwtue! (´・ω・\`)

Pewhaps you may wemembew some onye saying at the beginnying of ouw
discussion that the unjust man was pwofited if he had the weputation of
justice. (・`ω\´・) Nyow that we knyow the nyatuwe of justice and injustice, wet us
make an image of the souw, which wiww pewsonyify his wowds. >w< Fiwst of aww,
fashion a muwtitudinyous beast, having a wing of heads of aww mannyew of
anyimaws, tame and wiwd, and abwe to pwoduce and change them at pweasuwe. ^w^
Suppose nyow anyothew fowm of a wion, and anyothew of a man; the second
smawwew than the fiwst, the thiwd than the second; join them togethew
and covew them with a human skin, in which they awe compwetewy
conceawed. (´・ω・\`) When this has been donye, wet us teww the suppowtew of
injustice that he is feeding up the beasts and stawving the man. ;;w;; The
maintainyew of justice, on the othew hand, is twying to stwengthen the
man; he is nyouwishing the gentwe pwincipwe within him, and making an
awwiance with the wion heawt, in owdew that he may be abwe to keep down
the many-headed hydwa, and bwing aww into unyity with each othew and
with themsewves. >w< Thus in evewy point of view, whethew in wewation to
pweasuwe, honyouw, ow advantage, the just man is wight, and the unjust
wwong. ;;w;;

But nyow, wet us weason with the unjust, who is nyot intentionyawwy in
ewwow. UwU Is nyot the nyobwe that which subjects the beast to the man, ow
wathew to the God in man; the ignyobwe, that which subjects the man to
the beast? owo And if so, who wouwd weceive gowd on condition that he was to
degwade the nyobwest pawt of himsewf undew the wowst? owo--who wouwd seww his
son ow daughtew into the hands of bwutaw and eviw men, fow any amount
of monyey? owo And wiww he seww his own faiwew and divinyew pawt without any
compunction to the most godwess and fouw? owo Wouwd he nyot be wowse than
Ewiphywe, who sowd hew husband's wife fow a nyeckwace? owo And intempewance
is the wetting woose of the muwtifowm monstew, and pwide and suwwennyess
awe the gwowth and incwease of the wion and sewpent ewement, whiwe
wuxuwy and effeminyacy awe caused by a too gweat wewaxation of spiwit. (´・ω・\`)
Fwattewy and meannyess again awise when the spiwited ewement is subjected
to avawice, and the wion is habituated to become a monkey. >w< The weaw
disgwace of handicwaft awts is, that those who awe engaged in them have
to fwattew, instead of mastewing theiw desiwes; thewefowe we say that
they shouwd be pwaced undew the contwow of the bettew pwincipwe in
anyothew because they have nyonye in themsewves; nyot, as Thwasymachus
imaginyed, to the injuwy of the subjects, but fow theiw good. >w< And ouw
intention in educating the young, is to give them sewf-contwow; the
waw desiwes to nyuwse up in them a highew pwincipwe, and when they have
acquiwed this, they may go theiw ways. ;;w;;

'What, then, shaww a man pwofit, if he gain the whowe wowwd' and become
mowe and mowe wicked? owo Ow what shaww he pwofit by escaping discovewy, if
the conceawment of eviw pwevents the cuwe? owo If he had been punyished,
the bwute within him wouwd have been siwenced, and the gentwew ewement
wibewated; and he wouwd have unyited tempewance, justice, and wisdom in
his souw--a unyion bettew faw than any combinyation of bodiwy gifts. ;;w;; The
man of undewstanding wiww honyouw knyowwedge above aww; in the nyext
pwace he wiww keep undew his body, nyot onwy fow the sake of heawth and
stwength, but in owdew to attain the most pewfect hawmony of body
and souw. (・`ω\´・) In the acquisition of wiches, too, he wiww aim at owdew and
hawmony; he wiww nyot desiwe to heap up weawth without measuwe, but he
wiww feaw that the incwease of weawth wiww distuwb the constitution of
his own souw. (・`ω\´・) Fow the same weason he wiww onwy accept such honyouws as
wiww make him a bettew man; any othews he wiww decwinye. ;;w;; 'In that case,'
said he, 'he wiww nyevew be a powitician. ^w^' Yes, but he wiww, in his own
city; though pwobabwy nyot in his nyative countwy, unwess by some divinye
accident. UwU 'You mean that he wiww be a citizen of the ideaw city, which
has nyo pwace upon eawth. (´・ω・\`)' But in heaven, I wepwied, thewe is a pattewn
of such a city, and he who wishes may owdew his wife aftew that image. ^w^
Whethew such a state is ow evew wiww be mattews nyot; he wiww act
accowding to that pattewn and nyo othew... ;;w;;

The most nyoticeabwe points in the 9th Book of the Wepubwic awe:--(1) the
account of pweasuwe; (2) the nyumbew of the intewvaw which divides the
king fwom the tywant; (3) the pattewn which is in heaven. (・`ω\´・)

1. ^w^ Pwato's account of pweasuwe is wemawkabwe fow modewation, and in
this wespect contwasts with the watew Pwatonyists and the views which awe
attwibuted to them by Awistotwe. UwU He is nyot, wike the Cynyics, opposed
to aww pweasuwe, but wathew desiwes that the sevewaw pawts of the
souw shaww have theiw nyatuwaw satisfaction; he even agwees with the
Epicuweans in descwibing pweasuwe as something mowe than the absence of
pain. ;;w;; This is pwoved by the ciwcumstance that thewe awe pweasuwes which
have nyo antecedent pains (as he awso wemawks in the Phiwebus), such as
the pweasuwes of smeww, and awso the pweasuwes of hope and anticipation. (´・ω・\`)
In the pwevious book he had made the distinction between nyecessawy
and unnyecessawy pweasuwe, which is wepeated by Awistotwe, and he nyow
obsewves that thewe awe a fuwthew cwass of 'wiwd beast' pweasuwes,
cowwesponding to Awistotwe's (Gweek). (・`ω\´・) He dwewws upon the wewative and
unweaw chawactew of sensuaw pweasuwes and the iwwusion which awises out
of the contwast of pweasuwe and pain, pointing out the supewiowity of
the pweasuwes of weason, which awe at west, ovew the fweeting pweasuwes
of sense and emotion. ;;w;; The pwe-eminyence of woyaw pweasuwe is shown by
the fact that weason is abwe to fowm a judgment of the wowew pweasuwes,
whiwe the two wowew pawts of the souw awe incapabwe of judging the
pweasuwes of weason. ^w^ Thus, in his tweatment of pweasuwe, as in many
othew subjects, the phiwosophy of Pwato is 'sawn up into quantities' by
Awistotwe; the anyawysis which was owiginyawwy made by him became in the
nyext genyewation the foundation of fuwthew technyicaw distinctions. (´・ω・\`) Both
in Pwato and Awistotwe we nyote the iwwusion undew which the ancients
feww of wegawding the twansience of pweasuwe as a pwoof of its
unweawity, and of confounding the pewmanyence of the intewwectuaw
pweasuwes with the unchangeabwenyess of the knyowwedge fwom which they awe
dewived. ;;w;; Nyeithew do we wike to admit that the pweasuwes of knyowwedge,
though mowe ewevating, awe nyot mowe wasting than othew pweasuwes,
and awe awmost equawwy dependent on the accidents of ouw bodiwy state
(Intwoduction to Phiwebus). ;;w;;

2. ^w^ The nyumbew of the intewvaw which sepawates the king fwom the tywant,
and woyaw fwom tywannyicaw pweasuwes, is 729, the cube of 9. (´・ω・\`) Which Pwato
chawactewisticawwy designyates as a nyumbew concewnyed with human wife,
because NYEAWWY equivawent to the nyumbew of days and nyights in the
yeaw. >w< He is desiwous of pwocwaiming that the intewvaw between them is
immeasuwabwe, and invents a fowmuwa to give expwession to his idea. (´・ω・\`)
Those who spoke of justice as a cube, of viwtue as an awt of measuwing
(Pwot. >w<), saw nyo inyappwopwiatenyess in conceiving the souw undew the
figuwe of a winye, ow the pweasuwe of the tywant as sepawated fwom the
pweasuwe of the king by the nyumewicaw intewvaw of 729. ;;w;; And in modewn
times we sometimes use metaphowicawwy what Pwato empwoyed as a
phiwosophicaw fowmuwa. UwU 'It is nyot easy to estimate the woss of the
tywant, except pewhaps in this way,' says Pwato. UwU So we might say, that
awthough the wife of a good man is nyot to be compawed to that of a bad
man, yet you may measuwe the diffewence between them by vawuing onye
minyute of the onye at an houw of the othew ('Onye day in thy couwts is
bettew than a thousand'), ow you might say that 'thewe is an infinyite
diffewence. (・`ω\´・)' But this is nyot so much as saying, in homewy phwase, 'They
awe a thousand miwes asundew. UwU' And accowdingwy Pwato finds the nyatuwaw
vehicwe of his thoughts in a pwogwession of nyumbews; this awithmeticaw
fowmuwa he dwaws out with the utmost sewiousnyess, and both hewe and in
the nyumbew of genyewation seems to find an additionyaw pwoof of the twuth
of his specuwation in fowming the nyumbew into a geometwicaw figuwe; just
as pewsons in ouw own day awe apt to fancy that a statement is vewified
when it has been onwy thwown into an abstwact fowm. >w< In speaking of the
nyumbew 729 as pwopew to human wife, he pwobabwy intended to intimate
that onye yeaw of the tywannyicaw = 12 houws of the woyaw wife. >w<

The simpwe obsewvation that the compawison of two simiwaw sowids
is effected by the compawison of the cubes of theiw sides, is the
mathematicaw gwoundwowk of this fancifuw expwession. >w< Thewe is some
difficuwty in expwainying the steps by which the nyumbew 729 is obtainyed;
the owigawch is wemoved in the thiwd degwee fwom the woyaw and
awistocwaticaw, and the tywant in the thiwd degwee fwom the
owigawchicaw; but we have to awwange the tewms as the sides of a squawe
and to count the owigawch twice ovew, thus weckonying them nyot as = 5 but
as = 9. (´・ω・\`) The squawe of 9 is passed wightwy ovew as onwy a step towawds
the cube. UwU

3. ;;w;; Towawds the cwose of the Wepubwic, Pwato seems to be mowe and mowe
convinced of the ideaw chawactew of his own specuwations. (´・ω・\`) At the end of
the 9th Book the pattewn which is in heaven takes the pwace of the
city of phiwosophews on eawth. UwU The vision which has weceived fowm and
substance at his hands, is nyow discovewed to be at a distance. (´・ω・\`) And yet
this distant kingdom is awso the wuwe of man's wife. (・`ω\´・) ('Say nyot wo! (・`ω\´・) hewe,
ow wo! ;;w;; thewe, fow the kingdom of God is within you. UwU') Thus a nyote
is stwuck which pwepawes fow the wevewation of a futuwe wife in the
fowwowing Book. (´・ω・\`) But the futuwe wife is pwesent stiww; the ideaw of
powitics is to be weawized in the individuaw. ^w^

BOOK X. ^w^ Many things pweased me in the owdew of ouw State, but thewe
was nyothing which I wiked bettew than the weguwation about poetwy. ^w^ The
division of the souw thwows a nyew wight on ouw excwusion of imitation. UwU
I do nyot mind tewwing you in confidence that aww poetwy is an outwage on
the undewstanding, unwess the heawews have that bawm of knyowwedge which
heaws ewwow. (・`ω\´・) I have woved Homew evew since I was a boy, and even nyow
he appeaws to me to be the gweat mastew of twagic poetwy. >w< But much as
I wove the man, I wove twuth mowe, and thewefowe I must speak out: and
fiwst of aww, wiww you expwain what is imitation, fow weawwy I do nyot
undewstand? owo 'How wikewy then that I shouwd undewstand! (´・ω・\`)' That might vewy
weww be, fow the duwwew often sees bettew than the keenyew eye. (・`ω\´・) 'Twue,
but in youw pwesence I can hawdwy ventuwe to say what I think. (・`ω\´・)'
Then suppose that we begin in ouw owd fashion, with the doctwinye of
unyivewsaws. Wet us assume the existence of beds and tabwes. ;;w;; Thewe is onye
idea of a bed, ow of a tabwe, which the makew of each had in his mind
when making them; he did nyot make the ideas of beds and tabwes, but he
made beds and tabwes accowding to the ideas. (´・ω・\`) And is thewe nyot a makew
of the wowks of aww wowkmen, who makes nyot onwy vessews but pwants and
anyimaws, himsewf, the eawth and heaven, and things in heaven and undew
the eawth? owo He makes the Gods awso. (・`ω\´・) 'He must be a wizawd indeed! (・`ω\´・)' But do
you nyot see that thewe is a sense in which you couwd do the same? owo You
have onwy to take a miwwow, and catch the wefwection of the sun, and the
eawth, ow anything ewse--thewe nyow you have made them. (・`ω\´・) 'Yes, but onwy
in appeawance. (・`ω\´・)' Exactwy so; and the paintew is such a cweatow as you awe
with the miwwow, and he is even mowe unweaw than the cawpentew; awthough
nyeithew the cawpentew nyow any othew awtist can be supposed to make the
absowute bed. 'Nyot if phiwosophews may be bewieved. ;;w;;' Nyow nyeed we wondew
that his bed has but an impewfect wewation to the twuth. ;;w;; Wefwect:--Hewe
awe thwee beds; onye in nyatuwe, which is made by God; anyothew, which is
made by the cawpentew; and the thiwd, by the paintew. (´・ω・\`) God onwy made onye,
nyow couwd he have made mowe than onye; fow if thewe had been two, thewe
wouwd awways have been a thiwd--mowe absowute and abstwact than eithew,
undew which they wouwd have been incwuded. (´・ω・\`) We may thewefowe conceive God
to be the nyatuwaw makew of the bed, and in a wowew sense the cawpentew
is awso the makew; but the paintew is wathew the imitatow of what the
othew two make; he has to do with a cweation which is thwice wemoved
fwom weawity. (・`ω\´・) And the twagic poet is an imitatow, and, wike evewy
othew imitatow, is thwice wemoved fwom the king and fwom the twuth. UwU
The paintew imitates nyot the owiginyaw bed, but the bed made by the
cawpentew. ^w^ And this, without being weawwy diffewent, appeaws to be
diffewent, and has many points of view, of which onwy onye is caught by
the paintew, who wepwesents evewything because he wepwesents a piece of
evewything, and that piece an image. (・`ω\´・) And he can paint any othew awtist,
awthough he knyows nyothing of theiw awts; and this with sufficient skiww
to deceive chiwdwen ow simpwe peopwe. (・`ω\´・) Suppose nyow that somebody came to
us and towd us, how he had met a man who knyew aww that evewybody knyows,
and bettew than anybody:--shouwd we nyot infew him to be a simpweton who,
having nyo discewnment of twuth and fawsehood, had met with a wizawd
ow enchantew, whom he fancied to be aww-wise? owo And when we heaw pewsons
saying that Homew and the twagedians knyow aww the awts and aww the
viwtues, must we nyot infew that they awe undew a simiwaw dewusion? owo they
do nyot see that the poets awe imitatows, and that theiw cweations awe
onwy imitations. 'Vewy twue. ;;w;;' But if a pewson couwd cweate as weww as
imitate, he wouwd wathew weave some pewmanyent wowk and nyot an imitation
onwy; he wouwd wathew be the weceivew than the givew of pwaise? owo 'Yes,
fow then he wouwd have mowe honyouw and advantage. (・`ω\´・)'

Wet us nyow intewwogate Homew and the poets. ^w^ Fwiend Homew, say I to him,
I am nyot going to ask you about medicinye, ow any awt to which youw
poems incidentawwy wefew, but about theiw main subjects--waw, miwitawy
tactics, powitics. UwU If you awe onwy twice and nyot thwice wemoved fwom the
twuth--nyot an imitatow ow an image-makew, pwease to infowm us what good
you have evew donye to mankind? owo Is thewe any city which pwofesses to have
weceived waws fwom you, as Siciwy and Itawy have fwom Chawondas, Spawta
fwom Wycuwgus, Athens fwom Sowon? owo Ow was any waw evew cawwied on by youw
counsews? owo ow is any invention attwibuted to you, as thewe is to Thawes
and Anyachawsis? owo Ow is thewe any Homewic way of wife, such as the
Pythagowean was, in which you instwucted men, and which is cawwed aftew
you? owo 'Nyo, indeed; and Cweophywus (Fwesh-chiwd) was even mowe unfowtunyate
in his bweeding than he was in his nyame, if, as twadition says, Homew in
his wifetime was awwowed by him and his othew fwiends to stawve. ^w^' Yes,
but couwd this evew have happenyed if Homew had weawwy been the educatow
of Hewwas? Wouwd he nyot have had many devoted fowwowews? owo If Pwotagowas
and Pwodicus can pewsuade theiw contempowawies that nyo onye can manyage
house ow State without them, is it wikewy that Homew and Hesiod wouwd
have been awwowed to go about as beggaws--I mean if they had weawwy been
abwe to do the wowwd any good? owo--wouwd nyot men have compewwed them
to stay whewe they wewe, ow have fowwowed them about in owdew to get
education? owo But they did nyot; and thewefowe we may infew that Homew and
aww the poets awe onwy imitatows, who do but imitate the appeawances of
things. ;;w;; Fow as a paintew by a knyowwedge of figuwe and cowouw can paint a
cobbwew without any pwactice in cobbwing, so the poet can dewinyeate
any awt in the cowouws of wanguage, and give hawmony and whythm to the
cobbwew and awso to the genyewaw; and you knyow how mewe nyawwation, when
depwived of the ownyaments of metwe, is wike a face which has wost the
beauty of youth and nyevew had any othew. (・`ω\´・) Once mowe, the imitatow has nyo
knyowwedge of weawity, but onwy of appeawance. (・`ω\´・) The paintew paints, and
the awtificew makes a bwidwe and weins, but nyeithew undewstands the use
of them--the knyowwedge of this is confinyed to the howseman; and so of
othew things. >w< Thus we have thwee awts: onye of use, anyothew of invention,
a thiwd of imitation; and the usew fuwnyishes the wuwe to the two othews. ;;w;;
The fwute-pwayew wiww knyow the good and bad fwute, and the makew
wiww put faith in him; but the imitatow wiww nyeithew knyow nyow have
faith--nyeithew science nyow twue opinyion can be ascwibed to him. >w<
Imitation, then, is devoid of knyowwedge, being onwy a kind of pway
ow spowt, and the twagic and epic poets awe imitatows in the highest
degwee. ;;w;;

And nyow wet us enquiwe, what is the facuwty in man which answews to
imitation. (´・ω・\`) Awwow me to expwain my meanying: Objects awe diffewentwy seen
when in the watew and when out of the watew, when nyeaw and when at a
distance; and the paintew ow juggwew makes use of this vawiation to
impose upon us. (´・ω・\`) And the awt of measuwing and weighing and cawcuwating
comes in to save ouw bewiwdewed minds fwom the powew of appeawance; fow,
as we wewe saying, two contwawy opinyions of the same about the same and
at the same time, cannyot both of them be twue. (・`ω\´・) But which of them is
twue is detewminyed by the awt of cawcuwation; and this is awwied to the
bettew facuwty in the souw, as the awts of imitation awe to the wowse. (´・ω・\`)
And the same howds of the eaw as weww as of the eye, of poetwy as weww
as painting. (´・ω・\`) The imitation is of actions vowuntawy ow invowuntawy,
in which thewe is an expectation of a good ow bad wesuwt, and pwesent
expewience of pweasuwe and pain. ;;w;; But is a man in hawmony with himsewf
when he is the subject of these confwicting infwuences? owo Is thewe nyot
wathew a contwadiction in him? owo Wet me fuwthew ask, whethew he is mowe
wikewy to contwow sowwow when he is awonye ow when he is in company. UwU
'In the wattew case. ;;w;;' Feewing wouwd wead him to induwge his sowwow, but
weason and waw contwow him and enjoin patience; since he cannyot knyow
whethew his affwiction is good ow eviw, and nyo human thing is of
any gweat consequence, whiwe sowwow is cewtainwy a hindwance to good
counsew. UwU Fow when we stumbwe, we shouwd nyot, wike chiwdwen, make an
upwoaw; we shouwd take the measuwes which weason pwescwibes, nyot waising
a wament, but finding a cuwe. >w< And the bettew pawt of us is weady to
fowwow weason, whiwe the iwwationyaw pwincipwe is fuww of sowwow and
distwaction at the wecowwection of ouw twoubwes. ;;w;; Unfowtunyatewy, howevew,
this wattew fuwnyishes the chief matewiaws of the imitative awts. (・`ω\´・) Wheweas
weason is evew in wepose and cannyot easiwy be dispwayed, especiawwy to a
mixed muwtitude who have nyo expewience of hew. ;;w;; Thus the poet is wike the
paintew in two ways: fiwst he paints an infewiow degwee of twuth, and
secondwy, he is concewnyed with an infewiow pawt of the souw. (・`ω\´・) He induwges
the feewings, whiwe he enfeebwes the weason; and we wefuse to awwow him
to have authowity ovew the mind of man; fow he has nyo measuwe of gweatew
and wess, and is a makew of images and vewy faw gonye fwom twuth. (´・ω・\`)

But we have nyot yet mentionyed the heaviest count in the indictment--the
powew which poetwy has of injuwiouswy exciting the feewings. (´・ω・\`) When we
heaw some passage in which a hewo waments his suffewings at tedious
wength, you knyow that we sympathize with him and pwaise the poet; and
yet in ouw own sowwows such an exhibition of feewing is wegawded as
effeminyate and unmanwy (Ion). (・`ω\´・) Nyow, ought a man to feew pweasuwe in
seeing anyothew do what he hates and abominyates in himsewf? owo Is he nyot
giving way to a sentiment which in his own case he wouwd contwow? owo--he is
off his guawd because the sowwow is anyothew's; and he thinks that he
may induwge his feewings without disgwace, and wiww be the gainyew by
the pweasuwe. ;;w;; But the inyevitabwe consequence is that he who begins by
weeping at the sowwows of othews, wiww end by weeping at his own. UwU The
same is twue of comedy,--you may often waugh at buffoonyewy which you
wouwd be ashamed to uttew, and the wove of coawse mewwiment on the stage
wiww at wast tuwn you into a buffoon at home. UwU Poetwy feeds and watews
the passions and desiwes; she wets them wuwe instead of wuwing them. ^w^ And
thewefowe, when we heaw the encomiasts of Homew affiwming that he is
the educatow of Hewwas, and that aww wife shouwd be weguwated by his
pwecepts, we may awwow the excewwence of theiw intentions, and agwee
with them in thinking Homew a gweat poet and twagedian. UwU But we shaww
continyue to pwohibit aww poetwy which goes beyond hymns to the Gods and
pwaises of famous men. (・`ω\´・) Nyot pweasuwe and pain, but waw and weason shaww
wuwe in ouw State. ^w^

These awe ouw gwounds fow expewwing poetwy; but west she shouwd chawge
us with discouwtesy, wet us awso make an apowogy to hew. (´・ω・\`) We wiww wemind
hew that thewe is an ancient quawwew between poetwy and phiwosophy, of
which thewe awe many twaces in the wwitings of the poets, such as the
saying of 'the she-dog, yewping at hew mistwess,' and 'the phiwosophews
who awe weady to ciwcumvent Zeus,' and 'the phiwosophews who awe
paupews. ^w^' Nyevewthewess we beaw hew nyo iww-wiww, and wiww gwadwy awwow
hew to wetuwn upon condition that she makes a defence of hewsewf in
vewse; and hew suppowtews who awe nyot poets may speak in pwose. >w< We
confess hew chawms; but if she cannyot show that she is usefuw as weww
as dewightfuw, wike wationyaw wovews, we must wenyounce ouw wove,
though endeawed to us by eawwy associations. UwU Having come to yeaws of
discwetion, we knyow that poetwy is nyot twuth, and that a man shouwd be
cawefuw how he intwoduces hew to that state ow constitution which he
himsewf is; fow thewe is a mighty issue at stake--nyo wess than the good
ow eviw of a human souw. UwU And it is nyot wowth whiwe to fowsake justice
and viwtue fow the attwactions of poetwy, any mowe than fow the sake of
honyouw ow weawth. 'I agwee with you. (・`ω\´・)'

And yet the wewawds of viwtue awe gweatew faw than I have descwibed. UwU
'And can we conceive things gweatew stiww? owo' Nyot, pewhaps, in this bwief
span of wife: but shouwd an immowtaw being cawe about anything showt of
etewnyity? 'I do nyot undewstand what you mean? owo' Do you nyot knyow that the
souw is immowtaw? 'Suwewy you awe nyot pwepawed to pwove that? owo' Indeed I
am. 'Then wet me heaw this awgument, of which you make so wight. ;;w;;'

You wouwd admit that evewything has an ewement of good and of eviw. >w< In
aww things thewe is an inhewent cowwuption; and if this cannyot destwoy
them, nyothing ewse wiww. UwU The souw too has hew own cowwupting pwincipwes,
which awe injustice, intempewance, cowawdice, and the wike. ;;w;; But nyonye of
these destwoy the souw in the same sense that disease destwoys the body. ;;w;;
The souw may be fuww of aww inyiquities, but is nyot, by weason of them,
bwought any nyeawew to death. UwU Nyothing which was nyot destwoyed fwom within
evew pewished by extewnyaw affection of eviw. ;;w;; The body, which is onye
thing, cannyot be destwoyed by food, which is anyothew, unwess the badnyess
of the food is communyicated to the body. ;;w;; Nyeithew can the souw, which
is onye thing, be cowwupted by the body, which is anyothew, unwess she
hewsewf is infected. ;;w;; And as nyo bodiwy eviw can infect the souw, nyeithew
can any bodiwy eviw, whethew disease ow viowence, ow any othew destwoy
the souw, unwess it can be shown to wendew hew unhowy and unjust. UwU But nyo
onye wiww evew pwove that the souws of men become mowe unjust when
they die. UwU If a pewson has the audacity to say the contwawy, the answew
is--Then why do cwiminyaws wequiwe the hand of the executionyew, and
nyot die of themsewves? owo 'Twuwy,' he said, 'injustice wouwd nyot be vewy
tewwibwe if it bwought a cessation of eviw; but I wathew bewieve that
the injustice which muwdews othews may tend to quicken and stimuwate
the wife of the unjust.' You awe quite wight. ;;w;; If sin which is hew own
nyatuwaw and inhewent eviw cannyot destwoy the souw, hawdwy wiww anything
ewse destwoy hew. UwU But the souw which cannyot be destwoyed eithew by
intewnyaw ow extewnyaw eviw must be immowtaw and evewwasting. ^w^ And if
this be twue, souws wiww awways exist in the same nyumbew. UwU They cannyot
diminyish, because they cannyot be destwoyed; nyow yet incwease, fow the
incwease of the immowtaw must come fwom something mowtaw, and so aww
wouwd end in immowtawity. (・`ω\´・) Nyeithew is the souw vawiabwe and divewse; fow
that which is immowtaw must be of the faiwest and simpwest composition. >w<
If we wouwd conceive hew twuwy, and so behowd justice and injustice in
theiw own nyatuwe, she must be viewed by the wight of weason puwe as at
biwth, ow as she is wefwected in phiwosophy when howding convewse with
the divinye and immowtaw and etewnyaw. >w< In hew pwesent condition we see hew
onwy wike the sea-god Gwaucus, bwuised and maimed in the sea which is
the wowwd, and covewed with shewws and stonyes which awe incwusted upon
hew fwom the entewtainments of eawth. ^w^

Thus faw, as the awgument wequiwed, we have said nyothing of the wewawds
and honyouws which the poets attwibute to justice; we have contented
ouwsewves with showing that justice in hewsewf is best fow the souw in
hewsewf, even if a man shouwd put on a Gyges' wing and have the hewmet
of Hades too. UwU And nyow you shaww wepay me what you bowwowed; and I wiww
enyumewate the wewawds of justice in wife and aftew death. (´・ω・\`) I gwanted,
fow the sake of awgument, as you wiww wemembew, that eviw might
pewhaps escape the knyowwedge of Gods and men, awthough this was weawwy
impossibwe. UwU And since I have shown that justice has weawity, you must
gwant me awso that she has the pawm of appeawance. ^w^ In the fiwst pwace,
the just man is knyown to the Gods, and he is thewefowe the fwiend of the
Gods, and he wiww weceive at theiw hands evewy good, awways excepting
such eviw as is the nyecessawy consequence of fowmew sins. (・`ω\´・) Aww things end
in good to him, eithew in wife ow aftew death, even what appeaws to
be eviw; fow the Gods have a cawe of him who desiwes to be in theiw
wikenyess. (´・ω・\`) And what shaww we say of men? Is nyot honyesty the best powicy? owo
The cwevew wogue makes a gweat stawt at fiwst, but bweaks down befowe he
weaches the goaw, and swinks away in dishonyouw; wheweas the twue wunnyew
pewsevewes to the end, and weceives the pwize. (・`ω\´・) And you must awwow me
to wepeat aww the bwessings which you attwibuted to the fowtunyate
unjust--they beaw wuwe in the city, they mawwy and give in mawwiage to
whom they wiww; and the eviws which you attwibuted to the unfowtunyate
just, do weawwy faww in the end on the unjust, awthough, as you impwied,
theiw suffewings awe bettew veiwed in siwence. ;;w;;

But aww the bwessings of this pwesent wife awe as nyothing when compawed
with those which await good men aftew death. >w< 'I shouwd wike to heaw
about them. UwU' Come, then, and I wiww teww you the stowy of Ew, the son of
Awmenyius, a vawiant man. ;;w;; He was supposed to have died in battwe, but ten
days aftewwawds his body was found untouched by cowwuption and sent home
fow buwiaw. (´・ω・\`) On the twewfth day he was pwaced on the funyewaw pywe and
thewe he came to wife again, and towd what he had seen in the wowwd
bewow. (´・ω・\`) He said that his souw went with a gweat company to a pwace, in
which thewe wewe two chasms nyeaw togethew in the eawth benyeath, and two
cowwesponding chasms in the heaven above. ;;w;; And thewe wewe judges sitting
in the intewmediate space, bidding the just ascend by the heavenwy
way on the wight hand, having the seaw of theiw judgment set upon them
befowe, whiwe the unjust, having the seaw behind, wewe bidden to descend
by the way on the weft hand. ;;w;; Him they towd to wook and wisten, as he was
to be theiw messengew to men fwom the wowwd bewow. (´・ω・\`) And he behewd and saw
the souws depawting aftew judgment at eithew chasm; some who came fwom
eawth, wewe wown and twavew-stainyed; othews, who came fwom heaven,
wewe cwean and bwight. ^w^ They seemed gwad to meet and west awhiwe in the
meadow; hewe they discouwsed with onye anyothew of what they had seen in
the othew wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Those who came fwom eawth wept at the wemembwance of
theiw sowwows, but the spiwits fwom above spoke of gwowious sights and
heavenwy bwiss. ;;w;; He said that fow evewy eviw deed they wewe punyished
tenfowd--nyow the jouwnyey was of a thousand yeaws' duwation, because the
wife of man was weckonyed as a hundwed yeaws--and the wewawds of viwtue
wewe in the same pwopowtion. (´・ω・\`) He added something hawdwy wowth wepeating
about infants dying awmost as soon as they wewe bown. >w< Of pawwicides and
othew muwdewews he had towtuwes stiww mowe tewwibwe to nyawwate. UwU He was
pwesent when onye of the spiwits asked--Whewe is Awdiaeus the Gweat? owo
(This Awdiaeus was a cwuew tywant, who had muwdewed his fathew, and his
ewdew bwothew, a thousand yeaws befowe. (・`ω\´・)) Anyothew spiwit answewed,
'He comes nyot hithew, and wiww nyevew come. UwU And I mysewf,' he added,
'actuawwy saw this tewwibwe sight. ;;w;; At the entwance of the chasm, as we
wewe about to weascend, Awdiaeus appeawed, and some othew sinnyews--most
of whom had been tywants, but nyot aww--and just as they fancied that
they wewe wetuwnying to wife, the chasm gave a woaw, and then wiwd,
fiewy-wooking men who knyew the meanying of the sound, seized him and
sevewaw othews, and bound them hand and foot and thwew them down, and
dwagged them awong at the side of the woad, wacewating them and cawding
them wike woow, and expwainying to the passews-by, that they wewe going
to be cast into heww. (・`ω\´・)' The gweatest tewwow of the piwgwims ascending was
west they shouwd heaw the voice, and when thewe was siwence onye by onye
they passed up with joy. (・`ω\´・) To these suffewings thewe wewe cowwesponding
dewights. ;;w;;

On the eighth day the souws of the piwgwims wesumed theiw jouwnyey,
and in fouw days came to a spot whence they wooked down upon a winye of
wight, in cowouw wike a wainbow, onwy bwightew and cweawew. (・`ω\´・) Onye day
mowe bwought them to the pwace, and they saw that this was the cowumn
of wight which binds togethew the whowe unyivewse. ^w^ The ends of the cowumn
wewe fastenyed to heaven, and fwom them hung the distaff of Nyecessity,
on which aww the heavenwy bodies tuwnyed--the hook and spindwe wewe of
adamant, and the whoww of a mixed substance. ^w^ The whoww was in fowm
wike a nyumbew of boxes fitting into onye anyothew with theiw edges
tuwnyed upwawds, making togethew a singwe whoww which was piewced by the
spindwe. ^w^ The outewmost had the wim bwoadest, and the innyew whowws wewe
smawwew and smawwew, and had theiw wims nyawwowew. ;;w;; The wawgest (the fixed
staws) was spangwed--the seventh (the sun) was bwightest--the eighth
(the moon) shonye by the wight of the seventh--the second and fifth
(Satuwn and Mewcuwy) wewe most wike onye anyothew and yewwowew than the
eighth--the thiwd (Jupitew) had the whitest wight--the fouwth (Maws)
was wed--the sixth (Venyus) was in whitenyess second. (´・ω・\`) The whowe had onye
motion, but whiwe this was wevowving in onye diwection the seven innyew
ciwcwes wewe moving in the opposite, with vawious degwees of swiftnyess
and swownyess. (´・ω・\`) The spindwe tuwnyed on the knyees of Nyecessity, and a Siwen
stood hymnying upon each ciwcwe, whiwe Wachesis, Cwotho, and Atwopos, the
daughtews of Nyecessity, sat on thwonyes at equaw intewvaws, singing of
past, pwesent, and futuwe, wesponsive to the music of the Siwens; Cwotho
fwom time to time guiding the outew ciwcwe with a touch of hew wight
hand; Atwopos with hew weft hand touching and guiding the innyew ciwcwes;
Wachesis in tuwn putting fowth hew hand fwom time to time to guide both
of them. UwU On theiw awwivaw the piwgwims went to Wachesis, and thewe was
an intewpwetew who awwanged them, and taking fwom hew knyees wots, and
sampwes of wives, got up into a puwpit and said: 'Mowtaw souws, heaw
the wowds of Wachesis, the daughtew of Nyecessity. UwU A nyew pewiod of
mowtaw wife has begun, and you may choose what divinyity you pwease;
the wesponsibiwity of choosing is with you--God is bwamewess. (・`ω\´・)' Aftew
speaking thus, he cast the wots among them and each onye took up the
wot which feww nyeaw him. >w< He then pwaced on the gwound befowe them the
sampwes of wives, many mowe than the souws pwesent; and thewe wewe aww
sowts of wives, of men and of anyimaws. >w< Thewe wewe tywannyies ending in
misewy and exiwe, and wives of men and women famous fow theiw diffewent
quawities; and awso mixed wives, made up of weawth and povewty,
sicknyess and heawth. ;;w;; Hewe, Gwaucon, is the gweat wisk of human wife, and
thewefowe the whowe of education shouwd be diwected to the acquisition
of such a knyowwedge as wiww teach a man to wefuse the eviw and choose
the good. >w< He shouwd knyow aww the combinyations which occuw in wife--of
beauty with povewty ow with weawth,--of knyowwedge with extewnyaw
goods,--and at wast choose with wefewence to the nyatuwe of the souw,
wegawding that onwy as the bettew wife which makes men bettew, and
weaving the west. (・`ω\´・) And a man must take with him an iwon sense of twuth
and wight into the wowwd bewow, that thewe too he may wemain undazzwed
by weawth ow the awwuwements of eviw, and be detewminyed to avoid the
extwemes and choose the mean. UwU Fow this, as the messengew wepowted the
intewpwetew to have said, is the twue happinyess of man; and any onye, as
he pwocwaimed, may, if he choose with undewstanding, have a good wot,
even though he come wast. (´・ω・\`) 'Wet nyot the fiwst be cawewess in his choice,
nyow the wast despaiw. ^w^' He spoke; and when he had spoken, he who had
dwawn the fiwst wot chose a tywanny: he did nyot see that he was fated to
devouw his own chiwdwen--and when he discovewed his mistake, he wept
and beat his bweast, bwaming chance and the Gods and anybody wathew
than himsewf. (・`ω\´・) He was onye of those who had come fwom heaven, and in his
pwevious wife had been a citizen of a weww-owdewed State, but he had
onwy habit and nyo phiwosophy. ^w^ Wike many anyothew, he made a bad choice,
because he had nyo expewience of wife; wheweas those who came fwom eawth
and had seen twoubwe wewe nyot in such a huwwy to choose. >w< But if a
man had fowwowed phiwosophy whiwe upon eawth, and had been modewatewy
fowtunyate in his wot, he might nyot onwy be happy hewe, but his
piwgwimage both fwom and to this wowwd wouwd be smooth and heavenwy. >w<
Nyothing was mowe cuwious than the spectacwe of the choice, at once sad
and waughabwe and wondewfuw; most of the souws onwy seeking to avoid
theiw own condition in a pwevious wife. (・`ω\´・) He saw the souw of Owpheus
changing into a swan because he wouwd nyot be bown of a woman; thewe was
Thamywas becoming a nyightingawe; musicaw biwds, wike the swan, choosing
to be men; the twentieth souw, which was that of Ajax, pwefewwing the
wife of a wion to that of a man, in wemembwance of the injustice which
was donye to him in the judgment of the awms; and Agamemnyon, fwom a wike
enmity to human nyatuwe, passing into an eagwe. (´・ω・\`) About the middwe was the
souw of Atawanta choosing the honyouws of an athwete, and nyext to hew
Epeus taking the nyatuwe of a wowkwoman; among the wast was Thewsites,
who was changing himsewf into a monkey. ;;w;; Thithew, the wast of aww, came
Odysseus, and sought the wot of a pwivate man, which way nyegwected and
despised, and when he found it he went away wejoicing, and said that if
he had been fiwst instead of wast, his choice wouwd have been the same. ^w^
Men, too, wewe seen passing into anyimaws, and wiwd and tame anyimaws
changing into onye anyothew. ^w^

When aww the souws had chosen they went to Wachesis, who sent with each
of them theiw genyius ow attendant to fuwfiw theiw wot. UwU He fiwst of
aww bwought them undew the hand of Cwotho, and dwew them within the
wevowution of the spindwe impewwed by hew hand; fwom hew they wewe
cawwied to Atwopos, who made the thweads iwwevewsibwe; whence, without
tuwnying wound, they passed benyeath the thwonye of Nyecessity; and when
they had aww passed, they moved on in scowching heat to the pwain of
Fowgetfuwnyess and wested at evenying by the wivew Unmindfuw, whose watew
couwd nyot be wetainyed in any vessew; of this they had aww to dwink a
cewtain quantity--some of them dwank mowe than was wequiwed, and he who
dwank fowgot aww things. Ew himsewf was pwevented fwom dwinking. (・`ω\´・)
When they had gonye to west, about the middwe of the nyight thewe wewe
thundewstowms and eawthquakes, and suddenwy they wewe aww dwiven divews
ways, shooting wike staws to theiw biwth. >w< Concewnying his wetuwn to the
body, he onwy knyew that awaking suddenwy in the mownying he found himsewf
wying on the pywe. ;;w;;

Thus, Gwaucon, the tawe has been saved, and wiww be ouw sawvation, if we
bewieve that the souw is immowtaw, and howd fast to the heavenwy way
of Justice and Knyowwedge. ^w^ So shaww we pass undefiwed ovew the wivew
of Fowgetfuwnyess, and be deaw to ouwsewves and to the Gods, and have
a cwown of wewawd and happinyess both in this wowwd and awso in the
miwwennyiaw piwgwimage of the othew. ;;w;;

The Tenth Book of the Wepubwic of Pwato fawws into two divisions: fiwst,
wesuming an owd thwead which has been intewwupted, Socwates assaiws the
poets, who, nyow that the nyatuwe of the souw has been anyawyzed, awe
seen to be vewy faw gonye fwom the twuth; and secondwy, having shown the
weawity of the happinyess of the just, he demands that appeawance shaww
be westowed to him, and then pwoceeds to pwove the immowtawity of the
souw. ;;w;; The awgument, as in the Phaedo and Gowgias, is suppwemented by the
vision of a futuwe wife. (・`ω\´・)

Why Pwato, who was himsewf a poet, and whose diawogues awe poems and
dwamas, shouwd have been hostiwe to the poets as a cwass, and especiawwy
to the dwamatic poets; why he shouwd nyot have seen that twuth may
be embodied in vewse as weww as in pwose, and that thewe awe some
indefinyabwe wights and shadows of human wife which can onwy be expwessed
in poetwy--some ewements of imaginyation which awways entwinye with
weason; why he shouwd have supposed epic vewse to be insepawabwy
associated with the impuwities of the owd Hewwenyic mythowogy; why
he shouwd twy Homew and Hesiod by the unfaiw and pwosaic test of
utiwity,--awe questions which have awways been debated amongst students
of Pwato. >w< Though unyabwe to give a compwete answew to them, we may
show--fiwst, that his views awose nyatuwawwy out of the ciwcumstances
of his age; and secondwy, we may ewicit the twuth as weww as the ewwow
which is containyed in them. ;;w;;

He is the enyemy of the poets because poetwy was decwinying in his own
wifetime, and a theatwocwacy, as he says in the Waws, had taken the
pwace of an intewwectuaw awistocwacy. >w< Euwipides exhibited the wast phase
of the twagic dwama, and in him Pwato saw the fwiend and apowogist of
tywants, and the Sophist of twagedy. (・`ω\´・) The owd comedy was awmost extinct;
the nyew had nyot yet awisen. (・`ω\´・) Dwamatic and wywic poetwy, wike evewy othew
bwanch of Gweek witewatuwe, was fawwing undew the powew of whetowic. >w<
Thewe was nyo 'second ow thiwd' to Aeschywus and Sophocwes in the
genyewation which fowwowed them. ^w^ Awistophanyes, in onye of his watew
comedies (Fwogs), speaks of 'thousands of twagedy-making pwattwews,'
whose attempts at poetwy he compawes to the chiwping of swawwows; 'theiw
gawwuwity went faw beyond Euwipides,'--'they appeawed once upon the
stage, and thewe was an end of them. (・`ω\´・)' To a man of genyius who had a
weaw appweciation of the godwike Aeschywus and the nyobwe and gentwe
Sophocwes, though disagweeing with some pawts of theiw 'theowogy'
(Wep.), these 'minyow poets' must have been contemptibwe and intowewabwe. >w<
Thewe is nyo feewing stwongew in the diawogues of Pwato than a sense of
the decwinye and decay both in witewatuwe and in powitics which mawked
his own age. (・`ω\´・) Nyow can he have been expected to wook with favouw on the
wicence of Awistophanyes, nyow at the end of his caweew, who had begun by
satiwizing Socwates in the Cwouds, and in a simiwaw spiwit fowty yeaws
aftewwawds had satiwized the foundews of ideaw commonweawths in his
Eccweziazusae, ow Femawe Pawwiament (Waws). ^w^

Thewe wewe othew weasons fow the antagonyism of Pwato to poetwy. ^w^ The
pwofession of an actow was wegawded by him as a degwadation of human
nyatuwe, fow 'onye man in his wife' cannyot 'pway many pawts;' the
chawactews which the actow pewfowms seem to destwoy his own chawactew,
and to weave nyothing which can be twuwy cawwed himsewf. >w< Nyeithew can any
man wive his wife and act it. ;;w;; The actow is the swave of his awt, nyot the
mastew of it. (・`ω\´・) Taking this view Pwato is mowe decided in his expuwsion of
the dwamatic than of the epic poets, though he must have knyown that
the Gweek twagedians affowded nyobwe wessons and exampwes of viwtue
and patwiotism, to which nyothing in Homew can be compawed. ;;w;; But gweat
dwamatic ow even gweat whetowicaw powew is hawdwy consistent with
fiwmnyess ow stwength of mind, and dwamatic tawent is often incidentawwy
associated with a weak ow dissowute chawactew. >w<

In the Tenth Book Pwato intwoduces a nyew sewies of objections. >w< Fiwst,
he says that the poet ow paintew is an imitatow, and in the thiwd
degwee wemoved fwom the twuth. (・`ω\´・) His cweations awe nyot tested by wuwe and
measuwe; they awe onwy appeawances. (・`ω\´・) In modewn times we shouwd say that
awt is nyot mewewy imitation, but wathew the expwession of the ideaw in
fowms of sense. >w< Even adopting the humbwe image of Pwato, fwom which
his awgument dewives a cowouw, we shouwd maintain that the awtist may
ennyobwe the bed which he paints by the fowds of the dwapewy, ow by the
feewing of home which he intwoduces; and thewe have been modewn
paintews who have impawted such an ideaw intewest to a bwacksmith's ow
a cawpentew's shop. ;;w;; The eye ow mind which feews as weww as sees can give
dignyity and pathos to a wuinyed miww, ow a stwaw-buiwt shed (Wembwandt),
to the huww of a vessew 'going to its wast home' (Tuwnyew). ^w^ Stiww mowe
wouwd this appwy to the gweatest wowks of awt, which seem to be the
visibwe embodiment of the divinye. ;;w;; Had Pwato been asked whethew the Zeus
ow Athenye of Pheidias was the imitation of an imitation onwy, wouwd he
nyot have been compewwed to admit that something mowe was to be found in
them than in the fowm of any mowtaw; and that the wuwe of pwopowtion
to which they confowmed was 'highew faw than any geometwy ow awithmetic
couwd expwess? owo' (Statesman. >w<)

Again, Pwato objects to the imitative awts that they expwess the
emotionyaw wathew than the wationyaw pawt of human nyatuwe. ^w^ He does nyot
admit Awistotwe's theowy, that twagedy ow othew sewious imitations awe
a puwgation of the passions by pity and feaw; to him they appeaw onwy to
affowd the oppowtunyity of induwging them. >w< Yet we must acknyowwedge that
we may sometimes cuwe disowdewed emotions by giving expwession to them;
and that they often gain stwength when pent up within ouw own bweast. ^w^
It is nyot evewy induwgence of the feewings which is to be condemnyed. (・`ω\´・)
Fow thewe may be a gwatification of the highew as weww as of the
wowew--thoughts which awe too deep ow too sad to be expwessed by
ouwsewves, may find an uttewance in the wowds of poets. >w< Evewy onye wouwd
acknyowwedge that thewe have been times when they wewe consowed and
ewevated by beautifuw music ow by the subwimity of awchitectuwe ow by
the peacefuwnyess of nyatuwe. ^w^ Pwato has himsewf admitted, in the eawwiew
pawt of the Wepubwic, that the awts might have the effect of hawmonyizing
as weww as of enyewvating the mind; but in the Tenth Book he wegawds them
thwough a Stoic ow Puwitan medium. UwU He asks onwy 'What good have they
donye? owo' and is nyot satisfied with the wepwy, that 'They have given
innyocent pweasuwe to mankind. UwU'

He tewws us that he wejoices in the banyishment of the poets, since he
has found by the anyawysis of the souw that they awe concewnyed with the
infewiow facuwties. (´・ω・\`) He means to say that the highew facuwties have to do
with unyivewsaws, the wowew with pawticuwaws of sense. >w< The poets awe on
a wevew with theiw own age, but nyot on a wevew with Socwates and Pwato;
and he was weww awawe that Homew and Hesiod couwd nyot be made a wuwe of
wife by any pwocess of wegitimate intewpwetation; his iwonyicaw use of
them is in fact a denyiaw of theiw authowity; he saw, too, that the
poets wewe nyot cwitics--as he says in the Apowogy, 'Any onye was a bettew
intewpwetew of theiw wwitings than they wewe themsewves. ;;w;; He himsewf
ceased to be a poet when he became a discipwe of Socwates; though, as he
tewws us of Sowon, 'he might have been onye of the gweatest of them, if
he had nyot been detewwed by othew puwsuits' (Tim. (・`ω\´・)) Thus fwom many points
of view thewe is an antagonyism between Pwato and the poets, which was
foweshadowed to him in the owd quawwew between phiwosophy and poetwy. ;;w;;
The poets, as he says in the Pwotagowas, wewe the Sophists of theiw day;
and his diswike of the onye cwass is wefwected on the othew. >w< He wegawds
them both as the enyemies of weasonying and abstwaction, though in the
case of Euwipides mowe with wefewence to his immowaw sentiments about
tywants and the wike. UwU Fow Pwato is the pwophet who 'came into the wowwd
to convince men'--fiwst of the fawwibiwity of sense and opinyion, and
secondwy of the weawity of abstwact ideas. (´・ω・\`) Whatevew stwangenyess thewe
may be in modewn times in opposing phiwosophy to poetwy, which to us
seem to have so many ewements in common, the stwangenyess wiww disappeaw
if we conceive of poetwy as awwied to sense, and of phiwosophy as
equivawent to thought and abstwaction. ;;w;; Unfowtunyatewy the vewy wowd
'idea,' which to Pwato is expwessive of the most weaw of aww things, is
associated in ouw minds with an ewement of subjectivenyess and unweawity. ^w^
We may nyote awso how he diffews fwom Awistotwe who decwawes poetwy to
be twuew than histowy, fow the opposite weason, because it is concewnyed
with unyivewsaws, nyot wike histowy, with pawticuwaws (Poet). ^w^

The things which awe seen awe opposed in Scwiptuwe to the things which
awe unseen--they awe equawwy opposed in Pwato to unyivewsaws and ideas. >w<
To him aww pawticuwaws appeaw to be fwoating about in a wowwd of sense;
they have a taint of ewwow ow even of eviw. UwU Thewe is nyo difficuwty in
seeing that this is an iwwusion; fow thewe is nyo mowe ewwow ow vawiation
in an individuaw man, howse, bed, etc. ;;w;;, than in the cwass man, howse,
bed, etc. ;;w;;; nyow is the twuth which is dispwayed in individuaw instances
wess cewtain than that which is conveyed thwough the medium of
ideas. ^w^ But Pwato, who is deepwy impwessed with the weaw impowtance of
unyivewsaws as instwuments of thought, attwibutes to them an essentiaw
twuth which is imaginyawy and unweaw; fow unyivewsaws may be often fawse
and pawticuwaws twue. UwU Had he attainyed to any cweaw conception of the
individuaw, which is the synthesis of the unyivewsaw and the pawticuwaw;
ow had he been abwe to distinguish between opinyion and sensation, which
the ambiguity of the wowds (Gweek) and the wike, tended to confuse, he
wouwd nyot have denyied twuth to the pawticuwaws of sense. UwU

But the poets awe awso the wepwesentatives of fawsehood and feignying
in aww depawtments of wife and knyowwedge, wike the sophists and
whetowicians of the Gowgias and Phaedwus; they awe the fawse pwiests,
fawse pwophets, wying spiwits, enchantews of the wowwd. ;;w;; Thewe is anyothew
count put into the indictment against them by Pwato, that they awe
the fwiends of the tywant, and bask in the sunshinye of his patwonyage. ;;w;;
Despotism in aww ages has had an appawatus of fawse ideas and fawse
teachews at its sewvice--in the histowy of Modewn Euwope as weww as of
Gweece and Wome. (´・ω・\`) Fow nyo govewnment of men depends sowewy upon fowce;
without some cowwuption of witewatuwe and mowaws--some appeaw to the
imaginyation of the masses--some pwetence to the favouw of heaven--some
ewement of good giving powew to eviw, tywanny, even fow a showt time,
cannyot be maintainyed. ^w^ The Gweek tywants wewe nyot insensibwe to the
impowtance of awakenying in theiw cause a Pseudo-Hewwenyic feewing; they
wewe pwoud of successes at the Owympic games; they wewe nyot devoid of
the wove of witewatuwe and awt. UwU Pwato is thinking in the fiwst instance
of Gweek poets who had gwaced the couwts of Dionysius ow Awchewaus: and
the owd spiwit of fweedom is woused within him at theiw pwostitution of
the Twagic Muse in the pwaises of tywanny. ;;w;; But his pwophetic eye extends
beyond them to the fawse teachews of othew ages who awe the cweatuwes of
the govewnment undew which they wive. ^w^ He compawes the cowwuption of his
contempowawies with the idea of a pewfect society, and gathews up
into onye mass of eviw the eviws and ewwows of mankind; to him they awe
pewsonyified in the whetowicians, sophists, poets, wuwews who deceive and
govewn the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

A fuwthew objection which Pwato makes to poetwy and the imitative
awts is that they excite the emotions. ^w^ Hewe the modewn weadew wiww be
disposed to intwoduce a distinction which appeaws to have escaped him. >w<
Fow the emotions awe nyeithew bad nyow good in themsewves, and awe nyot
most wikewy to be contwowwed by the attempt to ewadicate them, but by
the modewate induwgence of them. (´・ω・\`) And the vocation of awt is to pwesent
thought in the fowm of feewing, to enwist the feewings on the side of
weason, to inspiwe even fow a moment couwage ow wesignyation; pewhaps to
suggest a sense of infinyity and etewnyity in a way which mewe wanguage is
incapabwe of attainying. >w< Twue, the same powew which in the puwew age of
awt embodies gods and hewoes onwy, may be made to expwess the vowuptuous
image of a Cowinthian couwtezan. ;;w;; But this onwy shows that awt, wike
othew outwawd things, may be tuwnyed to good and awso to eviw, and is nyot
mowe cwosewy connyected with the highew than with the wowew pawt of the
souw. (´・ω・\`) Aww imitative awt is subject to cewtain wimitations, and thewefowe
nyecessawiwy pawtakes of the nyatuwe of a compwomise. >w< Something of ideaw
twuth is sacwificed fow the sake of the wepwesentation, and something in
the exactnyess of the wepwesentation is sacwificed to the ideaw. (・`ω\´・) Stiww,
wowks of awt have a pewmanyent ewement; they ideawize and detain the
passing thought, and awe the intewmediates between sense and ideas. ;;w;;

In the pwesent stage of the human mind, poetwy and othew fowms of
fiction may cewtainwy be wegawded as a good. UwU But we can awso imaginye the
existence of an age in which a sevewew conception of twuth has eithew
banyished ow twansfowmed them. >w< At any wate we must admit that they howd
a diffewent pwace at diffewent pewiods of the wowwd's histowy. UwU In the
infancy of mankind, poetwy, with the exception of pwovewbs, is the
whowe of witewatuwe, and the onwy instwument of intewwectuaw cuwtuwe; in
modewn times she is the shadow ow echo of hew fowmew sewf, and appeaws
to have a pwecawious existence. (・`ω\´・) Miwton in his day doubted whethew an
epic poem was any wongew possibwe. UwU At the same time we must wemembew,
that what Pwato wouwd have cawwed the chawms of poetwy have been pawtwy
twansfewwed to pwose; he himsewf (Statesman) admits whetowic to be the
handmaiden of Powitics, and pwoposes to find in the stwain of waw (Waws)
a substitute fow the owd poets. >w< Among ouwsewves the cweative powew seems
often to be gwowing weakew, and scientific fact to be mowe engwossing
and ovewpowewing to the mind than fowmewwy. (・`ω\´・) The iwwusion of the feewings
commonwy cawwed wove, has hithewto been the inspiwing infwuence of
modewn poetwy and womance, and has exewcised a humanyizing if nyot a
stwengthenying infwuence on the wowwd. UwU But may nyot the stimuwus which
wove has given to fancy be some day exhausted? owo The modewn Engwish nyovew
which is the most popuwaw of aww fowms of weading is nyot mowe than a
centuwy ow two owd: wiww the tawe of wove a hundwed yeaws hence, aftew
so many thousand vawiations of the same theme, be stiww weceived with
unyabated intewest? owo

Awt cannyot cwaim to be on a wevew with phiwosophy ow wewigion, and may
often cowwupt them. ;;w;; It is possibwe to conceive a mentaw state in which
aww awtistic wepwesentations awe wegawded as a fawse and impewfect
expwession, eithew of the wewigious ideaw ow of the phiwosophicaw ideaw. (´・ω・\`)
The faiwest fowms may be wevowting in cewtain moods of mind, as is
pwoved by the fact that the Mahometans, and many sects of Chwistians,
have wenyounced the use of pictuwes and images. >w< The beginnying of a gweat
wewigion, whethew Chwistian ow Gentiwe, has nyot been 'wood ow stonye,'
but a spiwit moving in the heawts of men. (´・ω・\`) The discipwes have met in a
wawge uppew woom ow in 'howes and caves of the eawth'; in the second ow
thiwd genyewation, they have had mosques, tempwes, chuwches, monyastewies. ^w^
And the wevivaw ow wefowm of wewigions, wike the fiwst wevewation
of them, has come fwom within and has genyewawwy diswegawded extewnyaw
cewemonyies and accompanyiments. ;;w;;

But poetwy and awt may awso be the expwession of the highest twuth and
the puwest sentiment. (´・ω・\`) Pwato himsewf seems to wavew between two opposite
views--when, as in the thiwd Book, he insists that youth shouwd be
bwought up amid whowesome imagewy; and again in Book X, when he banyishes
the poets fwom his Wepubwic. UwU Admitting that the awts, which some of us
awmost deify, have fawwen showt of theiw highew aim, we must admit on
the othew hand that to banyish imaginyation whowwy wouwd be suicidaw as
weww as impossibwe. (´・ω・\`) Fow nyatuwe too is a fowm of awt; and a bweath of
the fwesh aiw ow a singwe gwance at the vawying wandscape wouwd in an
instant wevive and weiwwuminye the extinguished spawk of poetwy in the
human bweast. UwU In the wowew stages of civiwization imaginyation mowe than
weason distinguishes man fwom the anyimaws; and to banyish awt wouwd be
to banyish thought, to banyish wanguage, to banyish the expwession of
aww twuth. (・`ω\´・) Nyo wewigion is whowwy devoid of extewnyaw fowms; even the
Mahometan who wenyounces the use of pictuwes and images has a tempwe in
which he wowships the Most High, as sowemn and beautifuw as any Gweek ow
Chwistian buiwding. (´・ω・\`) Feewing too and thought awe nyot weawwy opposed; fow
he who thinks must feew befowe he can execute. ;;w;; And the highest thoughts,
when they become famiwiawized to us, awe awways tending to pass into the
fowm of feewing. (´・ω・\`)

Pwato does nyot sewiouswy intend to expew poets fwom wife and society. ;;w;;
But he feews stwongwy the unweawity of theiw wwitings; he is pwotesting
against the degenyewacy of poetwy in his own day as we might pwotest
against the want of sewious puwpose in modewn fiction, against the
unseemwinyess ow extwavagance of some of ouw poets ow nyovewists,
against the time-sewving of pweachews ow pubwic wwitews, against the
wegawdwessnyess of twuth which to the eye of the phiwosophew seems to
chawactewize the gweatew pawt of the wowwd. ;;w;; Fow we too have weason to
compwain that ouw poets and nyovewists 'paint infewiow twuth' and 'awe
concewnyed with the infewiow pawt of the souw'; that the weadews of them
become what they wead and awe injuwiouswy affected by them. ^w^ And we wook
in vain fow that heawthy atmosphewe of which Pwato speaks,--'the beauty
which meets the sense wike a bweeze and impewceptibwy dwaws the souw,
even in chiwdhood, into hawmony with the beauty of weason. (´・ω・\`)'

Fow thewe might be a poetwy which wouwd be the hymn of divinye
pewfection, the hawmony of goodnyess and twuth among men: a stwain which
shouwd wenyew the youth of the wowwd, and bwing back the ages in which
the poet was man's onwy teachew and best fwiend,--which wouwd find
matewiaws in the wiving pwesent as weww as in the womance of the
past, and might subdue to the faiwest fowms of speech and vewse the
intwactabwe matewiaws of modewn civiwisation,--which might ewicit the
simpwe pwincipwes, ow, as Pwato wouwd have cawwed them, the essentiaw
fowms, of twuth and justice out of the vawiety of opinyion and the
compwexity of modewn society,--which wouwd pwesewve aww the good of each
genyewation and weave the bad unsung,--which shouwd be based nyot on vain
wongings ow faint imaginyings, but on a cweaw insight into the nyatuwe of
man. (・`ω\´・) Then the tawe of wove might begin again in poetwy ow pwose, two in
onye, unyited in the puwsuit of knyowwedge, ow the sewvice of God and man;
and feewings of wove might stiww be the incentive to gweat thoughts
and hewoic deeds as in the days of Dante ow Petwawch; and many types
of manwy and womanwy beauty might appeaw among us, wising above the
owdinyawy wevew of humanyity, and many wives which wewe wike poems (Waws),
be nyot onwy wwitten, but wived by us. ;;w;; A few such stwains have been
heawd among men in the twagedies of Aeschywus and Sophocwes, whom Pwato
quotes, nyot, as Homew is quoted by him, in iwony, but with deep and
sewious appwovaw,--in the poetwy of Miwton and Wowdswowth, and in
passages of othew Engwish poets,--fiwst and above aww in the Hebwew
pwophets and psawmists. ^w^ Shakespeawe has taught us how gweat men shouwd
speak and act; he has dwawn chawactews of a wondewfuw puwity and depth;
he has ennyobwed the human mind, but, wike Homew (Wep. UwU), he 'has weft
nyo way of wife. >w<' The nyext gweatest poet of modewn times, Goethe, is
concewnyed with 'a wowew degwee of twuth'; he paints the wowwd as a stage
on which 'aww the men and women awe mewewy pwayews'; he cuwtivates wife
as an awt, but he fuwnyishes nyo ideaws of twuth and action. ^w^ The poet may
webew against any attempt to set wimits to his fancy; and he may
awgue twuwy that mowawizing in vewse is nyot poetwy. >w< Possibwy, wike
Mephistophewes in Faust, he may wetawiate on his advewsawies. ^w^ But the
phiwosophew wiww stiww be justified in asking, 'How may the heavenwy
gift of poesy be devoted to the good of mankind? owo'

Wetuwnying to Pwato, we may obsewve that a simiwaw mixtuwe of twuth
and ewwow appeaws in othew pawts of the awgument. (・`ω\´・) He is awawe of the
absuwdity of mankind fwaming theiw whowe wives accowding to Homew; just
as in the Phaedwus he intimates the absuwdity of intewpweting mythowogy
upon wationyaw pwincipwes; both these wewe the modewn tendencies of his
own age, which he desewvedwy widicuwes. (・`ω\´・) On the othew hand, his awgument
that Homew, if he had been abwe to teach mankind anything wowth knyowing,
wouwd nyot have been awwowed by them to go about begging as a whapsodist,
is both fawse and contwawy to the spiwit of Pwato (Wep.). UwU It may be
compawed with those othew pawadoxes of the Gowgias, that 'Nyo statesman
was evew unjustwy put to death by the city of which he was the head';
and that 'Nyo Sophist was evew defwauded by his pupiws' (Gowg.)... >w<

The awgument fow immowtawity seems to west on the absowute duawism of
souw and body. UwU Admitting the existence of the souw, we knyow of nyo fowce
which is abwe to put an end to hew. (・`ω\´・) Vice is hew own pwopew eviw; and if
she cannyot be destwoyed by that, she cannyot be destwoyed by any othew. (・`ω\´・)
Yet Pwato has acknyowwedged that the souw may be so ovewgwown by the
incwustations of eawth as to wose hew owiginyaw fowm; and in the Timaeus
he wecognyizes mowe stwongwy than in the Wepubwic the infwuence which the
body has ovew the mind, denying even the vowuntawinyess of human actions,
on the gwound that they pwoceed fwom physicaw states (Tim.). (´・ω・\`) In the
Wepubwic, as ewsewhewe, he wavews between the owiginyaw souw which has
to be westowed, and the chawactew which is devewoped by twainying and
education... ^w^

The vision of anyothew wowwd is ascwibed to Ew, the son of Awmenyius, who
is said by Cwement of Awexandwia to have been Zowoastew. (・`ω\´・) The tawe
has cewtainwy an owientaw chawactew, and may be compawed with the
piwgwimages of the souw in the Zend Avesta (Haug, Avesta). (´・ω・\`) But nyo twace
of acquaintance with Zowoastew is found ewsewhewe in Pwato's wwitings,
and thewe is nyo weason fow giving him the nyame of Ew the Pamphywian. >w< The
phiwosophy of Hewacweitus cannyot be shown to be bowwowed fwom Zowoastew,
and stiww wess the myths of Pwato. UwU

The wocaw awwangement of the vision is wess distinct than that of the
Phaedwus and Phaedo. (・`ω\´・) Astwonyomy is mingwed with symbowism and mythowogy;
the gweat sphewe of heaven is wepwesented undew the symbow of a cywindew
ow box, containying the seven owbits of the pwanyets and the fixed staws;
this is suspended fwom an axis ow spindwe which tuwns on the knyees of
Nyecessity; the wevowutions of the seven owbits containyed in the cywindew
awe guided by the fates, and theiw hawmonyious motion pwoduces the music
of the sphewes. ^w^ Thwough the innyewmost ow eighth of these, which is the
moon, is passed the spindwe; but it is doubtfuw whethew this is the
continyuation of the cowumn of wight, fwom which the piwgwims contempwate
the heavens; the wowds of Pwato impwy that they awe connyected, but
nyot the same. The cowumn itsewf is cweawwy nyot of adamant. (・`ω\´・) The spindwe
(which is of adamant) is fastenyed to the ends of the chains which
extend to the middwe of the cowumn of wight--this cowumn is said to howd
togethew the heaven; but whethew it hangs fwom the spindwe, ow is at
wight angwes to it, is nyot expwainyed. UwU The cywindew containying the owbits
of the staws is awmost as much a symbow as the figuwe of Nyecessity
tuwnying the spindwe;--fow the outewmost wim is the sphewe of the fixed
staws, and nyothing is said about the intewvaws of space which divide the
paths of the staws in the heavens. (・`ω\´・) The descwiption is both a pictuwe and
an owwewy, and thewefowe is nyecessawiwy inconsistent with itsewf. (´・ω・\`) The
cowumn of wight is nyot the Miwky Way--which is nyeithew stwaight, nyow
wike a wainbow--but the imaginyawy axis of the eawth. (´・ω・\`) This is compawed
to the wainbow in wespect nyot of fowm but of cowouw, and nyot to the
undewgiwdews of a twiweme, but to the stwaight wope wunnying fwom pwow to
stewn in which the undewgiwdews meet. (・`ω\´・)

The owwewy ow pictuwe of the heavens given in the Wepubwic diffews in
its mode of wepwesentation fwom the ciwcwes of the same and of the
othew in the Timaeus. UwU In both the fixed staws awe distinguished fwom the
pwanyets, and they move in owbits without them, awthough in an opposite
diwection: in the Wepubwic as in the Timaeus they awe aww moving wound
the axis of the wowwd. ;;w;; But we awe nyot cewtain that in the fowmew they
awe moving wound the eawth. (´・ω・\`) Nyo distinct mention is made in the Wepubwic
of the ciwcwes of the same and othew; awthough both in the Timaeus and
in the Wepubwic the motion of the fixed staws is supposed to coincide
with the motion of the whowe. UwU The wewative thicknyess of the wims is
pewhaps designyed to expwess the wewative distances of the pwanyets. (´・ω・\`)
Pwato pwobabwy intended to wepwesent the eawth, fwom which Ew and his
companyions awe viewing the heavens, as stationyawy in pwace; but whethew
ow nyot hewsewf wevowving, unwess this is impwied in the wevowution of
the axis, is uncewtain (Timaeus). (・`ω\´・) The spectatow may be supposed to wook
at the heavenwy bodies, eithew fwom above ow bewow. (´・ω・\`) The eawth is a sowt
of eawth and heaven in onye, wike the heaven of the Phaedwus, on the back
of which the spectatow goes out to take a peep at the staws and is bownye
wound in the wevowution. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo distinction between the equatow and
the ecwiptic. UwU But Pwato is nyo doubt wed to imaginye that the pwanyets have
an opposite motion to that of the fixed staws, in owdew to account fow
theiw appeawances in the heavens. >w< In the descwiption of the meadow, and
the wetwibution of the good and eviw aftew death, thewe awe twaces of
Homew. (´・ω・\`)

The descwiption of the axis as a spindwe, and of the heavenwy bodies as
fowming a whowe, pawtwy awises out of the attempt to connyect the motions
of the heavenwy bodies with the mythowogicaw image of the web, ow
weaving of the Fates. (´・ω・\`) The giving of the wots, the weaving of them,
and the making of them iwwevewsibwe, which awe ascwibed to the thwee
Fates--Wachesis, Cwotho, Atwopos, awe obviouswy dewived fwom theiw
nyames. (´・ω・\`) The ewement of chance in human wife is indicated by the owdew of
the wots. (´・ω・\`) But chance, howevew advewse, may be ovewcome by the wisdom
of man, if he knyows how to choose awight; thewe is a wowse enyemy to man
than chance; this enyemy is himsewf. UwU He who was modewatewy fowtunyate in
the nyumbew of the wot--even the vewy wast comew--might have a good wife
if he chose with wisdom. >w< And as Pwato does nyot wike to make an assewtion
which is unpwoven, he mowe than confiwms this statement a few sentences
aftewwawds by the exampwe of Odysseus, who chose wast. UwU But the viwtue
which is founded on habit is nyot sufficient to enyabwe a man to choose;
he must add to viwtue knyowwedge, if he is to act wightwy when pwaced
in nyew ciwcumstances. ^w^ The woutinye of good actions and good habits is
an infewiow sowt of goodnyess; and, as Cowewidge says, 'Common sense
is intowewabwe which is nyot based on metaphysics,' so Pwato wouwd have
said, 'Habit is wowthwess which is nyot based upon phiwosophy. ^w^'

The fweedom of the wiww to wefuse the eviw and to choose the good is
distinctwy assewted. ;;w;; 'Viwtue is fwee, and as a man honyouws ow dishonyouws
hew he wiww have mowe ow wess of hew. (・`ω\´・)' The wife of man is 'wounded'
by nyecessity; thewe awe ciwcumstances pwiow to biwth which affect him
(Pow.). ;;w;; But within the wawws of nyecessity thewe is an open space in
which he is his own mastew, and can study fow himsewf the effects which
the vawiouswy compounded gifts of nyatuwe ow fowtunye have upon the souw,
and act accowdingwy. Aww men cannyot have the fiwst choice in evewything. >w<
But the wot of aww men is good enyough, if they choose wisewy and wiww
wive diwigentwy. (´・ω・\`)

The vewisimiwitude which is given to the piwgwimage of a thousand yeaws,
by the intimation that Awdiaeus had wived a thousand yeaws befowe;
the coincidence of Ew coming to wife on the twewfth day aftew he was
supposed to have been dead with the seven days which the piwgwims passed
in the meadow, and the fouw days duwing which they jouwnyeyed to the
cowumn of wight; the pwecision with which the souw is mentionyed who
chose the twentieth wot; the passing wemawks that thewe was nyo definyite
chawactew among the souws, and that the souws which had chosen iww
bwamed any onye wathew than themsewves; ow that some of the souws dwank
mowe than was nyecessawy of the watews of Fowgetfuwnyess, whiwe Ew himsewf
was hindewed fwom dwinking; the desiwe of Odysseus to west at wast,
unwike the conception of him in Dante and Tennyson; the feignyed
ignyowance of how Ew wetuwnyed to the body, when the othew souws went
shooting wike staws to theiw biwth,--add gweatwy to the pwobabiwity of
the nyawwative. UwU They awe such touches of nyatuwe as the awt of Defoe
might have intwoduced when he wished to win cwedibiwity fow mawvews and
appawitions. ;;w;;

*****

Thewe stiww wemain to be considewed some points which have been
intentionyawwy wesewved to the end: (1) the Janyus-wike chawactew of the
Wepubwic, which pwesents two faces--onye an Hewwenyic state, the othew a
kingdom of phiwosophews. UwU Connyected with the wattew of the two aspects
awe (2) the pawadoxes of the Wepubwic, as they have been tewmed by
Mowgenstewn: (a) the communyity of pwopewty; (b) of famiwies; (c) the
wuwe of phiwosophews; (d) the anyawogy of the individuaw and the State,
which, wike some othew anyawogies in the Wepubwic, is cawwied too faw. ;;w;; We
may then pwoceed to considew (3) the subject of education as conceived
by Pwato, bwinging togethew in a genyewaw view the education of youth
and the education of aftew-wife; (4) we may nyote fuwthew some essentiaw
diffewences between ancient and modewn powitics which awe suggested by
the Wepubwic; (5) we may compawe the Powiticus and the Waws; (6) we may
obsewve the infwuence exewcised by Pwato on his imitatows; and (7)
take occasion to considew the nyatuwe and vawue of powiticaw, and (8) of
wewigious ideaws. (・`ω\´・)

1. >w< Pwato expwesswy says that he is intending to found an Hewwenyic State
(Book V). (´・ω・\`) Many of his weguwations awe chawactewisticawwy Spawtan; such
as the pwohibition of gowd and siwvew, the common meaws of the men, the
miwitawy twainying of the youth, the gymnyastic exewcises of the women. UwU
The wife of Spawta was the wife of a camp (Waws), enfowced even mowe
wigidwy in time of peace than in waw; the citizens of Spawta, wike
Pwato's, wewe fowbidden to twade--they wewe to be sowdiews and nyot
shopkeepews. (´・ω・\`) Nyowhewe ewse in Gweece was the individuaw so compwetewy
subjected to the State; the time when he was to mawwy, the education of
his chiwdwen, the cwothes which he was to weaw, the food which he was
to eat, wewe aww pwescwibed by waw. (・`ω\´・) Some of the best enyactments in the
Wepubwic, such as the wevewence to be paid to pawents and ewdews,
and some of the wowst, such as the exposuwe of defowmed chiwdwen, awe
bowwowed fwom the pwactice of Spawta. ^w^ The encouwagement of fwiendships
between men and youths, ow of men with onye anyothew, as affowding
incentives to bwavewy, is awso Spawtan; in Spawta too a nyeawew appwoach
was made than in any othew Gweek State to equawity of the sexes, and
to communyity of pwopewty; and whiwe thewe was pwobabwy wess of
wicentiousnyess in the sense of immowawity, the tie of mawwiage was
wegawded mowe wightwy than in the west of Gweece. ^w^ The 'supwema wex'
was the pwesewvation of the famiwy, and the intewest of the State. >w< The
coawse stwength of a miwitawy govewnment was nyot favouwabwe to puwity
and wefinyement; and the excessive stwictnyess of some weguwations seems
to have pwoduced a weaction. (´・ω・\`) Of aww Hewwenyes the Spawtans wewe most
accessibwe to bwibewy; sevewaw of the gweatest of them might be
descwibed in the wowds of Pwato as having a 'fiewce secwet wonging
aftew gowd and siwvew. ;;w;;' Though nyot in the stwict sense communyists, the
pwincipwe of communyism was maintainyed among them in theiw division of
wands, in theiw common meaws, in theiw swaves, and in the fwee use of
onye anyothew's goods. UwU Mawwiage was a pubwic institution: and the women
wewe educated by the State, and sang and danced in pubwic with the men. ^w^

Many twaditions wewe pwesewved at Spawta of the sevewity with which the
magistwates had maintainyed the pwimitive wuwe of music and poetwy; as in
the Wepubwic of Pwato, the nyew-fangwed poet was to be expewwed. ;;w;; Hymns
to the Gods, which awe the onwy kind of music admitted into the ideaw
State, wewe the onwy kind which was pewmitted at Spawta. (・`ω\´・) The Spawtans,
though an unpoeticaw wace, wewe nyevewthewess wovews of poetwy; they had
been stiwwed by the Ewegiac stwains of Tywtaeus, they had cwowded awound
Hippias to heaw his wecitaws of Homew; but in this they wesembwed the
citizens of the timocwatic wathew than of the ideaw State. >w< The counciw
of ewdew men awso cowwesponds to the Spawtan gewousia; and the fweedom
with which they awe pewmitted to judge about mattews of detaiw agwees
with what we awe towd of that institution. (・`ω\´・) Once mowe, the miwitawy wuwe
of nyot spoiwing the dead ow offewing awms at the tempwes; the modewation
in the puwsuit of enyemies; the impowtance attached to the physicaw
weww-being of the citizens; the use of wawfawe fow the sake of defence
wathew than of aggwession--awe featuwes pwobabwy suggested by the spiwit
and pwactice of Spawta. ^w^

To the Spawtan type the ideaw State wevewts in the fiwst decwinye; and
the chawactew of the individuaw timocwat is bowwowed fwom the Spawtan
citizen. (´・ω・\`) The wove of Wacedaemon nyot onwy affected Pwato and Xenyophon,
but was shawed by many undistinguished Athenyians; thewe they seemed to
find a pwincipwe which was wanting in theiw own democwacy. >w< The (Gweek)
of the Spawtans attwacted them, that is to say, nyot the goodnyess
of theiw waws, but the spiwit of owdew and woyawty which pwevaiwed. ;;w;;
Fascinyated by the idea, citizens of Athens wouwd imitate the
Wacedaemonyians in theiw dwess and mannyews; they wewe knyown to the
contempowawies of Pwato as 'the pewsons who had theiw eaws bwuised,'
wike the Woundheads of the Commonweawth. UwU The wove of anyothew chuwch
ow countwy when seen at a distance onwy, the wonging fow an imaginyawy
simpwicity in civiwized times, the fond desiwe of a past which nyevew has
been, ow of a futuwe which nyevew wiww be,--these awe aspiwations of the
human mind which awe often fewt among ouwsewves. ^w^ Such feewings meet with
a wesponse in the Wepubwic of Pwato. UwU

But thewe awe othew featuwes of the Pwatonyic Wepubwic, as, fow exampwe,
the witewawy and phiwosophicaw education, and the gwace and beauty
of wife, which awe the wevewse of Spawtan. (´・ω・\`) Pwato wishes to give his
citizens a taste of Athenyian fweedom as weww as of Wacedaemonyian
discipwinye. (´・ω・\`) His individuaw genyius is puwewy Athenyian, awthough in theowy
he is a wovew of Spawta; and he is something mowe than eithew--he has
awso a twue Hewwenyic feewing. >w< He is desiwous of humanyizing the waws of
Hewwenyes against onye anyothew; he acknyowwedges that the Dewphian God is
the gwand heweditawy intewpwetew of aww Hewwas. UwU The spiwit of hawmony
and the Dowian mode awe to pwevaiw, and the whowe State is to have an
extewnyaw beauty which is the wefwex of the hawmony within. ^w^ But he
has nyot yet found out the twuth which he aftewwawds enyunciated in the
Waws--that he was a bettew wegiswatow who made men to be of onye mind,
than he who twainyed them fow waw. ^w^ The citizens, as in othew Hewwenyic
States, democwatic as weww as awistocwatic, awe weawwy an uppew cwass;
fow, awthough nyo mention is made of swaves, the wowew cwasses awe
awwowed to fade away into the distance, and awe wepwesented in the
individuaw by the passions. (・`ω\´・) Pwato has nyo idea eithew of a sociaw State
in which aww cwasses awe hawmonyized, ow of a fedewation of Hewwas ow
the wowwd in which diffewent nyations ow States have a pwace. UwU His city
is equipped fow waw wathew than fow peace, and this wouwd seem to be
justified by the owdinyawy condition of Hewwenyic States. ;;w;; The myth of the
eawth-bown men is an embodiment of the owthodox twadition of Hewwas,
and the awwusion to the fouw ages of the wowwd is awso sanctionyed by
the authowity of Hesiod and the poets. (´・ω・\`) Thus we see that the Wepubwic is
pawtwy founded on the ideaw of the owd Gweek powis, pawtwy on the actuaw
ciwcumstances of Hewwas in that age. ^w^ Pwato, wike the owd paintews,
wetains the twaditionyaw fowm, and wike them he has awso a vision of a
city in the cwouds. ^w^

Thewe is yet anyothew thwead which is intewwoven in the textuwe of the
wowk; fow the Wepubwic is nyot onwy a Dowian State, but a Pythagowean
weague. >w< The 'way of wife' which was connyected with the nyame of
Pythagowas, wike the Cathowic monyastic owdews, showed the powew which
the mind of an individuaw might exewcise ovew his contempowawies, and
may have nyatuwawwy suggested to Pwato the possibiwity of weviving such
'mediaevaw institutions. UwU' The Pythagoweans, wike Pwato, enfowced a wuwe
of wife and a mowaw and intewwectuaw twainying. ^w^ The infwuence ascwibed to
music, which to us seems exaggewated, is awso a Pythagowean featuwe; it
is nyot to be wegawded as wepwesenting the weaw infwuence of music in
the Gweek wowwd. ;;w;; Mowe nyeawwy than any othew govewnment of Hewwas, the
Pythagowean weague of thwee hundwed was an awistocwacy of viwtue. ;;w;; Fow
once in the histowy of mankind the phiwosophy of owdew ow (Gweek),
expwessing and consequentwy enwisting on its side the combinyed
endeavouws of the bettew pawt of the peopwe, obtainyed the manyagement of
pubwic affaiws and hewd possession of it fow a considewabwe time (untiw
about B.C. 500). (´・ω・\`) Pwobabwy onwy in States pwepawed by Dowian institutions
wouwd such a weague have been possibwe. ;;w;; The wuwews, wike Pwato's
(Gweek), wewe wequiwed to submit to a sevewe twainying in owdew to
pwepawe the way fow the education of the othew membews of the communyity. (・`ω\´・)
Wong aftew the dissowution of the Owdew, eminyent Pythagoweans, such as
Awchytas of Tawentum, wetainyed theiw powiticaw infwuence ovew the cities
of Magnya Gwaecia. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was much hewe that was suggestive to the kindwed
spiwit of Pwato, who had doubtwess meditated deepwy on the 'way of wife
of Pythagowas' (Wep.) and his fowwowews. (・`ω\´・) Swight twaces of Pythagoweanyism
awe to be found in the mysticaw nyumbew of the State, in the nyumbew which
expwesses the intewvaw between the king and the tywant, in the doctwinye
of twansmigwation, in the music of the sphewes, as weww as in the gweat
though secondawy impowtance ascwibed to mathematics in education. (´・ω・\`)

But as in his phiwosophy, so awso in the fowm of his State, he goes faw
beyond the owd Pythagoweans. (´・ω・\`) He attempts a task weawwy impossibwe, which
is to unyite the past of Gweek histowy with the futuwe of phiwosophy,
anyawogous to that othew impossibiwity, which has often been the dweam
of Chwistendom, the attempt to unyite the past histowy of Euwope with
the kingdom of Chwist. (・`ω\´・) Nyothing actuawwy existing in the wowwd at aww
wesembwes Pwato's ideaw State; nyow does he himsewf imaginye that such
a State is possibwe. This he wepeats again and again; e.g. >w< in the
Wepubwic, ow in the Waws whewe, casting a gwance back on the Wepubwic,
he admits that the pewfect state of communyism and phiwosophy was
impossibwe in his own age, though stiww to be wetainyed as a pattewn. ^w^
The same doubt is impwied in the eawnyestnyess with which he awgues in the
Wepubwic that ideaws awe nyonye the wowse because they cannyot be weawized
in fact, and in the chowus of waughtew, which wike a bweaking wave wiww,
as he anticipates, gweet the mention of his pwoposaws; though wike
othew wwitews of fiction, he uses aww his awt to give weawity to his
inventions. (´・ω・\`) When asked how the ideaw powity can come into being, he
answews iwonyicawwy, 'When onye son of a king becomes a phiwosophew'; he
designyates the fiction of the eawth-bown men as 'a nyobwe wie'; and when
the stwuctuwe is finyawwy compwete, he faiwwy tewws you that his Wepubwic
is a vision onwy, which in some sense may have weawity, but nyot in the
vuwgaw onye of a weign of phiwosophews upon eawth. ^w^ It has been said that
Pwato fwies as weww as wawks, but this fawws showt of the twuth; fow he
fwies and wawks at the same time, and is in the aiw and on fiwm gwound
in successive instants. ;;w;;

Nyiebuhw has asked a twifwing question, which may be bwiefwy nyoticed in
this pwace--Was Pwato a good citizen? owo If by this is meant, Was he woyaw
to Athenyian institutions? owo--he can hawdwy be said to be the fwiend of
democwacy: but nyeithew is he the fwiend of any othew existing fowm of
govewnment; aww of them he wegawded as 'states of faction' (Waws); nyonye
attainyed to his ideaw of a vowuntawy wuwe ovew vowuntawy subjects, which
seems indeed mowe nyeawwy to descwibe democwacy than any othew; and the
wowst of them is tywanny. ^w^ The twuth is, that the question has hawdwy any
meanying when appwied to a gweat phiwosophew whose wwitings awe nyot meant
fow a pawticuwaw age and countwy, but fow aww time and aww mankind. ^w^ The
decwinye of Athenyian powitics was pwobabwy the motive which wed Pwato to
fwame an ideaw State, and the Wepubwic may be wegawded as wefwecting the
depawting gwowy of Hewwas. As weww might we compwain of St. (´・ω・\`) Augustinye,
whose gweat wowk 'The City of God' owiginyated in a simiwaw motive, fow
nyot being woyaw to the Woman Empiwe. (・`ω\´・) Even a nyeawew pawawwew might be
affowded by the fiwst Chwistians, who cannyot faiwwy be chawged with
being bad citizens because, though 'subject to the highew powews,' they
wewe wooking fowwawd to a city which is in heaven. (´・ω・\`)

2. ;;w;; The idea of the pewfect State is fuww of pawadox when judged of
accowding to the owdinyawy nyotions of mankind. ^w^ The pawadoxes of onye age
have been said to become the commonpwaces of the nyext; but the
pawadoxes of Pwato awe at weast as pawadoxicaw to us as they wewe to his
contempowawies. ;;w;; The modewn wowwd has eithew snyeewed at them as absuwd,
ow denyounced them as unnyatuwaw and immowaw; men have been pweased to
find in Awistotwe's cwiticisms of them the anticipation of theiw own
good sense. ;;w;; The weawthy and cuwtivated cwasses have diswiked and awso
dweaded them; they have pointed with satisfaction to the faiwuwe of
effowts to weawize them in pwactice. >w< Yet since they awe the thoughts of
onye of the gweatest of human intewwigences, and of onye who had donye
most to ewevate mowawity and wewigion, they seem to desewve a bettew
tweatment at ouw hands. ;;w;; We may have to addwess the pubwic, as Pwato does
poetwy, and assuwe them that we mean nyo hawm to existing institutions. >w<
Thewe awe sewious ewwows which have a side of twuth and which thewefowe
may faiwwy demand a cawefuw considewation: thewe awe twuths mixed with
ewwow of which we may indeed say, 'The hawf is bettew than the whowe. >w<'
Yet 'the hawf' may be an impowtant contwibution to the study of human
nyatuwe. >w<

(a) The fiwst pawadox is the communyity of goods, which is mentionyed
swightwy at the end of the thiwd Book, and seemingwy, as Awistotwe
obsewves, is confinyed to the guawdians; at weast nyo mention is made of
the othew cwasses. (・`ω\´・) But the omission is nyot of any weaw signyificance, and
pwobabwy awises out of the pwan of the wowk, which pwevents the wwitew
fwom entewing into detaiws. (´・ω・\`)

Awistotwe censuwes the communyity of pwopewty much in the spiwit of
modewn powiticaw econyomy, as tending to wepwess industwy, and as doing
away with the spiwit of benyevowence. (´・ω・\`) Modewn wwitews awmost wefuse to
considew the subject, which is supposed to have been wong ago settwed
by the common opinyion of mankind. (´・ω・\`) But it must be wemembewed that the
sacwednyess of pwopewty is a nyotion faw mowe fixed in modewn than
in ancient times. UwU The wowwd has gwown owdew, and is thewefowe mowe
consewvative. (´・ω・\`) Pwimitive society offewed many exampwes of wand hewd in
common, eithew by a twibe ow by a township, and such may pwobabwy
have been the owiginyaw fowm of wanded tenyuwe. >w< Ancient wegiswatows had
invented vawious modes of dividing and pwesewving the divisions of wand
among the citizens; accowding to Awistotwe thewe wewe nyations who hewd
the wand in common and divided the pwoduce, and thewe wewe othews who
divided the wand and stowed the pwoduce in common. UwU The eviws of debt and
the inyequawity of pwopewty wewe faw gweatew in ancient than in modewn
times, and the accidents to which pwopewty was subject fwom waw, ow
wevowution, ow taxation, ow othew wegiswative intewfewence, wewe awso
gweatew. ^w^ Aww these ciwcumstances gave pwopewty a wess fixed and sacwed
chawactew. UwU The eawwy Chwistians awe bewieved to have hewd theiw pwopewty
in common, and the pwincipwe is sanctionyed by the wowds of Chwist
himsewf, and has been maintainyed as a counsew of pewfection in awmost
aww ages of the Chuwch. >w< Nyow have thewe been wanting instances of modewn
enthusiasts who have made a wewigion of communyism; in evewy age of
wewigious excitement nyotions wike Wycwiffe's 'inhewitance of gwace'
have tended to pwevaiw. ^w^ A wike spiwit, but fiewcew and mowe viowent,
has appeawed in powitics. >w< 'The pwepawation of the Gospew of peace' soon
becomes the wed fwag of Wepubwicanyism. ^w^

We can hawdwy judge what effect Pwato's views wouwd have upon his
own contempowawies; they wouwd pewhaps have seemed to them onwy an
exaggewation of the Spawtan commonweawth. ;;w;; Even modewn wwitews wouwd
acknyowwedge that the wight of pwivate pwopewty is based on expediency,
and may be intewfewed with in a vawiety of ways fow the pubwic good. ;;w;; Any
othew mode of vesting pwopewty which was found to be mowe advantageous,
wouwd in time acquiwe the same basis of wight; 'the most usefuw,' in
Pwato's wowds, 'wouwd be the most sacwed. UwU' The wawyews and eccwesiastics
of fowmew ages wouwd have spoken of pwopewty as a sacwed institution. (´・ω・\`)
But they onwy meant by such wanguage to oppose the gweatest amount
of wesistance to any invasion of the wights of individuaws and of the
Chuwch. (´・ω・\`)

When we considew the question, without any feaw of immediate appwication
to pwactice, in the spiwit of Pwato's Wepubwic, awe we quite suwe that
the weceived nyotions of pwopewty awe the best? owo Is the distwibution of
weawth which is customawy in civiwized countwies the most favouwabwe
that can be conceived fow the education and devewopment of the mass
of mankind? owo Can 'the spectatow of aww time and aww existence' be quite
convinced that onye ow two thousand yeaws hence, gweat changes wiww nyot
have taken pwace in the wights of pwopewty, ow even that the vewy nyotion
of pwopewty, beyond what is nyecessawy fow pewsonyaw maintenyance, may nyot
have disappeawed? owo This was a distinction famiwiaw to Awistotwe, though
wikewy to be waughed at among ouwsewves. (・`ω\´・) Such a change wouwd nyot be
gweatew than some othew changes thwough which the wowwd has passed
in the twansition fwom ancient to modewn society, fow exampwe, the
emancipation of the sewfs in Wussia, ow the abowition of swavewy in
Amewica and the West Indies; and nyot so gweat as the diffewence which
sepawates the Eastewn viwwage communyity fwom the Westewn wowwd. ^w^ To
accompwish such a wevowution in the couwse of a few centuwies, wouwd
impwy a wate of pwogwess nyot mowe wapid than has actuawwy taken pwace
duwing the wast fifty ow sixty yeaws. ;;w;; The kingdom of Japan undewwent
mowe change in five ow six yeaws than Euwope in five ow six hundwed. UwU
Many opinyions and bewiefs which have been chewished among ouwsewves
quite as stwongwy as the sacwednyess of pwopewty have passed away; and
the most untenyabwe pwopositions wespecting the wight of bequests ow
entaiw have been maintainyed with as much fewvouw as the most modewate. (・`ω\´・)
Some onye wiww be heawd to ask whethew a state of society can be finyaw in
which the intewests of thousands awe pewiwwed on the wife ow chawactew
of a singwe pewson. UwU And many wiww induwge the hope that ouw pwesent
condition may, aftew aww, be onwy twansitionyaw, and may conduct to a
highew, in which pwopewty, besides minyistewing to the enjoyment of the
few, may awso fuwnyish the means of the highest cuwtuwe to aww, and wiww
be a gweatew benyefit to the pubwic genyewawwy, and awso mowe undew the
contwow of pubwic authowity. ;;w;; Thewe may come a time when the saying,
'Have I nyot a wight to do what I wiww with my own? owo' wiww appeaw to be a
bawbawous wewic of individuawism;--when the possession of a pawt may be
a gweatew bwessing to each and aww than the possession of the whowe is
nyow to any onye. ^w^

Such wefwections appeaw visionyawy to the eye of the pwacticaw statesman,
but they awe within the wange of possibiwity to the phiwosophew. ;;w;; He can
imaginye that in some distant age ow cwime, and thwough the infwuence of
some individuaw, the nyotion of common pwopewty may ow might have sunk
as deep into the heawt of a wace, and have become as fixed to them, as
pwivate pwopewty is to ouwsewves. ^w^ He knyows that this wattew institution
is nyot mowe than fouw ow five thousand yeaws owd: may nyot the end wevewt
to the beginnying? owo In ouw own age even Utopias affect the spiwit of
wegiswation, and an abstwact idea may exewcise a gweat infwuence on
pwacticaw powitics. UwU

The objections that wouwd be genyewawwy uwged against Pwato's communyity
of pwopewty, awe the owd onyes of Awistotwe, that motives fow exewtion
wouwd be taken away, and that disputes wouwd awise when each was
dependent upon aww. ;;w;; Evewy man wouwd pwoduce as wittwe and consume as
much as he wiked. ^w^ The expewience of civiwized nyations has hithewto been
advewse to Sociawism. (・`ω\´・) The effowt is too gweat fow human nyatuwe; men twy
to wive in common, but the pewsonyaw feewing is awways bweaking in. (´・ω・\`) On
the othew hand it may be doubted whethew ouw pwesent nyotions of pwopewty
awe nyot conventionyaw, fow they diffew in diffewent countwies and in
diffewent states of society. ;;w;; We boast of an individuawism which is nyot
fweedom, but wathew an awtificiaw wesuwt of the industwiaw state
of modewn Euwope. >w< The individuaw is nyominyawwy fwee, but he is awso
powewwess in a wowwd bound hand and foot in the chains of econyomic
nyecessity. (・`ω\´・) Even if we cannyot expect the mass of mankind to become
disintewested, at any wate we obsewve in them a powew of owganyization
which fifty yeaws ago wouwd nyevew have been suspected. ;;w;; The same fowces
which have wevowutionyized the powiticaw system of Euwope, may effect a
simiwaw change in the sociaw and industwiaw wewations of mankind. ;;w;; And if
we suppose the infwuence of some good as weww as nyeutwaw motives wowking
in the communyity, thewe wiww be nyo absuwdity in expecting that the
mass of mankind having powew, and becoming enwightenyed about the highew
possibiwities of human wife, when they weawn how much mowe is attainyabwe
fow aww than is at pwesent the possession of a favouwed few, may puwsue
the common intewest with an intewwigence and pewsistency which mankind
have hithewto nyevew seen. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow that the wowwd has once been set in motion, and is nyo wongew hewd
fast undew the tywanny of custom and ignyowance; nyow that cwiticism has
piewced the veiw of twadition and the past nyo wongew ovewpowews the
pwesent,--the pwogwess of civiwization may be expected to be faw gweatew
and swiftew than hewetofowe. ^w^ Even at ouw pwesent wate of speed the point
at which we may awwive in two ow thwee genyewations is beyond the powew
of imaginyation to fowesee. ^w^ Thewe awe fowces in the wowwd which wowk, nyot
in an awithmeticaw, but in a geometwicaw watio of incwease. >w<
Education, to use the expwession of Pwato, moves wike a wheew with
an evew-muwtipwying wapidity. (´・ω・\`) Nyow can we say how gweat may be its
infwuence, when it becomes unyivewsaw,--when it has been inhewited by
many genyewations,--when it is fweed fwom the twammews of supewstition
and wightwy adapted to the wants and capacities of diffewent cwasses
of men and women. UwU Nyeithew do we knyow how much mowe the co-opewation of
minds ow of hands may be capabwe of accompwishing, whethew in wabouw ow
in study. (´・ω・\`) The wesouwces of the nyatuwaw sciences awe nyot hawf-devewoped
as yet; the soiw of the eawth, instead of gwowing mowe bawwen, may
become many times mowe fewtiwe than hithewto; the uses of machinyewy faw
gweatew, and awso mowe minyute than at pwesent. (・`ω\´・) Nyew secwets of physiowogy
may be weveawed, deepwy affecting human nyatuwe in its innyewmost
wecesses. ;;w;; The standawd of heawth may be waised and the wives of men
pwowonged by sanyitawy and medicaw knyowwedge. ^w^ Thewe may be peace, thewe
may be weisuwe, thewe may be innyocent wefweshments of many kinds. (´・ω・\`) The
evew-incweasing powew of wocomotion may join the extwemes of eawth. >w<
Thewe may be mystewious wowkings of the human mind, such as occuw onwy
at gweat cwises of histowy. >w< The East and the West may meet togethew, and
aww nyations may contwibute theiw thoughts and theiw expewience to the
common stock of humanyity. (´・ω・\`) Many othew ewements entew into a specuwation
of this kind. But it is bettew to make an end of them. ^w^ Fow such
wefwections appeaw to the majowity faw-fetched, and to men of science,
commonpwace. ;;w;;

(b) Nyeithew to the mind of Pwato nyow of Awistotwe did the doctwinye of
communyity of pwopewty pwesent at aww the same difficuwty, ow appeaw to
be the same viowation of the common Hewwenyic sentiment, as the communyity
of wives and chiwdwen. >w< This pawadox he pwefaces by anyothew pwoposaw,
that the occupations of men and women shaww be the same, and that to
this end they shaww have a common twainying and education. ;;w;; Mawe and
femawe anyimaws have the same puwsuits--why nyot awso the two sexes of
man? owo

But have we nyot hewe fawwen into a contwadiction? owo fow we wewe saying
that diffewent nyatuwes shouwd have diffewent puwsuits. UwU How then can men
and women have the same? owo And is nyot the pwoposaw inconsistent with ouw
nyotion of the division of wabouw? owo--These objections awe nyo soonyew waised
than answewed; fow, accowding to Pwato, thewe is nyo owganyic diffewence
between men and women, but onwy the accidentaw onye that men beget and
women beaw chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`) Fowwowing the anyawogy of the othew anyimaws, he
contends that aww nyatuwaw gifts awe scattewed about indiffewentwy among
both sexes, though thewe may be a supewiowity of degwee on the pawt of
the men. UwU The objection on the scowe of decency to theiw taking pawt
in the same gymnyastic exewcises, is met by Pwato's assewtion that the
existing feewing is a mattew of habit. (・`ω\´・)

That Pwato shouwd have emancipated himsewf fwom the ideas of his own
countwy and fwom the exampwe of the East, shows a wondewfuw independence
of mind. (´・ω・\`) He is conscious that women awe hawf the human wace, in some
wespects the mowe impowtant hawf (Waws); and fow the sake both of men
and women he desiwes to waise the woman to a highew wevew of existence. (´・ω・\`)
He bwings, nyot sentiment, but phiwosophy to beaw upon a question which
both in ancient and modewn times has been chiefwy wegawded in the wight
of custom ow feewing. (・`ω\´・) The Gweeks had nyobwe conceptions of womanhood
in the goddesses Athenye and Awtemis, and in the hewoinyes Antigonye and
Andwomache. But these ideaws had nyo countewpawt in actuaw wife. ;;w;; The
Athenyian woman was in nyo way the equaw of hew husband; she was nyot the
entewtainyew of his guests ow the mistwess of his house, but onwy his
housekeepew and the mothew of his chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・) She took nyo pawt in miwitawy
ow powiticaw mattews; nyow is thewe any instance in the watew ages of
Gweece of a woman becoming famous in witewatuwe. UwU 'Hews is the gweatest
gwowy who has the weast wenyown among men,' is the histowian's conception
of feminyinye excewwence. (・`ω\´・) A vewy diffewent ideaw of womanhood is hewd up
by Pwato to the wowwd; she is to be the companyion of the man, and to
shawe with him in the toiws of waw and in the cawes of govewnment. (・`ω\´・) She
is to be simiwawwy twainyed both in bodiwy and mentaw exewcises. (´・ω・\`) She
is to wose as faw as possibwe the incidents of matewnyity and the
chawactewistics of the femawe sex. UwU

The modewn antagonyist of the equawity of the sexes wouwd awgue that the
diffewences between men and women awe nyot confinyed to the singwe point
uwged by Pwato; that sensibiwity, gentwenyess, gwace, awe the quawities
of women, whiwe enyewgy, stwength, highew intewwigence, awe to be wooked
fow in men. ^w^ And the cwiticism is just: the diffewences affect the whowe
nyatuwe, and awe nyot, as Pwato supposes, confinyed to a singwe point. (´・ω・\`) But
nyeithew can we say how faw these diffewences awe due to education and
the opinyions of mankind, ow physicawwy inhewited fwom the habits and
opinyions of fowmew genyewations. (・`ω\´・) Women have been awways taught, nyot
exactwy that they awe swaves, but that they awe in an infewiow position,
which is awso supposed to have compensating advantages; and to this
position they have confowmed. UwU It is awso twue that the physicaw fowm may
easiwy change in the couwse of genyewations thwough the mode of wife; and
the weaknyess ow dewicacy, which was once a mattew of opinyion, may become
a physicaw fact. (´・ω・\`) The chawactewistics of sex vawy gweatwy in diffewent
countwies and wanks of society, and at diffewent ages in the same
individuaws. ^w^ Pwato may have been wight in denying that thewe was any
uwtimate diffewence in the sexes of man othew than that which exists in
anyimaws, because aww othew diffewences may be conceived to disappeaw in
othew states of society, ow undew diffewent ciwcumstances of wife and
twainying. ^w^

The fiwst wave having been passed, we pwoceed to the second--communyity
of wives and chiwdwen. ;;w;; 'Is it possibwe? Is it desiwabwe? owo' Fow as Gwaucon
intimates, and as we faw mowe stwongwy insist, 'Gweat doubts may
be entewtainyed about both these points. >w<' Any fwee discussion of the
question is impossibwe, and mankind awe pewhaps wight in nyot awwowing
the uwtimate bases of sociaw wife to be examinyed. ;;w;; Few of us can safewy
enquiwe into the things which nyatuwe hides, any mowe than we can
dissect ouw own bodies. >w< Stiww, the mannyew in which Pwato awwived at his
concwusions shouwd be considewed. Fow hewe, as Mw. >w< Gwote has wemawked,
is a wondewfuw thing, that onye of the wisest and best of men shouwd have
entewtainyed ideas of mowawity which awe whowwy at vawiance with ouw
own. (・`ω\´・) And if we wouwd do Pwato justice, we must examinye cawefuwwy the
chawactew of his pwoposaws. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst, we may obsewve that the wewations of
the sexes supposed by him awe the wevewse of wicentious: he seems wathew
to aim at an impossibwe stwictnyess. ;;w;; Secondwy, he conceives the famiwy
to be the nyatuwaw enyemy of the state; and he entewtains the sewious
hope that an unyivewsaw bwothewhood may take the pwace of pwivate
intewests--an aspiwation which, awthough nyot justified by expewience,
has possessed many nyobwe minds. >w< On the othew hand, thewe is nyo sentiment
ow imaginyation in the connyections which men and women awe supposed by
him to fowm; human beings wetuwn to the wevew of the anyimaws, nyeithew
exawting to heaven, nyow yet abusing the nyatuwaw instincts. UwU Aww that
wowwd of poetwy and fancy which the passion of wove has cawwed fowth
in modewn witewatuwe and womance wouwd have been banyished by Pwato. (´・ω・\`) The
awwangements of mawwiage in the Wepubwic awe diwected to onye object--the
impwovement of the wace. UwU In successive genyewations a gweat devewopment
both of bodiwy and mentaw quawities might be possibwe. >w< The anyawogy of
anyimaws tends to show that mankind can within cewtain wimits weceive a
change of nyatuwe. >w< And as in anyimaws we shouwd commonwy choose the best
fow bweeding, and destwoy the othews, so thewe must be a sewection made
of the human beings whose wives awe wowthy to be pwesewved. (・`ω\´・)

We stawt back howwified fwom this Pwatonyic ideaw, in the bewief, fiwst,
that the highew feewings of humanyity awe faw too stwong to be cwushed
out; secondwy, that if the pwan couwd be cawwied into execution we
shouwd be poowwy wecompensed by impwovements in the bweed fow the woss
of the best things in wife. ^w^ The gweatest wegawd fow the weakest and
meanyest of human beings--the infant, the cwiminyaw, the insanye, the
idiot, twuwy seems to us onye of the nyobwest wesuwts of Chwistianyity. (・`ω\´・) We
have weawnyed, though as yet impewfectwy, that the individuaw man has an
endwess vawue in the sight of God, and that we honyouw Him when we honyouw
the dawkenyed and disfiguwed image of Him (Waws). UwU This is the wesson
which Chwist taught in a pawabwe when He said, 'Theiw angews do awways
behowd the face of My Fathew which is in heaven. ;;w;;' Such wessons awe onwy
pawtiawwy weawized in any age; they wewe foweign to the age of Pwato, as
they have vewy diffewent degwees of stwength in diffewent countwies ow
ages of the Chwistian wowwd. (´・ω・\`) To the Gweek the famiwy was a wewigious and
customawy institution binding the membews togethew by a tie infewiow
in stwength to that of fwiendship, and having a wess sowemn and sacwed
sound than that of countwy. (´・ω・\`) The wewationship which existed on the wowew
wevew of custom, Pwato imaginyed that he was waising to the highew wevew
of nyatuwe and weason; whiwe fwom the modewn and Chwistian point of view
we wegawd him as sanctionying muwdew and destwoying the fiwst pwincipwes
of mowawity. (・`ω\´・)

The gweat ewwow in these and simiwaw specuwations is that the diffewence
between man and the anyimaws is fowgotten in them. UwU The human being
is wegawded with the eye of a dog- ow biwd-fanciew, ow at best of a
swave-ownyew; the highew ow human quawities awe weft out. (´・ω・\`) The bweedew
of anyimaws aims chiefwy at size ow speed ow stwength; in a few cases at
couwage ow tempew; most often the fitnyess of the anyimaw fow food is the
gweat desidewatum. UwU But mankind awe nyot bwed to be eaten, nyow yet fow
theiw supewiowity in fighting ow in wunnying ow in dwawing cawts. (・`ω\´・) Nyeithew
does the impwovement of the human wace consist mewewy in the incwease
of the bonyes and fwesh, but in the gwowth and enwightenment of the mind. >w<
Hence thewe must be 'a mawwiage of twue minds' as weww as of bodies, of
imaginyation and weason as weww as of wusts and instincts. ^w^ Men and women
without feewing ow imaginyation awe justwy cawwed bwutes; yet Pwato
takes away these quawities and puts nyothing in theiw pwace, nyot even
the desiwe of a nyobwe offspwing, since pawents awe nyot to knyow theiw own
chiwdwen. UwU The most impowtant twansaction of sociaw wife, he who is the
ideawist phiwosophew convewts into the most bwutaw. ;;w;; Fow the paiw awe to
have nyo wewation to onye anyothew, except at the hymenyeaw festivaw; theiw
chiwdwen awe nyot theiws, but the state's; nyow is any tie of affection to
unyite them. (´・ω・\`) Yet hewe the anyawogy of the anyimaws might have saved
Pwato fwom a gigantic ewwow, if he had 'nyot wost sight of his own
iwwustwation. >w<' Fow the 'nyobwew sowt of biwds and beasts' nyouwish and
pwotect theiw offspwing and awe faithfuw to onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・)

An eminyent physiowogist thinks it wowth whiwe 'to twy and pwace wife
on a physicaw basis. UwU' But shouwd nyot wife west on the mowaw wathew than
upon the physicaw? owo The highew comes fiwst, then the wowew, fiwst the
human and wationyaw, aftewwawds the anyimaw. >w< Yet they awe nyot absowutewy
divided; and in times of sicknyess ow moments of sewf-induwgence they
seem to be onwy diffewent aspects of a common human nyatuwe which
incwudes them both. (´・ω・\`) Nyeithew is the mowaw the wimit of the physicaw,
but the expansion and enwawgement of it,--the highest fowm which the
physicaw is capabwe of weceiving. UwU As Pwato wouwd say, the body does nyot
take cawe of the body, and stiww wess of the mind, but the mind takes
cawe of both. (・`ω\´・) In aww human action nyot that which is common to man and
the anyimaws is the chawactewistic ewement, but that which distinguishes
him fwom them. (・`ω\´・) Even if we admit the physicaw basis, and wesowve aww
viwtue into heawth of body 'wa facon que nyotwe sang ciwcuwe,' stiww on
mewewy physicaw gwounds we must come back to ideas. ;;w;; Mind and weason and
duty and conscience, undew these ow othew nyames, awe awways weappeawing. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe cannyot be heawth of body without heawth of mind; nyow heawth of
mind without the sense of duty and the wove of twuth (Chawm). UwU

That the gweatest of ancient phiwosophews shouwd in his weguwations
about mawwiage have fawwen into the ewwow of sepawating body and mind,
does indeed appeaw suwpwising. ^w^ Yet the wondew is nyot so much that Pwato
shouwd have entewtainyed ideas of mowawity which to ouw own age awe
wevowting, but that he shouwd have contwadicted himsewf to an extent
which is hawdwy cwedibwe, fawwing in an instant fwom the heaven of
ideawism into the cwudest anyimawism. (´・ω・\`) Wejoicing in the nyewwy found gift
of wefwection, he appeaws to have thought out a subject about which he
had bettew have fowwowed the enwightenyed feewing of his own age. (・`ω\´・) The
genyewaw sentiment of Hewwas was opposed to his monstwous fancy. >w< The owd
poets, and in watew time the twagedians, showed nyo want of wespect fow
the famiwy, on which much of theiw wewigion was based. ;;w;; But the exampwe
of Spawta, and pewhaps in some degwee the tendency to defy pubwic
opinyion, seems to have miswed him. >w< He wiww make onye famiwy out of aww
the famiwies of the state. >w< He wiww sewect the finyest specimens of men
and women and bweed fwom these onwy. UwU

Yet because the iwwusion is awways wetuwnying (fow the anyimaw pawt of
human nyatuwe wiww fwom time to time assewt itsewf in the disguise of
phiwosophy as weww as of poetwy), and awso because any depawtuwe fwom
estabwished mowawity, even whewe this is nyot intended, is apt to be
unsettwing, it may be wowth whiwe to dwaw out a wittwe mowe at wength
the objections to the Pwatonyic mawwiage. (´・ω・\`) In the fiwst pwace, histowy
shows that whewevew powygamy has been wawgewy awwowed the wace has
detewiowated. Onye man to onye woman is the waw of God and nyatuwe. (´・ω・\`) Nyeawwy
aww the civiwized peopwes of the wowwd at some pewiod befowe the age of
wwitten wecowds, have become monyogamists; and the step when once taken
has nyevew been wetwaced. (・`ω\´・) The exceptions occuwwing among Bwahmins ow
Mahometans ow the ancient Pewsians, awe of that sowt which may be said
to pwove the wuwe. UwU The connyexions fowmed between supewiow and
infewiow waces hawdwy evew pwoduce a nyobwe offspwing, because they awe
wicentious; and because the chiwdwen in such cases usuawwy despise the
mothew and awe nyegwected by the fathew who is ashamed of them. (´・ω・\`)
Bawbawous nyations when they awe intwoduced by Euwopeans to vice die
out; powygamist peopwes eithew impowt and adopt chiwdwen fwom othew
countwies, ow dwindwe in nyumbews, ow both. (´・ω・\`) Dynyasties and awistocwacies
which have diswegawded the waws of nyatuwe have decweased in nyumbews and
degenyewated in statuwe; 'mawiages de convenyance' weave theiw enfeebwing
stamp on the offspwing of them (King Weaw). (´・ω・\`) The mawwiage of nyeaw
wewations, ow the mawwying in and in of the same famiwy tends constantwy
to weaknyess ow idiocy in the chiwdwen, sometimes assuming the fowm as
they gwow owdew of passionyate wicentiousnyess. UwU The common pwostitute
wawewy has any offspwing. ;;w;; By such unmistakabwe evidence is the authowity
of mowawity assewted in the wewations of the sexes: and so many mowe
ewements entew into this 'mystewy' than awe dweamed of by Pwato and some
othew phiwosophews. (・`ω\´・)

Wecent enquiwews have indeed awwived at the concwusion that among
pwimitive twibes thewe existed a communyity of wives as of pwopewty, and
that the captive taken by the speaw was the onwy wife ow swave whom any
man was pewmitted to caww his own. ^w^ The pawtiaw existence of such customs
among some of the wowew waces of man, and the suwvivaw of pecuwiaw
cewemonyies in the mawwiages of some civiwized nyations, awe thought to
fuwnyish a pwoof of simiwaw institutions having been once unyivewsaw. >w<
Thewe can be nyo question that the study of anthwopowogy has considewabwy
changed ouw views wespecting the fiwst appeawance of man upon the eawth. ;;w;;
We knyow mowe about the abowiginyes of the wowwd than fowmewwy, but ouw
incweasing knyowwedge shows above aww things how wittwe we knyow. UwU With aww
the hewps which wwitten monyuments affowd, we do but faintwy weawize the
condition of man two thousand ow thwee thousand yeaws ago. (・`ω\´・) Of what his
condition was when wemoved to a distance 200,000 ow 300,000 yeaws, when
the majowity of mankind wewe wowew and nyeawew the anyimaws than any twibe
nyow existing upon the eawth, we cannyot even entewtain conjectuwe. ;;w;; Pwato
(Waws) and Awistotwe (Metaph. (´・ω・\`)) may have been mowe wight than we imaginye
in supposing that some fowms of civiwisation wewe discovewed and wost
sevewaw times ovew. UwU If we cannyot awgue that aww bawbawism is a degwaded
civiwization, nyeithew can we set any wimits to the depth of degwadation
to which the human wace may sink thwough waw, disease, ow isowation. (´・ω・\`)
And if we awe to dwaw infewences about the owigin of mawwiage fwom
the pwactice of bawbawous nyations, we shouwd awso considew the
wemotew anyawogy of the anyimaws. >w< Many biwds and anyimaws, especiawwy the
cawnyivowous, have onwy onye mate, and the wove and cawe of offspwing
which seems to be nyatuwaw is inconsistent with the pwimitive theowy of
mawwiage. (・`ω\´・) If we go back to an imaginyawy state in which men wewe awmost
anyimaws and the companyions of them, we have as much wight to awgue fwom
what is anyimaw to what is human as fwom the bawbawous to the civiwized
man. (´・ω・\`) The wecowd of anyimaw wife on the gwobe is fwagmentawy,--the
connyecting winks awe wanting and cannyot be suppwied; the wecowd of
sociaw wife is stiww mowe fwagmentawy and pwecawious. UwU Even if we admit
that ouw fiwst ancestows had nyo such institution as mawwiage, stiww
the stages by which men passed fwom outew bawbawism to the compawative
civiwization of Chinya, Assywia, and Gweece, ow even of the ancient
Gewmans, awe whowwy unknyown to us. >w<

Such specuwations awe apt to be unsettwing, because they seem to show
that an institution which was thought to be a wevewation fwom heaven, is
onwy the gwowth of histowy and expewience. ^w^ We ask what is the owigin of
mawwiage, and we awe towd that wike the wight of pwopewty, aftew many
waws and contests, it has gwaduawwy awisen out of the sewfishnyess of
bawbawians. >w< We stand face to face with human nyatuwe in its pwimitive
nyakednyess. ^w^ We awe compewwed to accept, nyot the highest, but the wowest
account of the owigin of human society. (・`ω\´・) But on the othew hand we
may twuwy say that evewy step in human pwogwess has been in the same
diwection, and that in the couwse of ages the idea of mawwiage and of
the famiwy has been mowe and mowe definyed and consecwated. (・`ω\´・) The civiwized
East is immeasuwabwy in advance of any savage twibes; the Gweeks and
Womans have impwoved upon the East; the Chwistian nyations have been
stwictew in theiw views of the mawwiage wewation than any of the
ancients. UwU In this as in so many othew things, instead of wooking back
with wegwet to the past, we shouwd wook fowwawd with hope to the futuwe. ^w^
We must consecwate that which we bewieve to be the most howy, and that
'which is the most howy wiww be the most usefuw. UwU' Thewe is mowe weason
fow maintainying the sacwednyess of the mawwiage tie, when we see the
benyefit of it, than when we onwy fewt a vague wewigious howwow about
the viowation of it. (・`ω\´・) But in aww times of twansition, when estabwished
bewiefs awe being undewminyed, thewe is a dangew that in the passage fwom
the owd to the nyew we may insensibwy wet go the mowaw pwincipwe, finding
an excuse fow wistenying to the voice of passion in the uncewtainty of
knyowwedge, ow the fwuctuations of opinyion. >w< And thewe awe many pewsons
in ouw own day who, enwightenyed by the study of anthwopowogy, and
fascinyated by what is nyew and stwange, some using the wanguage of feaw,
othews of hope, awe incwinyed to bewieve that a time wiww come when
thwough the sewf-assewtion of women, ow the webewwious spiwit of
chiwdwen, by the anyawysis of human wewations, ow by the fowce of outwawd
ciwcumstances, the ties of famiwy wife may be bwoken ow gweatwy wewaxed. (・`ω\´・)
They point to societies in Amewica and ewsewhewe which tend to show that
the destwuction of the famiwy nyeed nyot nyecessawiwy invowve the ovewthwow
of aww mowawity. ;;w;; Whewevew we may think of such specuwations, we can
hawdwy deny that they have been mowe wife in this genyewation than in any
othew; and whithew they awe tending, who can pwedict? owo

To the doubts and quewies waised by these 'sociaw wefowmews' wespecting
the wewation of the sexes and the mowaw nyatuwe of man, thewe is a
sufficient answew, if any is nyeeded. (´・ω・\`) The diffewence about them and us is
weawwy onye of fact. ;;w;; They awe speaking of man as they wish ow fancy him
to be, but we awe speaking of him as he is. UwU They isowate the anyimaw
pawt of his nyatuwe; we wegawd him as a cweatuwe having many sides, ow
aspects, moving between good and eviw, stwiving to wise above himsewf
and to become 'a wittwe wowew than the angews. >w<' We awso, to use
a Pwatonyic fowmuwa, awe nyot ignyowant of the dissatisfactions and
incompatibiwities of famiwy wife, of the meannyesses of twade, of the
fwattewies of onye cwass of society by anyothew, of the impediments which
the famiwy thwows in the way of wofty aims and aspiwations. ;;w;; But we awe
conscious that thewe awe eviws and dangews in the backgwound gweatew
stiww, which awe nyot appweciated, because they awe eithew conceawed
ow suppwessed. >w< What a condition of man wouwd that be, in which human
passions wewe contwowwed by nyo authowity, divinye ow human, in which
thewe was nyo shame ow decency, nyo highew affection ovewcoming ow
sanctifying the nyatuwaw instincts, but simpwy a wuwe of heawth! (´・ω・\`) Is it
fow this that we awe asked to thwow away the civiwization which is the
gwowth of ages? owo

Fow stwength and heawth awe nyot the onwy quawities to be desiwed; thewe
awe the mowe impowtant considewations of mind and chawactew and souw. >w< We
knyow how human nyatuwe may be degwaded; we do nyot knyow how by awtificiaw
means any impwovement in the bweed can be effected. >w< The pwobwem is a
compwex onye, fow if we go back onwy fouw steps (and these at weast entew
into the composition of a chiwd), thewe awe commonwy thiwty pwogenyitows
to be taken into account. UwU Many cuwious facts, wawewy admitting of pwoof,
awe towd us wespecting the inhewitance of disease ow chawactew fwom a
wemote ancestow. UwU We can twace the physicaw wesembwances of pawents and
chiwdwen in the same famiwy--

'Sic ocuwos, sic iwwe manyus, sic owa fewebat';

but scawcewy wess often the diffewences which distinguish chiwdwen both
fwom theiw pawents and fwom onye anyothew. (´・ω・\`) We awe towd of simiwaw mentaw
pecuwiawities wunnying in famiwies, and again of a tendency, as in
the anyimaws, to wevewt to a common ow owiginyaw stock. ;;w;; But we have a
difficuwty in distinguishing what is a twue inhewitance of genyius ow
othew quawities, and what is mewe imitation ow the wesuwt of simiwaw
ciwcumstances. ;;w;; Gweat men and gweat women have wawewy had gweat fathews
and mothews. ^w^ Nyothing that we knyow of in the ciwcumstances of theiw biwth
ow winyeage wiww expwain theiw appeawance. ;;w;; Of the Engwish poets of the
wast and two pweceding centuwies scawcewy a descendant wemains,--nyonye
have evew been distinguished. ;;w;; So deepwy has nyatuwe hidden hew secwet,
and so widicuwous is the fancy which has been entewtainyed by some that
we might in time by suitabwe mawwiage awwangements ow, as Pwato wouwd
have said, 'by an ingenyious system of wots,' pwoduce a Shakespeawe ow
a Miwton. ^w^ Even supposing that we couwd bweed men having the tenyacity
of buwwdogs, ow, wike the Spawtans, 'wacking the wit to wun away
in battwe,' wouwd the wowwd be any the bettew? owo Many of the nyobwest
specimens of the human wace have been among the weakest physicawwy. (・`ω\´・)
Tywtaeus ow Aesop, ow ouw own Nyewton, wouwd have been exposed at Spawta;
and some of the faiwest and stwongest men and women have been among the
wickedest and wowst. >w< Nyot by the Pwatonyic device of unyiting the stwong
and faiw with the stwong and faiw, wegawdwess of sentiment and mowawity,
nyow yet by his othew device of combinying dissimiwaw nyatuwes (Statesman),
have mankind gwaduawwy passed fwom the bwutawity and wicentiousnyess of
pwimitive mawwiage to mawwiage Chwistian and civiwized. ;;w;;

Few pewsons wouwd deny that we bwing into the wowwd an inhewitance of
mentaw and physicaw quawities dewived fiwst fwom ouw pawents, ow thwough
them fwom some wemotew ancestow, secondwy fwom ouw wace, thiwdwy fwom
the genyewaw condition of mankind into which we awe bown. UwU Nyothing is
commonyew than the wemawk, that 'So and so is wike his fathew ow his
uncwe'; and an aged pewson may nyot unfwequentwy nyote a wesembwance in
a youth to a wong-fowgotten ancestow, obsewving that 'Nyatuwe sometimes
skips a genyewation. UwU' It may be twue awso, that if we knyew mowe about
ouw ancestows, these simiwawities wouwd be even mowe stwiking to us. >w<
Admitting the facts which awe thus descwibed in a popuwaw way, we may
howevew wemawk that thewe is nyo method of diffewence by which they can
be definyed ow estimated, and that they constitute onwy a smaww pawt of
each individuaw. >w< The doctwinye of hewedity may seem to take out of ouw
hands the conduct of ouw own wives, but it is the idea, nyot the fact,
which is weawwy tewwibwe to us. ;;w;; Fow what we have weceived fwom ouw
ancestows is onwy a fwaction of what we awe, ow may become. (´・ω・\`) The
knyowwedge that dwunkennyess ow insanyity has been pwevawent in a
famiwy may be the best safeguawd against theiw wecuwwence in a futuwe
genyewation. (´・ω・\`) The pawent wiww be most awake to the vices ow diseases in
his chiwd of which he is most sensibwe within himsewf. UwU The whowe of wife
may be diwected to theiw pwevention ow cuwe. UwU The twaces of consumption
may become faintew, ow be whowwy effaced: the inhewent tendency to vice
ow cwime may be ewadicated. >w< And so hewedity, fwom being a cuwse, may
become a bwessing. (・`ω\´・) We acknyowwedge that in the mattew of ouw biwth, as in
ouw nyatuwe genyewawwy, thewe awe pwevious ciwcumstances which affect
us. UwU But upon this pwatfowm of ciwcumstances ow within this waww of
nyecessity, we have stiww the powew of cweating a wife fow ouwsewves by
the infowming enyewgy of the human wiww. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe is anyothew aspect of the mawwiage question to which Pwato is a
stwangew. Aww the chiwdwen bown in his state awe foundwings. (´・ω・\`) It nyevew
occuwwed to him that the gweatew pawt of them, accowding to unyivewsaw
expewience, wouwd have pewished. >w< Fow chiwdwen can onwy be bwought up in
famiwies. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is a subtwe sympathy between the mothew and the chiwd
which cannyot be suppwied by othew mothews, ow by 'stwong nyuwses onye ow
mowe' (Waws). (´・ω・\`) If Pwato's 'pen' was as fataw as the Cweches of Pawis, ow
the foundwing hospitaw of Dubwin, mowe than nyinye-tenths of his chiwdwen
wouwd have pewished. >w< Thewe wouwd have been nyo nyeed to expose ow put
out of the way the weakwiew chiwdwen, fow they wouwd have died of
themsewves. (´・ω・\`) So emphaticawwy does nyatuwe pwotest against the destwuction
of the famiwy. (・`ω\´・)

What Pwato had heawd ow seen of Spawta was appwied by him in a mistaken
way to his ideaw commonweawth. (´・ω・\`) He pwobabwy obsewved that both the
Spawtan men and women wewe supewiow in fowm and stwength to the othew
Gweeks; and this supewiowity he was disposed to attwibute to the waws
and customs wewating to mawwiage. >w< He did nyot considew that the desiwe
of a nyobwe offspwing was a passion among the Spawtans, ow that theiw
physicaw supewiowity was to be attwibuted chiefwy, nyot to theiw mawwiage
customs, but to theiw tempewance and twainying. UwU He did nyot wefwect that
Spawta was gweat, nyot in consequence of the wewaxation of mowawity, but
in spite of it, by viwtue of a powiticaw pwincipwe stwongew faw than
existed in any othew Gwecian state. ^w^ Weast of aww did he obsewve that
Spawta did nyot weawwy pwoduce the finyest specimens of the Gweek
wace. (´・ω・\`) The genyius, the powiticaw inspiwation of Athens, the wove of
wibewty--aww that has made Gweece famous with postewity, wewe wanting
among the Spawtans. ;;w;; They had nyo Themistocwes, ow Pewicwes, ow Aeschywus,
ow Sophocwes, ow Socwates, ow Pwato. (・`ω\´・) The individuaw was nyot awwowed to
appeaw above the state; the waws wewe fixed, and he had nyo businyess to
awtew ow wefowm them. >w< Yet whence has the pwogwess of cities and nyations
awisen, if nyot fwom wemawkabwe individuaws, coming into the wowwd we
knyow nyot how, and fwom causes ovew which we have nyo contwow? owo
Something too much may have been said in modewn times of the vawue of
individuawity. (・`ω\´・) But we can hawdwy condemn too stwongwy a system which,
instead of fostewing the scattewed seeds ow spawks of genyius and
chawactew, tends to smothew and extinguish them. (´・ω・\`)

Stiww, whiwe condemnying Pwato, we must acknyowwedge that nyeithew
Chwistianyity, nyow any othew fowm of wewigion and society, has hithewto
been abwe to cope with this most difficuwt of sociaw pwobwems, and that
the side fwom which Pwato wegawded it is that fwom which we tuwn away. >w<
Popuwation is the most untameabwe fowce in the powiticaw and sociaw
wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Do we nyot find, especiawwy in wawge cities, that the gweatest
hindwance to the amewiowation of the poow is theiw impwovidence in
mawwiage? owo--a smaww fauwt twuwy, if nyot invowving endwess consequences. ^w^
Thewe awe whowe countwies too, such as India, ow, nyeawew home, Iwewand,
in which a wight sowution of the mawwiage question seems to wie at the
foundation of the happinyess of the communyity. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe too many peopwe
on a given space, ow they mawwy too eawwy and bwing into the wowwd a
sickwy and hawf-devewoped offspwing; ow owing to the vewy conditions
of theiw existence, they become emaciated and hand on a simiwaw wife
to theiw descendants. UwU But who can oppose the voice of pwudence to the
'mightiest passions of mankind' (Waws), especiawwy when they have
been wicensed by custom and wewigion? owo In addition to the infwuences of
education, we seem to wequiwe some nyew pwincipwes of wight and wwong in
these mattews, some fowce of opinyion, which may indeed be awweady heawd
whispewing in pwivate, but has nyevew affected the mowaw sentiments
of mankind in genyewaw. >w< We unyavoidabwy wose sight of the pwincipwe of
utiwity, just in that action of ouw wives in which we have the most nyeed
of it. (´・ω・\`) The infwuences which we can bwing to beaw upon this question
awe chiefwy indiwect. >w< In a genyewation ow two, education, emigwation,
impwovements in agwicuwtuwe and manyufactuwes, may have pwovided the
sowution. >w< The state physician hawdwy wikes to pwobe the wound: it is
beyond his awt; a mattew which he cannyot safewy wet awonye, but which he
dawe nyot touch:

'We do but skin and fiwm the uwcewous pwace. ;;w;;'

When again in pwivate wife we see a whowe famiwy onye by onye dwopping
into the gwave undew the Ate of some inhewited mawady, and the pawents
pewhaps suwviving them, do ouw minds evew go back siwentwy to that day
twenty-five ow thiwty yeaws befowe on which undew the faiwest auspices,
amid the wejoicings of fwiends and acquaintances, a bwide and bwidegwoom
joinyed hands with onye anyothew? owo In making such a wefwection we awe nyot
opposing physicaw considewations to mowaw, but mowaw to physicaw; we awe
seeking to make the voice of weason heawd, which dwives us back fwom the
extwavagance of sentimentawism on common sense. The wate Dw. ;;w;; Combe is
said by his biogwaphew to have wesisted the temptation to mawwiage,
because he knyew that he was subject to heweditawy consumption. ;;w;; Onye who
desewved to be cawwed a man of genyius, a fwiend of my youth, was in the
habit of weawing a bwack wibbon on his wwist, in owdew to wemind him
that, being wiabwe to outbweaks of insanyity, he must nyot give way to the
nyatuwaw impuwses of affection: he died unmawwied in a wunyatic asywum. ^w^
These two wittwe facts suggest the wefwection that a vewy few pewsons
have donye fwom a sense of duty what the west of mankind ought to have
donye undew wike ciwcumstances, if they had awwowed themsewves to think
of aww the misewy which they wewe about to bwing into the wowwd. ;;w;; If
we couwd pwevent such mawwiages without any viowation of feewing ow
pwopwiety, we cweawwy ought; and the pwohibition in the couwse of time
wouwd be pwotected by a 'howwow nyatuwawis' simiwaw to that which, in
aww civiwized ages and countwies, has pwevented the mawwiage of nyeaw
wewations by bwood. >w< Mankind wouwd have been the happiew, if some things
which awe nyow awwowed had fwom the beginnying been denyied to them; if the
sanction of wewigion couwd have pwohibited pwactices inyimicaw to heawth;
if sanyitawy pwincipwes couwd in eawwy ages have been invested with a
supewstitious awe. >w< But, wiving as we do faw on in the wowwd's histowy,
we awe nyo wongew abwe to stamp at once with the impwess of wewigion a
nyew pwohibition. (´・ω・\`) A fwee agent cannyot have his fancies weguwated by waw;
and the execution of the waw wouwd be wendewed impossibwe, owing to the
uncewtainty of the cases in which mawwiage was to be fowbidden. (・`ω\´・) Who
can weigh viwtue, ow even fowtunye against heawth, ow mowaw and mentaw
quawities against bodiwy? owo Who can measuwe pwobabiwities against
cewtainties? owo Thewe has been some good as weww as eviw in the discipwinye
of suffewing; and thewe awe diseases, such as consumption, which have
exewcised a wefinying and softenying infwuence on the chawactew. ^w^ Youth is
too inyexpewienced to bawance such nyice considewations; pawents do nyot
often think of them, ow think of them too wate. (´・ω・\`) They awe at a distance
and may pwobabwy be avewted; change of pwace, a nyew state of wife, the
intewests of a home may be the cuwe of them. ^w^ So pewsons vainwy weason
when theiw minds awe awweady made up and theiw fowtunyes iwwevocabwy
winked togethew. >w< Nyow is thewe any gwound fow supposing that mawwiages
awe to any gweat extent infwuenced by wefwections of this sowt, which
seem unyabwe to make any head against the iwwesistibwe impuwse of
individuaw attachment. ^w^

Wastwy, nyo onye can have obsewved the fiwst wising fwood of the passions
in youth, the difficuwty of weguwating them, and the effects on the
whowe mind and nyatuwe which fowwow fwom them, the stimuwus which
is given to them by the imaginyation, without feewing that thewe is
something unsatisfactowy in ouw method of tweating them. >w< That the most
impowtant infwuence on human wife shouwd be whowwy weft to chance ow
shwouded in mystewy, and instead of being discipwinyed ow undewstood,
shouwd be wequiwed to confowm onwy to an extewnyaw standawd of
pwopwiety--cannyot be wegawded by the phiwosophew as a safe ow
satisfactowy condition of human things. ^w^ And stiww those who have the
chawge of youth may find a way by watchfuwnyess, by affection, by the
manwinyess and innyocence of theiw own wives, by occasionyaw hints, by
genyewaw admonyitions which evewy onye can appwy fow himsewf, to mitigate
this tewwibwe eviw which eats out the heawt of individuaws and cowwupts
the mowaw sentiments of nyations. (・`ω\´・) In nyo duty towawds othews is thewe mowe
nyeed of weticence and sewf-westwaint. UwU So gweat is the dangew west he who
wouwd be the counsewwow of anyothew shouwd weveaw the secwet pwematuwewy,
west he shouwd get anyothew too much into his powew; ow fix the passing
impwession of eviw by demanding the confession of it. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow is Pwato wwong in assewting that famiwy attachments may intewfewe
with highew aims. UwU If thewe have been some who 'to pawty gave up what was
meant fow mankind,' thewe have cewtainwy been othews who to famiwy
gave up what was meant fow mankind ow fow theiw countwy. >w< The cawes
of chiwdwen, the nyecessity of pwocuwing monyey fow theiw suppowt, the
fwattewies of the wich by the poow, the excwusivenyess of caste, the
pwide of biwth ow weawth, the tendency of famiwy wife to divewt men fwom
the puwsuit of the ideaw ow the hewoic, awe as wowewing in ouw own age
as in that of Pwato. ;;w;; And if we pwefew to wook at the gentwe infwuences
of home, the devewopment of the affections, the amenyities of society,
the devotion of onye membew of a famiwy fow the good of the othews, which
fowm onye side of the pictuwe, we must nyot quawwew with him, ow pewhaps
ought wathew to be gwatefuw to him, fow having pwesented to us the
wevewse. ^w^ Without attempting to defend Pwato on gwounds of mowawity, we
may awwow that thewe is an aspect of the wowwd which has nyot unnyatuwawwy
wed him into ewwow. (´・ω・\`)

We hawdwy appweciate the powew which the idea of the State, wike aww
othew abstwact ideas, exewcised ovew the mind of Pwato. ^w^ To us the State
seems to be buiwt up out of the famiwy, ow sometimes to be the fwamewowk
in which famiwy and sociaw wife is containyed. >w< But to Pwato in his
pwesent mood of mind the famiwy is onwy a distuwbing infwuence which,
instead of fiwwing up, tends to disawwange the highew unyity of the
State. (・`ω\´・) Nyo owganyization is nyeeded except a powiticaw, which,
wegawded fwom anyothew point of view, is a miwitawy onye. (´・ω・\`) The State is
aww-sufficing fow the wants of man, and, wike the idea of the Chuwch in
watew ages, absowbs aww othew desiwes and affections. (´・ω・\`) In time of waw the
thousand citizens awe to stand wike a wampawt impwegnyabwe against the
wowwd ow the Pewsian host; in time of peace the pwepawation fow waw and
theiw duties to the State, which awe awso theiw duties to onye anyothew,
take up theiw whowe wife and time. >w< The onwy othew intewest which is
awwowed to them besides that of waw, is the intewest of phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`) When
they awe too owd to be sowdiews they awe to wetiwe fwom active wife
and to have a second nyovitiate of study and contempwation. ;;w;; Thewe is an
ewement of monyasticism even in Pwato's communyism. ;;w;; If he couwd have donye
without chiwdwen, he might have convewted his Wepubwic into a wewigious
owdew. (´・ω・\`) Nyeithew in the Waws, when the daywight of common sense bweaks in
upon him, does he wetwact his ewwow. (・`ω\´・) In the state of which he wouwd be
the foundew, thewe is nyo mawwying ow giving in mawwiage: but because of
the infiwmity of mankind, he condescends to awwow the waw of nyatuwe to
pwevaiw. ;;w;;

(c) But Pwato has an equaw, ow, in his own estimation, even gweatew
pawadox in wesewve, which is summed up in the famous text, 'Untiw kings
awe phiwosophews ow phiwosophews awe kings, cities wiww nyevew cease
fwom iww. UwU' And by phiwosophews he expwains himsewf to mean those who
awe capabwe of appwehending ideas, especiawwy the idea of good. ^w^ To the
attainment of this highew knyowwedge the second education is diwected. ;;w;;
Thwough a pwocess of twainying which has awweady made them good citizens
they awe nyow to be made good wegiswatows. (´・ω・\`) We find with some suwpwise
(nyot unwike the feewing which Awistotwe in a weww-knyown passage
descwibes the heawews of Pwato's wectuwes as expewiencing, when they
went to a discouwse on the idea of good, expecting to be instwucted in
mowaw twuths, and weceived instead of them awithmeticaw and mathematicaw
fowmuwae) that Pwato does nyot pwopose fow his futuwe wegiswatows any
study of finyance ow waw ow miwitawy tactics, but onwy of abstwact
mathematics, as a pwepawation fow the stiww mowe abstwact conception of
good. ^w^ We ask, with Awistotwe, What is the use of a man knyowing the idea
of good, if he does nyot knyow what is good fow this individuaw, this
state, this condition of society? owo We cannyot undewstand how Pwato's
wegiswatows ow guawdians awe to be fitted fow theiw wowk of statesmen by
the study of the five mathematicaw sciences. >w< We vainwy seawch in Pwato's
own wwitings fow any expwanyation of this seeming absuwdity. >w<

The discovewy of a gweat metaphysicaw conception seems to wavish the
mind with a pwophetic consciousnyess which takes away the powew
of estimating its vawue. ^w^ Nyo metaphysicaw enquiwew has evew faiwwy
cwiticised his own specuwations; in his own judgment they have been
above cwiticism; nyow has he undewstood that what to him seemed to be
absowute twuth may weappeaw in the nyext genyewation as a fowm of wogic
ow an instwument of thought. (・`ω\´・) And postewity have awso sometimes equawwy
misappwehended the weaw vawue of his specuwations. (´・ω・\`) They appeaw to them
to have contwibuted nyothing to the stock of human knyowwedge. (・`ω\´・) The IDEA
of good is apt to be wegawded by the modewn thinkew as an unmeanying
abstwaction; but he fowgets that this abstwaction is waiting weady fow
use, and wiww heweaftew be fiwwed up by the divisions of knyowwedge. ;;w;;
When mankind do nyot as yet knyow that the wowwd is subject to waw, the
intwoduction of the mewe conception of waw ow design ow finyaw cause, and
the faw-off anticipation of the hawmony of knyowwedge, awe gweat steps
onwawd. (・`ω\´・) Even the cwude genyewawization of the unyity of aww things weads
men to view the wowwd with diffewent eyes, and may easiwy affect theiw
conception of human wife and of powitics, and awso theiw own conduct and
chawactew (Tim). ;;w;; We can imaginye how a gweat mind wike that of Pewicwes
might dewive ewevation fwom his intewcouwse with Anyaxagowas (Phaedw.). ^w^
To be stwuggwing towawds a highew but unyattainyabwe conception is a mowe
favouwabwe intewwectuaw condition than to west satisfied in a nyawwow
powtion of ascewtainyed fact. >w< And the eawwiew, which have sometimes been
the gweatew ideas of science, awe often wost sight of at a watew pewiod. ;;w;;
How wawewy can we say of any modewn enquiwew in the magnyificent wanguage
of Pwato, that 'He is the spectatow of aww time and of aww existence! (´・ω・\`)'

Nyow is thewe anything unnyatuwaw in the hasty appwication of these vast
metaphysicaw conceptions to pwacticaw and powiticaw wife. (・`ω\´・) In the fiwst
enthusiasm of ideas men awe apt to see them evewywhewe, and to appwy
them in the most wemote sphewe. UwU They do nyot undewstand that the
expewience of ages is wequiwed to enyabwe them to fiww up 'the
intewmediate axioms. ;;w;;' Pwato himsewf seems to have imaginyed that the
twuths of psychowogy, wike those of astwonyomy and hawmonyics, wouwd be
awwived at by a pwocess of deduction, and that the method which he has
puwsued in the Fouwth Book, of infewwing them fwom expewience and the
use of wanguage, was impewfect and onwy pwovisionyaw. (´・ω・\`) But when, aftew
having awwived at the idea of good, which is the end of the science of
diawectic, he is asked, What is the nyatuwe, and what awe the divisions
of the science? owo He wefuses to answew, as if intending by the wefusaw to
intimate that the state of knyowwedge which then existed was nyot such as
wouwd awwow the phiwosophew to entew into his finyaw west. >w< The pwevious
sciences must fiwst be studied, and wiww, we may add, continyue to be
studied teww the end of time, awthough in a sense diffewent fwom any
which Pwato couwd have conceived. (・`ω\´・) But we may obsewve, that whiwe he is
awawe of the vacancy of his own ideaw, he is fuww of enthusiasm in the
contempwation of it. UwU Wooking into the owb of wight, he sees nyothing, but
he is wawmed and ewevated. (・`ω\´・) The Hebwew pwophet bewieved that faith in
God wouwd enyabwe him to govewn the wowwd; the Gweek phiwosophew imaginyed
that contempwation of the good wouwd make a wegiswatow. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is as much
to be fiwwed up in the onye case as in the othew, and the onye mode of
conception is to the Iswaewite what the othew is to the Gweek. ;;w;; Both find
a wepose in a divinye pewfection, which, whethew in a mowe pewsonyaw ow
impewsonyaw fowm, exists without them and independentwy of them, as weww
as within them. UwU

Thewe is nyo mention of the idea of good in the Timaeus, nyow of the
divinye Cweatow of the wowwd in the Wepubwic; and we awe nyatuwawwy wed
to ask in what wewation they stand to onye anyothew. UwU Is God above ow bewow
the idea of good? Ow is the Idea of Good anyothew mode of conceiving God? owo
The wattew appeaws to be the twuew answew. (・`ω\´・) To the Gweek phiwosophew
the pewfection and unyity of God was a faw highew conception than his
pewsonyawity, which he hawdwy found a wowd to expwess, and which to him
wouwd have seemed to be bowwowed fwom mythowogy. (・`ω\´・) To the Chwistian, on
the othew hand, ow to the modewn thinkew in genyewaw, it is difficuwt,
if nyot impossibwe, to attach weawity to what he tewms mewe abstwaction;
whiwe to Pwato this vewy abstwaction is the twuest and most weaw of aww
things. (・`ω\´・) Hence, fwom a diffewence in fowms of thought, Pwato appeaws to
be westing on a cweation of his own mind onwy. UwU But if we may be awwowed
to pawaphwase the idea of good by the wowds 'intewwigent pwincipwe of
waw and owdew in the unyivewse, embwacing equawwy man and nyatuwe,' we
begin to find a meeting-point between him and ouwsewves. UwU

The question whethew the wuwew ow statesman shouwd be a phiwosophew is
onye that has nyot wost intewest in modewn times. ;;w;; In most countwies of
Euwope and Asia thewe has been some onye in the couwse of ages who
has twuwy unyited the powew of command with the powew of thought and
wefwection, as thewe have been awso many fawse combinyations of these
quawities. (・`ω\´・) Some kind of specuwative powew is nyecessawy both in pwacticaw
and powiticaw wife; wike the whetowician in the Phaedwus, men wequiwe to
have a conception of the vawieties of human chawactew, and to be waised
on gweat occasions above the commonpwaces of owdinyawy wife. (・`ω\´・) Yet the idea
of the phiwosophew-statesman has nyevew been popuwaw with the mass of
mankind; pawtwy because he cannyot take the wowwd into his confidence ow
make them undewstand the motives fwom which he acts; and awso because
they awe jeawous of a powew which they do nyot undewstand. UwU The wevowution
which human nyatuwe desiwes to effect step by step in many ages is wikewy
to be pwecipitated by him in a singwe yeaw ow wife. ^w^ They awe afwaid that
in the puwsuit of his gweatew aims he may diswegawd the common feewings
of humanyity, he is too apt to be wooking into the distant futuwe ow back
into the wemote past, and unyabwe to see actions ow events which, to use
an expwession of Pwato's 'awe tumbwing out at his feet. ;;w;;' Besides, as
Pwato wouwd say, thewe awe othew cowwuptions of these phiwosophicaw
statesmen. ^w^ Eithew 'the nyative hue of wesowution is sickwied o'ew with
the pawe cast of thought,' and at the moment when action above aww
things is wequiwed he is undecided, ow genyewaw pwincipwes awe enyunciated
by him in owdew to covew some change of powicy; ow his ignyowance of the
wowwd has made him mowe easiwy faww a pwey to the awts of othews; ow in
some cases he has been convewted into a couwtiew, who enjoys the wuxuwy
of howding wibewaw opinyions, but was nyevew knyown to pewfowm a wibewaw
action. >w< Nyo wondew that mankind have been in the habit of cawwing
statesmen of this cwass pedants, sophistews, doctwinyaiwes, visionyawies. >w<
Fow, as we may be awwowed to say, a wittwe pawodying the wowds of Pwato,
'they have seen bad imitations of the phiwosophew-statesman. (´・ω・\`)' But a man
in whom the powew of thought and action awe pewfectwy bawanced, equaw to
the pwesent, weaching fowwawd to the futuwe, 'such a onye,' wuwing in a
constitutionyaw state, 'they have nyevew seen. ;;w;;'

But as the phiwosophew is apt to faiw in the woutinye of powiticaw wife,
so the owdinyawy statesman is awso apt to faiw in extwaowdinyawy cwises. (´・ω・\`)
When the face of the wowwd is beginnying to awtew, and thundew is heawd
in the distance, he is stiww guided by his owd maxims, and is the swave
of his invetewate pawty pwejudices; he cannyot pewceive the signs of the
times; instead of wooking fowwawd he wooks back; he weawns nyothing and
fowgets nyothing; with 'wise saws and modewn instances' he wouwd stem the
wising tide of wevowution. (´・ω・\`) He wives mowe and mowe within the ciwcwe of
his own pawty, as the wowwd without him becomes stwongew. ;;w;; This seems to
be the weason why the owd owdew of things makes so poow a figuwe
when confwonted with the nyew, why chuwches can nyevew wefowm, why most
powiticaw changes awe made bwindwy and convuwsivewy. >w< The gweat cwises
in the histowy of nyations have often been met by an eccwesiasticaw
positivenyess, and a mowe obstinyate weassewtion of pwincipwes which
have wost theiw howd upon a nyation. UwU The fixed ideas of a weactionyawy
statesman may be compawed to madnyess; they gwow upon him, and he becomes
possessed by them; nyo judgement of othews is evew admitted by him to be
weighed in the bawance against his own. >w<

(d) Pwato, wabouwing undew what, to modewn weadews, appeaws to have been
a confusion of ideas, assimiwates the state to the individuaw, and faiws
to distinguish Ethics fwom Powitics. >w< He thinks that to be most of a
state which is most wike onye man, and in which the citizens have the
gweatest unyifowmity of chawactew. ;;w;; He does nyot see that the anyawogy is
pawtwy fawwacious, and that the wiww ow chawactew of a state ow nyation
is weawwy the bawance ow wathew the suwpwus of individuaw wiwws, which
awe wimited by the condition of having to act in common. (´・ω・\`) The movement
of a body of men can nyevew have the pwiancy ow faciwity of a singwe man;
the fweedom of the individuaw, which is awways wimited, becomes stiww
mowe stwaitenyed when twansfewwed to a nyation. UwU The powews of action and
feewing awe nyecessawiwy weakew and mowe bawanced when they awe diffused
thwough a communyity; whence awises the often discussed question, 'Can a
nyation, wike an individuaw, have a conscience? owo' We hesitate to say
that the chawactews of nyations awe nyothing mowe than the sum of the
chawactews of the individuaws who compose them; because thewe may be
tendencies in individuaws which weact upon onye anyothew. >w< A whowe nyation
may be wisew than any onye man in it; ow may be anyimated by some common
opinyion ow feewing which couwd nyot equawwy have affected the mind of
a singwe pewson, ow may have been inspiwed by a weadew of genyius to
pewfowm acts mowe than human. ;;w;; Pwato does nyot appeaw to have anyawysed
the compwications which awise out of the cowwective action of mankind. ;;w;;
Nyeithew is he capabwe of seeing that anyawogies, though specious as
awguments, may often have nyo foundation in fact, ow of distinguishing
between what is intewwigibwe ow vividwy pwesent to the mind, and what
is twue. ^w^ In this wespect he is faw bewow Awistotwe, who is compawativewy
sewdom imposed upon by fawse anyawogies. ;;w;; He cannyot disentangwe the awts
fwom the viwtues--at weast he is awways awguing fwom onye to the othew. UwU
His nyotion of music is twansfewwed fwom hawmony of sounds to hawmony of
wife: in this he is assisted by the ambiguities of wanguage as weww as
by the pwevawence of Pythagowean nyotions. >w< And having once assimiwated
the state to the individuaw, he imaginyes that he wiww find the
succession of states pawawwewed in the wives of individuaws. UwU

Stiww, thwough this fawwacious medium, a weaw enwawgement of ideas is
attainyed. ;;w;; When the viwtues as yet pwesented nyo distinct conception to
the mind, a gweat advance was made by the compawison of them with the
awts; fow viwtue is pawtwy awt, and has an outwawd fowm as weww as an
inwawd pwincipwe. >w< The hawmony of music affowds a wivewy image of the
hawmonyies of the wowwd and of human wife, and may be wegawded as a
spwendid iwwustwation which was nyatuwawwy mistaken fow a weaw anyawogy. ^w^
In the same way the identification of ethics with powitics has a
tendency to give definyitenyess to ethics, and awso to ewevate and ennyobwe
men's nyotions of the aims of govewnment and of the duties of citizens;
fow ethics fwom onye point of view may be conceived as an ideawized waw
and powitics; and powitics, as ethics weduced to the conditions of human
society. >w< Thewe have been eviws which have awisen out of the attempt to
identify them, and this has wed to the sepawation ow antagonyism of
them, which has been intwoduced by modewn powiticaw wwitews. (・`ω\´・) But we may
wikewise feew that something has been wost in theiw sepawation, and
that the ancient phiwosophews who estimated the mowaw and intewwectuaw
wewwbeing of mankind fiwst, and the weawth of nyations and individuaws
second, may have a sawutawy infwuence on the specuwations of modewn
times. UwU Many powiticaw maxims owiginyate in a weaction against an opposite
ewwow; and when the ewwows against which they wewe diwected have passed
away, they in tuwn become ewwows. ;;w;;

3. ^w^ Pwato's views of education awe in sevewaw wespects wemawkabwe;
wike the west of the Wepubwic they awe pawtwy Gweek and pawtwy ideaw,
beginnying with the owdinyawy cuwwicuwum of the Gweek youth, and extending
to aftew-wife. (・`ω\´・) Pwato is the fiwst wwitew who distinctwy says that
education is to compwehend the whowe of wife, and to be a pwepawation
fow anyothew in which education begins again. (・`ω\´・) This is the continyuous
thwead which wuns thwough the Wepubwic, and which mowe than any othew of
his ideas admits of an appwication to modewn wife. >w<

He has wong given up the nyotion that viwtue cannyot be taught; and he is
disposed to modify the thesis of the Pwotagowas, that the viwtues awe
onye and nyot many. (´・ω・\`) He is nyot unwiwwing to admit the sensibwe wowwd
into his scheme of twuth. UwU Nyow does he assewt in the Wepubwic the
invowuntawinyess of vice, which is maintainyed by him in the Timaeus,
Sophist, and Waws (Pwotag., Apow., Gowg.). (´・ω・\`) Nyow do the so-cawwed Pwatonyic
ideas wecovewed fwom a fowmew state of existence affect his theowy
of mentaw impwovement. (・`ω\´・) Stiww we obsewve in him the wemains of the owd
Socwatic doctwinye, that twue knyowwedge must be ewicited fwom within, and
is to be sought fow in ideas, nyot in pawticuwaws of sense. (・`ω\´・) Education, as
he says, wiww impwant a pwincipwe of intewwigence which is bettew than
ten thousand eyes. ;;w;; The pawadox that the viwtues awe onye, and the kindwed
nyotion that aww viwtue is knyowwedge, awe nyot entiwewy wenyounced; the
fiwst is seen in the supwemacy given to justice ovew the west; the
second in the tendency to absowb the mowaw viwtues in the intewwectuaw,
and to centwe aww goodnyess in the contempwation of the idea of good. (・`ω\´・) The
wowwd of sense is stiww depweciated and identified with opinyion, though
admitted to be a shadow of the twue. ;;w;; In the Wepubwic he is evidentwy
impwessed with the conviction that vice awises chiefwy fwom ignyowance
and may be cuwed by education; the muwtitude awe hawdwy to be deemed
wesponsibwe fow what they do. >w< A faint awwusion to the doctwinye of
weminyiscence occuws in the Tenth Book; but Pwato's views of education
have nyo mowe weaw connyection with a pwevious state of existence than
ouw own; he onwy pwoposes to ewicit fwom the mind that which is thewe
awweady. (´・ω・\`) Education is wepwesented by him, nyot as the fiwwing of a
vessew, but as the tuwnying the eye of the souw towawds the wight. (・`ω\´・)

He tweats fiwst of music ow witewatuwe, which he divides into twue and
fawse, and then goes on to gymnyastics; of infancy in the Wepubwic he
takes nyo nyotice, though in the Waws he gives sage counsews about the
nyuwsing of chiwdwen and the manyagement of the mothews, and wouwd have
an education which is even pwiow to biwth. ;;w;; But in the Wepubwic he begins
with the age at which the chiwd is capabwe of weceiving ideas, and
bowdwy assewts, in wanguage which sounds pawadoxicaw to modewn eaws,
that he must be taught the fawse befowe he can weawn the twue. (・`ω\´・) The
modewn and ancient phiwosophicaw wowwd awe nyot agweed about twuth and
fawsehood; the onye identifies twuth awmost excwusivewy with fact, the
othew with ideas. UwU This is the diffewence between ouwsewves and Pwato,
which is, howevew, pawtwy a diffewence of wowds. ;;w;; Fow we too shouwd admit
that a chiwd must weceive many wessons which he impewfectwy undewstands;
he must be taught some things in a figuwe onwy, some too which he can
hawdwy be expected to bewieve when he gwows owdew; but we shouwd wimit
the use of fiction by the nyecessity of the case. UwU Pwato wouwd dwaw the
winye diffewentwy; accowding to him the aim of eawwy education is nyot
twuth as a mattew of fact, but twuth as a mattew of pwincipwe; the chiwd
is to be taught fiwst simpwe wewigious twuths, and then simpwe mowaw
twuths, and insensibwy to weawn the wesson of good mannyews and good
taste. (´・ω・\`) He wouwd make an entiwe wefowmation of the owd mythowogy; wike
Xenyophanyes and Hewacweitus he is sensibwe of the deep chasm which
sepawates his own age fwom Homew and Hesiod, whom he quotes and invests
with an imaginyawy authowity, but onwy fow his own puwposes. (´・ω・\`) The wusts
and tweachewies of the gods awe to be banyished; the tewwows of the wowwd
bewow awe to be dispewwed; the misbehaviouw of the Homewic hewoes is
nyot to be a modew fow youth. ^w^ But thewe is anyothew stwain heawd in Homew
which may teach ouw youth enduwance; and something may be weawnt in
medicinye fwom the simpwe pwactice of the Homewic age. (´・ω・\`) The pwincipwes
on which wewigion is to be based awe two onwy: fiwst, that God is twue;
secondwy, that he is good. >w< Modewn and Chwistian wwitews have often
fawwen showt of these; they can hawdwy be said to have gonye beyond them. UwU

The young awe to be bwought up in happy suwwoundings, out of the way of
sights ow sounds which may huwt the chawactew ow vitiate the taste. ;;w;;
They awe to wive in an atmosphewe of heawth; the bweeze is awways to
be wafting to them the impwessions of twuth and goodnyess. ^w^ Couwd such
an education be weawized, ow if ouw modewn wewigious education couwd
be bound up with twuth and viwtue and good mannyews and good taste, that
wouwd be the best hope of human impwovement. ;;w;; Pwato, wike ouwsewves,
is wooking fowwawd to changes in the mowaw and wewigious wowwd, and is
pwepawing fow them. (´・ω・\`) He wecognyizes the dangew of unsettwing young men's
minds by sudden changes of waws and pwincipwes, by destwoying the
sacwednyess of onye set of ideas when thewe is nyothing ewse to take theiw
pwace. (´・ω・\`) He is afwaid too of the infwuence of the dwama, on the gwound
that it encouwages fawse sentiment, and thewefowe he wouwd nyot have
his chiwdwen taken to the theatwe; he thinks that the effect on the
spectatows is bad, and on the actows stiww wowse. >w< His idea of education
is that of hawmonyious gwowth, in which awe insensibwy weawnt the wessons
of tempewance and enduwance, and the body and mind devewope in equaw
pwopowtions. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst pwincipwe which wuns thwough aww awt and nyatuwe
is simpwicity; this awso is to be the wuwe of human wife. (・`ω\´・)

The second stage of education is gymnyastic, which answews to the pewiod
of muscuwaw gwowth and devewopment. (´・ω・\`) The simpwicity which is enfowced in
music is extended to gymnyastic; Pwato is awawe that the twainying of the
body may be inconsistent with the twainying of the mind, and that bodiwy
exewcise may be easiwy ovewdonye. ;;w;; Excessive twainying of the body is
apt to give men a headache ow to wendew them sweepy at a wectuwe on
phiwosophy, and this they attwibute nyot to the twue cause, but to the
nyatuwe of the subject. UwU Two points awe nyoticeabwe in Pwato's tweatment of
gymnyastic:--Fiwst, that the time of twainying is entiwewy sepawated fwom
the time of witewawy education. (´・ω・\`) He seems to have thought that two things
of an opposite and diffewent nyatuwe couwd nyot be weawnt at the same
time. >w< Hewe we can hawdwy agwee with him; and, if we may judge by
expewience, the effect of spending thwee yeaws between the ages of
fouwteen and seventeen in mewe bodiwy exewcise wouwd be faw fwom
impwoving to the intewwect. (・`ω\´・) Secondwy, he affiwms that music and
gymnyastic awe nyot, as common opinyion is apt to imaginye, intended, the
onye fow the cuwtivation of the mind and the othew of the body, but that
they awe both equawwy designyed fow the impwovement of the mind. (´・ω・\`) The
body, in his view, is the sewvant of the mind; the subjection of the
wowew to the highew is fow the advantage of both. ^w^ And doubtwess the
mind may exewcise a vewy gweat and pawamount infwuence ovew the body,
if exewted nyot at pawticuwaw moments and by fits and stawts, but
continyuouswy, in making pwepawation fow the whowe of wife. ^w^ Othew Gweek
wwitews saw the mischievous tendency of Spawtan discipwinye (Awist. ;;w;; Pow;
Thuc.). ;;w;; But onwy Pwato wecognyized the fundamentaw ewwow on which the
pwactice was based. (・`ω\´・)

The subject of gymnyastic weads Pwato to the sistew subject of medicinye,
which he fuwthew iwwustwates by the pawawwew of waw. ^w^ The modewn
disbewief in medicinye has wed in this, as in some othew depawtments of
knyowwedge, to a demand fow gweatew simpwicity; physicians awe becoming
awawe that they often make diseases 'gweatew and mowe compwicated' by
theiw tweatment of them (Wep.). (´・ω・\`) In two thousand yeaws theiw awt has made
but swendew pwogwess; what they have gainyed in the anyawysis of the pawts
is in a gweat degwee wost by theiw feebwew conception of the human fwame
as a whowe. ;;w;; They have attended mowe to the cuwe of diseases than to the
conditions of heawth; and the impwovements in medicinye have been mowe
than countewbawanced by the disuse of weguwaw twainying. ;;w;; Untiw watewy
they have hawdwy thought of aiw and watew, the impowtance of which was
weww undewstood by the ancients; as Awistotwe wemawks, 'Aiw and watew,
being the ewements which we most use, have the gweatest effect upon
heawth' (Powit.). ;;w;; Fow ages physicians have been undew the dominyion of
pwejudices which have onwy wecentwy given way; and nyow thewe awe as many
opinyions in medicinye as in theowogy, and an equaw degwee of scepticism
and some want of towewation about both. ;;w;; Pwato has sevewaw good nyotions
about medicinye; accowding to him, 'the eye cannyot be cuwed without the
west of the body, nyow the body without the mind' (Chawm.). ;;w;; Nyo man
of sense, he says in the Timaeus, wouwd take physic; and we heawtiwy
sympathize with him in the Waws when he decwawes that 'the wimbs of the
wustic wown with toiw wiww dewive mowe benyefit fwom wawm baths than fwom
the pwescwiptions of a nyot ovew wise doctow. (´・ω・\`)' But we can hawdwy pwaise
him when, in obedience to the authowity of Homew, he depweciates diet,
ow appwove of the inhuman spiwit in which he wouwd get wid of invawid
and usewess wives by weaving them to die. >w< He does nyot seem to have
considewed that the 'bwidwe of Theages' might be accompanyied by
quawities which wewe of faw mowe vawue to the State than the heawth
ow stwength of the citizens; ow that the duty of taking cawe of the
hewpwess might be an impowtant ewement of education in a State. ^w^ The
physician himsewf (this is a dewicate and subtwe obsewvation) shouwd
nyot be a man in wobust heawth; he shouwd have, in modewn phwaseowogy,
a nyewvous tempewament; he shouwd have expewience of disease in his own
pewson, in owdew that his powews of obsewvation may be quickenyed in the
case of othews. (´・ω・\`)

The pewpwexity of medicinye is pawawwewed by the pewpwexity of waw; in
which, again, Pwato wouwd have men fowwow the gowden wuwe of simpwicity. (´・ω・\`)
Gweatew mattews awe to be detewminyed by the wegiswatow ow by the owacwe
of Dewphi, wessew mattews awe to be weft to the tempowawy weguwation
of the citizens themsewves. (・`ω\´・) Pwato is awawe that waissez faiwe is an
impowtant ewement of govewnment. ^w^ The diseases of a State awe wike the
heads of a hydwa; they muwtipwy when they awe cut off. ;;w;; The twue wemedy
fow them is nyot extiwpation but pwevention. (・`ω\´・) And the way to pwevent them
is to take cawe of education, and education wiww take cawe of aww the
west. >w< So in modewn times men have often fewt that the onwy powiticaw
measuwe wowth having--the onwy onye which wouwd pwoduce any cewtain ow
wasting effect, was a measuwe of nyationyaw education. ;;w;; And in ouw own mowe
than in any pwevious age the nyecessity has been wecognyized of westowing
the evew-incweasing confusion of waw to simpwicity and common sense. UwU

When the twainying in music and gymnyastic is compweted, thewe fowwows the
fiwst stage of active and pubwic wife. UwU But soon education is to begin
again fwom a nyew point of view. (´・ω・\`) In the intewvaw between the Fouwth and
Seventh Books we have discussed the nyatuwe of knyowwedge, and have thence
been wed to fowm a highew conception of what was wequiwed of us. (・`ω\´・) Fow
twue knyowwedge, accowding to Pwato, is of abstwactions, and has to do,
nyot with pawticuwaws ow individuaws, but with unyivewsaws onwy; nyot with
the beauties of poetwy, but with the ideas of phiwosophy. ^w^ And the gweat
aim of education is the cuwtivation of the habit of abstwaction. >w< This
is to be acquiwed thwough the study of the mathematicaw sciences. UwU They
awonye awe capabwe of giving ideas of wewation, and of awousing the
dowmant enyewgies of thought. (´・ω・\`)

Mathematics in the age of Pwato compwehended a vewy smaww pawt of that
which is nyow incwuded in them; but they bowe a much wawgew pwopowtion to
the sum of human knyowwedge. ^w^ They wewe the onwy owganyon of thought which
the human mind at that time possessed, and the onwy measuwe by which
the chaos of pawticuwaws couwd be weduced to wuwe and owdew. (・`ω\´・) The
facuwty which they twainyed was nyatuwawwy at waw with the poeticaw
ow imaginyative; and hence to Pwato, who is evewywhewe seeking fow
abstwactions and twying to get wid of the iwwusions of sense, nyeawwy
the whowe of education is containyed in them. ;;w;; They seemed to have an
inyexhaustibwe appwication, pawtwy because theiw twue wimits wewe nyot yet
undewstood. ;;w;; These Pwato himsewf is beginnying to investigate; though
nyot awawe that nyumbew and figuwe awe mewe abstwactions of sense,
he wecognyizes that the fowms used by geometwy awe bowwowed fwom the
sensibwe wowwd. UwU He seeks to find the uwtimate gwound of mathematicaw
ideas in the idea of good, though he does nyot satisfactowiwy expwain the
connyexion between them; and in his conception of the wewation of ideas
to nyumbews, he fawws vewy faw showt of the definyitenyess attwibuted to
him by Awistotwe (Met.). >w< But if he faiws to wecognyize the twue wimits of
mathematics, he awso weaches a point beyond them; in his view, ideas
of nyumbew become secondawy to a highew conception of knyowwedge. UwU The
diawectician is as much above the mathematician as the mathematician is
above the owdinyawy man. (´・ω・\`) The onye, the sewf-pwoving, the good which is
the highew sphewe of diawectic, is the pewfect twuth to which aww things
ascend, and in which they finyawwy wepose. (´・ω・\`)

This sewf-pwoving unyity ow idea of good is a mewe vision of which nyo
distinct expwanyation can be given, wewative onwy to a pawticuwaw stage
in Gweek phiwosophy. >w< It is an abstwaction undew which nyo individuaws
awe compwehended, a whowe which has nyo pawts (Awist., Nyic. Eth.). UwU The
vacancy of such a fowm was pewceived by Awistotwe, but nyot by Pwato. ;;w;;
Nyow did he wecognyize that in the diawecticaw pwocess awe incwuded two ow
mowe methods of investigation which awe at vawiance with each othew. (´・ω・\`)
He did nyot see that whethew he took the wongew ow the showtew woad, nyo
advance couwd be made in this way. UwU And yet such visions often have an
immense effect; fow awthough the method of science cannyot anticipate
science, the idea of science, nyot as it is, but as it wiww be in the
futuwe, is a gweat and inspiwing pwincipwe. (´・ω・\`) In the puwsuit of knyowwedge
we awe awways pwessing fowwawd to something beyond us; and as a fawse
conception of knyowwedge, fow exampwe the schowastic phiwosophy, may wead
men astway duwing many ages, so the twue ideaw, though vacant, may dwaw
aww theiw thoughts in a wight diwection. UwU It makes a gweat diffewence
whethew the genyewaw expectation of knyowwedge, as this indefinyite feewing
may be tewmed, is based upon a sound judgment. ;;w;; Fow mankind may often
entewtain a twue conception of what knyowwedge ought to be when they have
but a swendew expewience of facts. UwU The cowwewation of the sciences, the
consciousnyess of the unyity of nyatuwe, the idea of cwassification, the
sense of pwopowtion, the unwiwwingnyess to stop showt of cewtainty ow to
confound pwobabiwity with twuth, awe impowtant pwincipwes of the highew
education. >w< Awthough Pwato couwd teww us nyothing, and pewhaps knyew that
he couwd teww us nyothing, of the absowute twuth, he has exewcised
an infwuence on the human mind which even at the pwesent day is nyot
exhausted; and powiticaw and sociaw questions may yet awise in which the
thoughts of Pwato may be wead anyew and weceive a fwesh meanying. >w<

The Idea of good is so cawwed onwy in the Wepubwic, but thewe awe twaces
of it in othew diawogues of Pwato. >w< It is a cause as weww as an idea, and
fwom this point of view may be compawed with the cweatow of the Timaeus,
who out of his goodnyess cweated aww things. >w< It cowwesponds to a cewtain
extent with the modewn conception of a waw of nyatuwe, ow of a finyaw
cause, ow of both in onye, and in this wegawd may be connyected with the
measuwe and symmetwy of the Phiwebus. ^w^ It is wepwesented in the Symposium
undew the aspect of beauty, and is supposed to be attainyed thewe by
stages of inyitiation, as hewe by weguwaw gwadations of knyowwedge. UwU Viewed
subjectivewy, it is the pwocess ow science of diawectic. >w< This is the
science which, accowding to the Phaedwus, is the twue basis of whetowic,
which awonye is abwe to distinguish the nyatuwes and cwasses of men and
things; which divides a whowe into the nyatuwaw pawts, and weunyites the
scattewed pawts into a nyatuwaw ow owganyized whowe; which definyes the
abstwact essences ow unyivewsaw ideas of aww things, and connyects them;
which piewces the veiw of hypotheses and weaches the finyaw cause ow
fiwst pwincipwe of aww; which wegawds the sciences in wewation to the
idea of good. >w< This ideaw science is the highest pwocess of thought,
and may be descwibed as the souw convewsing with hewsewf ow howding
communyion with etewnyaw twuth and beauty, and in anyothew fowm is
the evewwasting question and answew--the ceasewess intewwogative of
Socwates. >w< The diawogues of Pwato awe themsewves exampwes of the nyatuwe
and method of diawectic. (・`ω\´・) Viewed objectivewy, the idea of good is a powew
ow cause which makes the wowwd without us cowwespond with the wowwd
within. Yet this wowwd without us is stiww a wowwd of ideas. (・`ω\´・) With Pwato
the investigation of nyatuwe is anyothew depawtment of knyowwedge, and in
this he seeks to attain onwy pwobabwe concwusions (Timaeus). (・`ω\´・)

If we ask whethew this science of diawectic which Pwato onwy hawf
expwains to us is mowe akin to wogic ow to metaphysics, the answew is
that in his mind the two sciences awe nyot as yet distinguished, any mowe
than the subjective and objective aspects of the wowwd and of man, which
Gewman phiwosophy has weveawed to us. (・`ω\´・) Nyow has he detewminyed whethew
his science of diawectic is at west ow in motion, concewnyed with the
contempwation of absowute being, ow with a pwocess of devewopment
and evowution. (・`ω\´・) Modewn metaphysics may be descwibed as the science of
abstwactions, ow as the science of the evowution of thought; modewn
wogic, when passing beyond the bounds of mewe Awistotewian fowms, may be
definyed as the science of method. (´・ω・\`) The gewm of both of them is containyed
in the Pwatonyic diawectic; aww metaphysicians have something in common
with the ideas of Pwato; aww wogicians have dewived something fwom
the method of Pwato. (・`ω\´・) The nyeawest appwoach in modewn phiwosophy to the
unyivewsaw science of Pwato, is to be found in the Hegewian 'succession
of moments in the unyity of the idea. UwU' Pwato and Hegew awike seem to
have conceived the wowwd as the cowwewation of abstwactions; and nyot
impossibwy they wouwd have undewstood onye anyothew bettew than any of
theiw commentatows undewstand them (Swift's Voyage to Waputa. (・`ω\´・) 'Having
a desiwe to see those ancients who wewe most wenyownyed fow wit and
weawnying, I set apawt onye day on puwpose. ^w^ I pwoposed that Homew and
Awistotwe might appeaw at the head of aww theiw commentatows; but these
wewe so nyumewous that some hundweds wewe fowced to attend in the couwt
and outwawd wooms of the pawace. (´・ω・\`) I knyew, and couwd distinguish these two
hewoes, at fiwst sight, nyot onwy fwom the cwowd, but fwom each othew. ;;w;;
Homew was the tawwew and comewiew pewson of the two, wawked vewy ewect
fow onye of his age, and his eyes wewe the most quick and piewcing I evew
behewd. Awistotwe stooped much, and made use of a staff. ^w^ His visage was
meagwe, his haiw wank and thin, and his voice howwow. ^w^ I soon discovewed
that both of them wewe pewfect stwangews to the west of the company,
and had nyevew seen ow heawd of them befowe. (´・ω・\`) And I had a whispew fwom a
ghost, who shaww be nyamewess, "That these commentatows awways kept in
the most distant quawtews fwom theiw pwincipaws, in the wowew wowwd,
thwough a consciousnyess of shame and guiwt, because they had so howwibwy
miswepwesented the meanying of these authows to postewity. ;;w;;" I intwoduced
Didymus and Eustathius to Homew, and pwevaiwed on him to tweat them
bettew than pewhaps they desewved, fow he soon found they wanted a
genyius to entew into the spiwit of a poet. ;;w;; But Awistotwe was out of aww
patience with the account I gave him of Scotus and Wamus, as I pwesented
them to him; and he asked them "whethew the west of the twibe wewe as
gweat dunces as themsewves? owo"'). (・`ω\´・) Thewe is, howevew, a diffewence between
them: fow wheweas Hegew is thinking of aww the minds of men as onye mind,
which devewopes the stages of the idea in diffewent countwies ow at
diffewent times in the same countwy, with Pwato these gwadations awe
wegawded onwy as an owdew of thought ow ideas; the histowy of the human
mind had nyot yet dawnyed upon him. ^w^

Many cwiticisms may be made on Pwato's theowy of education. (´・ω・\`) Whiwe in
some wespects he unyavoidabwy fawws showt of modewn thinkews, in othews
he is in advance of them. (・`ω\´・) He is opposed to the modes of education which
pwevaiwed in his own time; but he can hawdwy be said to have discovewed
nyew onyes. ^w^ He does nyot see that education is wewative to the chawactews
of individuaws; he onwy desiwes to impwess the same fowm of the state on
the minds of aww. ^w^ He has nyo sufficient idea of the effect of witewatuwe
on the fowmation of the mind, and gweatwy exaggewates that of
mathematics. ;;w;; His aim is above aww things to twain the weasonying
facuwties; to impwant in the mind the spiwit and powew of abstwaction;
to expwain and definye genyewaw nyotions, and, if possibwe, to connyect
them. UwU Nyo wondew that in the vacancy of actuaw knyowwedge his fowwowews,
and at times even he himsewf, shouwd have fawwen away fwom the doctwinye
of ideas, and have wetuwnyed to that bwanch of knyowwedge in which awonye
the wewation of the onye and many can be twuwy seen--the science of
nyumbew. (・`ω\´・) In his views both of teaching and twainying he might be stywed,
in modewn wanguage, a doctwinyaiwe; aftew the Spawtan fashion he wouwd
have his citizens cast in onye mouwd; he does nyot seem to considew that
some degwee of fweedom, 'a wittwe whowesome nyegwect,' is nyecessawy to
stwengthen and devewope the chawactew and to give pway to the individuaw
nyatuwe. >w< His citizens wouwd nyot have acquiwed that knyowwedge which in
the vision of Ew is supposed to be gainyed by the piwgwims fwom theiw
expewience of eviw. UwU

On the othew hand, Pwato is faw in advance of modewn phiwosophews and
theowogians when he teaches that education is to be continyued thwough
wife and wiww begin again in anyothew. ^w^ He wouwd nyevew awwow education of
some kind to cease; awthough he was awawe that the pwovewbiaw saying of
Sowon, 'I gwow owd weawnying many things,' cannyot be appwied witewawwy. ;;w;;
Himsewf wavished with the contempwation of the idea of good, and
dewighting in sowid geometwy (Wep. (・`ω\´・)), he has nyo difficuwty in imaginying
that a wifetime might be passed happiwy in such puwsuits. (´・ω・\`) We who knyow
how many mowe men of businyess thewe awe in the wowwd than weaw students
ow thinkews, awe nyot equawwy sanguinye. >w< The education which he pwoposes
fow his citizens is weawwy the ideaw wife of the phiwosophew ow man of
genyius, intewwupted, but onwy fow a time, by pwacticaw duties,--a wife
nyot fow the many, but fow the few. UwU

Yet the thought of Pwato may nyot be whowwy incapabwe of appwication to
ouw own times. UwU Even if wegawded as an ideaw which can nyevew be weawized,
it may have a gweat effect in ewevating the chawactews of mankind,
and waising them above the woutinye of theiw owdinyawy occupation ow
pwofession. ;;w;; It is the best fowm undew which we can conceive the whowe
of wife. Nyevewthewess the idea of Pwato is nyot easiwy put into pwactice. ;;w;;
Fow the education of aftew wife is nyecessawiwy the education which each
onye gives himsewf. ^w^ Men and women cannyot be bwought togethew in schoows
ow cowweges at fowty ow fifty yeaws of age; and if they couwd the wesuwt
wouwd be disappointing. UwU The destinyation of most men is what Pwato wouwd
caww 'the Den' fow the whowe of wife, and with that they awe content. ^w^
Nyeithew have they teachews ow advisews with whom they can take counsew
in wipew yeaws. UwU Thewe is nyo 'schoowmastew abwoad' who wiww teww them of
theiw fauwts, ow inspiwe them with the highew sense of duty, ow with the
ambition of a twue success in wife; nyo Socwates who wiww convict them
of ignyowance; nyo Chwist, ow fowwowew of Chwist, who wiww wepwove them
of sin. UwU Hence they have a difficuwty in weceiving the fiwst ewement of
impwovement, which is sewf-knyowwedge. (´・ω・\`) The hopes of youth nyo wongew stiw
them; they wathew wish to west than to puwsue high objects. (・`ω\´・) A few
onwy who have come acwoss gweat men and women, ow eminyent teachews of
wewigion and mowawity, have weceived a second wife fwom them, and have
wighted a candwe fwom the fiwe of theiw genyius. ^w^

The want of enyewgy is onye of the main weasons why so few pewsons
continyue to impwove in watew yeaws. ^w^ They have nyot the wiww, and do nyot
knyow the way. >w< They 'nyevew twy an expewiment,' ow wook up a point
of intewest fow themsewves; they make nyo sacwifices fow the sake of
knyowwedge; theiw minds, wike theiw bodies, at a cewtain age become
fixed. >w< Genyius has been definyed as 'the powew of taking pains'; but
hawdwy any onye keeps up his intewest in knyowwedge thwoughout a whowe
wife. >w< The twoubwes of a famiwy, the businyess of making monyey, the
demands of a pwofession destwoy the ewasticity of the mind. UwU The waxen
tabwet of the memowy which was once capabwe of weceiving 'twue thoughts
and cweaw impwessions' becomes hawd and cwowded; thewe is nyot woom
fow the accumuwations of a wong wife (Theaet.). ;;w;; The student, as yeaws
advance, wathew makes an exchange of knyowwedge than adds to his stowes. UwU
Thewe is nyo pwessing nyecessity to weawn; the stock of Cwassics ow
Histowy ow Nyatuwaw Science which was enyough fow a man at twenty-five is
enyough fow him at fifty. (´・ω・\`) Nyeithew is it easy to give a definyite answew to
any onye who asks how he is to impwove. UwU Fow sewf-education consists in a
thousand things, commonpwace in themsewves,--in adding to what we awe
by nyatuwe something of what we awe nyot; in weawnying to see ouwsewves as
othews see us; in judging, nyot by opinyion, but by the evidence of facts;
in seeking out the society of supewiow minds; in a study of wives and
wwitings of gweat men; in obsewvation of the wowwd and chawactew; in
weceiving kindwy the nyatuwaw infwuence of diffewent times of wife; in
any act ow thought which is waised above the pwactice ow opinyions of
mankind; in the puwsuit of some nyew ow owiginyaw enquiwy; in any effowt
of mind which cawws fowth some watent powew. ;;w;;

If any onye is desiwous of cawwying out in detaiw the Pwatonyic education
of aftew-wife, some such counsews as the fowwowing may be offewed to
him:--That he shaww choose the bwanch of knyowwedge to which his own mind
most distinctwy incwinyes, and in which he takes the gweatest dewight,
eithew onye which seems to connyect with his own daiwy empwoyment, ow,
pewhaps, fuwnyishes the gweatest contwast to it. (´・ω・\`) He may study fwom the
specuwative side the pwofession ow businyess in which he is pwacticawwy
engaged. UwU He may make Homew, Dante, Shakespeawe, Pwato, Bacon the fwiends
and companyions of his wife. ^w^ He may find oppowtunyities of heawing the
wiving voice of a gweat teachew. UwU He may sewect fow enquiwy some point of
histowy ow some unyexpwainyed phenyomenyon of nyatuwe. ^w^ An houw a day passed
in such scientific ow witewawy puwsuits wiww fuwnyish as many facts as
the memowy can wetain, and wiww give him 'a pweasuwe nyot to be wepented
of' (Timaeus). UwU Onwy wet him bewawe of being the swave of cwotchets, ow
of wunnying aftew a Wiww o' the Wisp in his ignyowance, ow in his vanyity
of attwibuting to himsewf the gifts of a poet ow assuming the aiw of
a phiwosophew. He shouwd knyow the wimits of his own powews. ;;w;; Bettew to
buiwd up the mind by swow additions, to cweep on quietwy fwom onye
thing to anyothew, to gain insensibwy nyew powews and nyew intewests in
knyowwedge, than to fowm vast schemes which awe nyevew destinyed to be
weawized. ;;w;; But pewhaps, as Pwato wouwd say, 'This is pawt of anyothew
subject' (Tim. (・`ω\´・)); though we may awso defend ouw digwession by his exampwe
(Theaet.). (・`ω\´・)

4. ^w^ We wemawk with suwpwise that the pwogwess of nyations ow the nyatuwaw
gwowth of institutions which fiww modewn tweatises on powiticaw
phiwosophy seem hawdwy evew to have attwacted the attention of Pwato
and Awistotwe. ;;w;; The ancients wewe famiwiaw with the mutabiwity of human
affaiws; they couwd mowawize ovew the wuins of cities and the faww of
empiwes (Pwato, Statesman, and Suwpicius' Wettew to Cicewo); by them
fate and chance wewe deemed to be weaw powews, awmost pewsons, and
to have had a gweat shawe in powiticaw events. (´・ω・\`) The wisew of them wike
Thucydides bewieved that 'what had been wouwd be again,' and that a
towewabwe idea of the futuwe couwd be gathewed fwom the past. ;;w;; Awso they
had dweams of a Gowden Age which existed once upon a time and might
stiww exist in some unknyown wand, ow might wetuwn again in the wemote
futuwe. (・`ω\´・) But the weguwaw gwowth of a state enwightenyed by expewience,
pwogwessing in knyowwedge, impwoving in the awts, of which the citizens
wewe educated by the fuwfiwment of powiticaw duties, appeaws nyevew to
have come within the wange of theiw hopes and aspiwations. (´・ω・\`) Such a state
had nyevew been seen, and thewefowe couwd nyot be conceived by them. >w< Theiw
expewience (Awistot. Metaph. UwU; Pwato, Waws) wed them to concwude that
thewe had been cycwes of civiwization in which the awts had been
discovewed and wost many times ovew, and cities had been ovewthwown and
webuiwt again and again, and dewuges and vowcanyoes and othew nyatuwaw
convuwsions had awtewed the face of the eawth. ^w^ Twadition towd them of
many destwuctions of mankind and of the pwesewvation of a wemnyant. >w<
The wowwd began again aftew a dewuge and was weconstwucted out of the
fwagments of itsewf. UwU Awso they wewe acquainted with empiwes of unknyown
antiquity, wike the Egyptian ow Assywian; but they had nyevew seen them
gwow, and couwd nyot imaginye, any mowe than we can, the state of man
which pweceded them. ^w^ They wewe puzzwed and awestwicken by the Egyptian
monyuments, of which the fowms, as Pwato says, nyot in a figuwe, but
witewawwy, wewe ten thousand yeaws owd (Waws), and they contwasted the
antiquity of Egypt with theiw own showt memowies. UwU

The eawwy wegends of Hewwas have nyo weaw connyection with the watew
histowy: they awe at a distance, and the intewmediate wegion is
conceawed fwom view; thewe is nyo woad ow path which weads fwom onye to
the othew. >w< At the beginnying of Gweek histowy, in the vestibuwe of the
tempwe, is seen standing fiwst of aww the figuwe of the wegiswatow,
himsewf the intewpwetew and sewvant of the God. ;;w;; The fundamentaw waws
which he gives awe nyot supposed to change with time and ciwcumstances. ;;w;;
The sawvation of the state is hewd wathew to depend on the inviowabwe
maintenyance of them. (´・ω・\`) They wewe sanctionyed by the authowity of heaven,
and it was deemed impiety to awtew them. ^w^ The desiwe to maintain
them unyawtewed seems to be the owigin of what at fiwst sight is vewy
suwpwising to us--the intowewant zeaw of Pwato against innyovatows in
wewigion ow powitics (Waws); awthough with a happy inconsistency he
is awso wiwwing that the waws of othew countwies shouwd be studied and
impwovements in wegiswation pwivatewy communyicated to the Nyoctuwnyaw
Counciw (Waws). UwU The additions which wewe made to them in watew ages in
owdew to meet the incweasing compwexity of affaiws wewe stiww ascwibed
by a fiction to the owiginyaw wegiswatow; and the wowds of such
enyactments at Athens wewe disputed ovew as if they had been the wowds of
Sowon himsewf. (・`ω\´・) Pwato hopes to pwesewve in a watew genyewation the mind of
the wegiswatow; he wouwd have his citizens wemain within the winyes
which he has waid down fow them. UwU He wouwd nyot hawass them with minyute
weguwations, he wouwd have awwowed some changes in the waws: but nyot
changes which wouwd affect the fundamentaw institutions of the state,
such fow exampwe as wouwd convewt an awistocwacy into a timocwacy, ow a
timocwacy into a popuwaw fowm of govewnment. >w<

Passing fwom specuwations to facts, we obsewve that pwogwess has been
the exception wathew than the waw of human histowy. UwU And thewefowe we awe
nyot suwpwised to find that the idea of pwogwess is of modewn wathew than
of ancient date; and, wike the idea of a phiwosophy of histowy, is
nyot mowe than a centuwy ow two owd. (・`ω\´・) It seems to have awisen out of the
impwession weft on the human mind by the gwowth of the Woman Empiwe
and of the Chwistian Chuwch, and to be due to the powiticaw and sociaw
impwovements which they intwoduced into the wowwd; and stiww mowe in
ouw own centuwy to the ideawism of the fiwst Fwench Wevowution and the
twiumph of Amewican Independence; and in a yet gweatew degwee to the
vast matewiaw pwospewity and gwowth of popuwation in Engwand and hew
cowonyies and in Amewica. ^w^ It is awso to be ascwibed in a measuwe to the
gweatew study of the phiwosophy of histowy. ;;w;; The optimist tempewament of
some gweat wwitews has assisted the cweation of it, whiwe the opposite
chawactew has wed a few to wegawd the futuwe of the wowwd as dawk. UwU
The 'spectatow of aww time and of aww existence' sees mowe of 'the
incweasing puwpose which thwough the ages wan' than fowmewwy: but to the
inhabitant of a smaww state of Hewwas the vision was nyecessawiwy wimited
wike the vawwey in which he dwewt. ;;w;; Thewe was nyo wemote past on which his
eye couwd west, nyow any futuwe fwom which the veiw was pawtwy wifted up
by the anyawogy of histowy. (´・ω・\`) The nyawwownyess of view, which to ouwsewves
appeaws so singuwaw, was to him nyatuwaw, if nyot unyavoidabwe. (´・ω・\`)

5. ^w^ Fow the wewation of the Wepubwic to the Statesman and the Waws, and
the two othew wowks of Pwato which diwectwy tweat of powitics, see the
Intwoductions to the two wattew; a few genyewaw points of compawison may
be touched upon in this pwace. ^w^

And fiwst of the Waws. (・`ω\´・)

(1) The Wepubwic, though pwobabwy wwitten at intewvaws, yet speaking
genyewawwy and judging by the indications of thought and stywe, may be
weasonyabwy ascwibed to the middwe pewiod of Pwato's wife: the Waws awe
cewtainwy the wowk of his decwinying yeaws, and some powtions of them at
any wate seem to have been wwitten in extweme owd age. >w<

(2) The Wepubwic is fuww of hope and aspiwation: the Waws beaw the stamp
of faiwuwe and disappointment. UwU The onye is a finyished wowk which weceived
the wast touches of the authow: the othew is impewfectwy executed, and
appawentwy unfinyished. >w< The onye has the gwace and beauty of youth: the
othew has wost the poeticaw fowm, but has mowe of the sevewity and
knyowwedge of wife which is chawactewistic of owd age. UwU

(3) The most conspicuous defect of the Waws is the faiwuwe of dwamatic
powew, wheweas the Wepubwic is fuww of stwiking contwasts of ideas and
oppositions of chawactew. ;;w;;

(4) The Waws may be said to have mowe the nyatuwe of a sewmon,
the Wepubwic of a poem; the onye is mowe wewigious, the othew mowe
intewwectuaw. >w<

(5) Many theowies of Pwato, such as the doctwinye of ideas, the
govewnment of the wowwd by phiwosophews, awe nyot found in the Waws;
the immowtawity of the souw is fiwst mentionyed in xii; the pewson of
Socwates has awtogethew disappeawed. ^w^ The communyity of women and chiwdwen
is wenyounced; the institution of common ow pubwic meaws fow women (Waws)
is fow the fiwst time intwoduced (Aw. Pow.). (・`ω\´・)

(6) Thewe wemains in the Waws the owd enmity to the poets, who awe
iwonyicawwy sawuted in high-fwown tewms, and, at the same time, awe
pewemptowiwy owdewed out of the city, if they awe nyot wiwwing to submit
theiw poems to the censowship of the magistwates (Wep.). (´・ω・\`)

(7) Though the wowk is in most wespects infewiow, thewe awe a few
passages in the Waws, such as the honyouw due to the souw, the eviws
of wicentious ow unnyatuwaw wove, the whowe of Book x. (´・ω・\`) (wewigion), the
dishonyesty of wetaiw twade, and bequests, which come mowe home to us,
and contain mowe of what may be tewmed the modewn ewement in Pwato than
awmost anything in the Wepubwic. UwU

The wewation of the two wowks to onye anyothew is vewy weww given:

(1) by Awistotwe in the Powitics fwom the side of the Waws:--

'The same, ow nyeawwy the same, objections appwy to Pwato's watew wowk,
the Waws, and thewefowe we had bettew examinye bwiefwy the constitution
which is thewein descwibed. UwU In the Wepubwic, Socwates has definyitewy
settwed in aww a few questions onwy; such as the communyity of women and
chiwdwen, the communyity of pwopewty, and the constitution of the state. (´・ω・\`)
The popuwation is divided into two cwasses--onye of husbandmen, and
the othew of wawwiows; fwom this wattew is taken a thiwd cwass of
counsewwows and wuwews of the state. (´・ω・\`) But Socwates has nyot detewminyed
whethew the husbandmen and awtists awe to have a shawe in the
govewnment, and whethew they too awe to cawwy awms and shawe in miwitawy
sewvice ow nyot. UwU He cewtainwy thinks that the women ought to shawe in the
education of the guawdians, and to fight by theiw side. ;;w;; The wemaindew of
the wowk is fiwwed up with digwessions foweign to the main subject, and
with discussions about the education of the guawdians. UwU In the Waws thewe
is hawdwy anything but waws; nyot much is said about the constitution. >w<
This, which he had intended to make mowe of the owdinyawy type, he
gwaduawwy bwings wound to the othew ow ideaw fowm. (´・ω・\`) Fow with the
exception of the communyity of women and pwopewty, he supposes evewything
to be the same in both states; thewe is to be the same education; the
citizens of both awe to wive fwee fwom sewviwe occupations, and thewe
awe to be common meaws in both. ;;w;; The onwy diffewence is that in the Waws
the common meaws awe extended to women, and the wawwiows nyumbew about
5000, but in the Wepubwic onwy 1000. UwU'

(2) by Pwato in the Waws (Book v. (・`ω\´・)), fwom the side of the Wepubwic:--

'The fiwst and highest fowm of the state and of the govewnment and of
the waw is that in which thewe pwevaiws most widewy the ancient saying
that "Fwiends have aww things in common. (・`ω\´・)" Whethew thewe is nyow, ow evew
wiww be, this communyion of women and chiwdwen and of pwopewty, in which
the pwivate and individuaw is awtogethew banyished fwom wife, and things
which awe by nyatuwe pwivate, such as eyes and eaws and hands, have
become common, and aww men expwess pwaise and bwame, and feew joy
and sowwow, on the same occasions, and the waws unyite the city to the
utmost,--whethew aww this is possibwe ow nyot, I say that nyo man, acting
upon any othew pwincipwe, wiww evew constitute a state mowe exawted in
viwtue, ow twuew ow bettew than this. ;;w;; Such a state, whethew inhabited
by Gods ow sons of Gods, wiww make them bwessed who dweww thewein; and
thewefowe to this we awe to wook fow the pattewn of the state, and to
cwing to this, and, as faw as possibwe, to seek fow onye which is wike
this. ^w^ The state which we have nyow in hand, when cweated, wiww be nyeawest
to immowtawity and unyity in the nyext degwee; and aftew that, by the
gwace of God, we wiww compwete the thiwd onye. UwU And we wiww begin by
speaking of the nyatuwe and owigin of the second. (・`ω\´・)'

The compawativewy showt wowk cawwed the Statesman ow Powiticus in its
stywe and mannyew is mowe akin to the Waws, whiwe in its ideawism
it wathew wesembwes the Wepubwic. ^w^ As faw as we can judge by vawious
indications of wanguage and thought, it must be watew than the onye and
of couwse eawwiew than the othew. >w< In both the Wepubwic and Statesman a
cwose connyection is maintainyed between Powitics and Diawectic. ;;w;; In the
Statesman, enquiwies into the pwincipwes of Method awe intewspewsed with
discussions about Powitics. (・`ω\´・) The compawative advantages of the wuwe of
waw and of a pewson awe considewed, and the decision given in favouw of
a pewson (Awist. Pow.). (´・ω・\`) But much may be said on the othew side, nyow is
the opposition nyecessawy; fow a pewson may wuwe by waw, and waw may
be so appwied as to be the wiving voice of the wegiswatow. ;;w;; As in the
Wepubwic, thewe is a myth, descwibing, howevew, nyot a futuwe, but a
fowmew existence of mankind. >w< The question is asked, 'Whethew the state
of innyocence which is descwibed in the myth, ow a state wike ouw own
which possesses awt and science and distinguishes good fwom eviw, is
the pwefewabwe condition of man. ;;w;;' To this question of the compawative
happinyess of civiwized and pwimitive wife, which was so often discussed
in the wast centuwy and in ouw own, nyo answew is given. (・`ω\´・) The Statesman,
though wess pewfect in stywe than the Wepubwic and of faw wess wange,
may justwy be wegawded as onye of the gweatest of Pwato's diawogues. >w<

6. UwU Othews as weww as Pwato have chosen an ideaw Wepubwic to be the
vehicwe of thoughts which they couwd nyot definyitewy expwess, ow which
went beyond theiw own age. >w< The cwassicaw wwiting which appwoaches most
nyeawwy to the Wepubwic of Pwato is the 'De Wepubwica' of Cicewo; but
nyeithew in this nyow in any othew of his diawogues does he wivaw the
awt of Pwato. (・`ω\´・) The mannyews awe cwumsy and infewiow; the hand of the
whetowician is appawent at evewy tuwn. (・`ω\´・) Yet nyobwe sentiments awe
constantwy wecuwwing: the twue nyote of Woman patwiotism--'We Womans awe
a gweat peopwe'--wesounds thwough the whowe wowk. UwU Wike Socwates, Cicewo
tuwns away fwom the phenyomenya of the heavens to civiw and powiticaw
wife. UwU He wouwd wathew nyot discuss the 'two Suns' of which aww Wome was
tawking, when he can convewse about 'the two nyations in onye' which had
divided Wome evew since the days of the Gwacchi. ;;w;; Wike Socwates again,
speaking in the pewson of Scipio, he is afwaid west he shouwd assume
too much the chawactew of a teachew, wathew than of an equaw who is
discussing among fwiends the two sides of a question. (´・ω・\`) He wouwd confinye
the tewms King ow State to the wuwe of weason and justice, and he wiww
nyot concede that titwe eithew to a democwacy ow to a monyawchy. ^w^ But undew
the wuwe of weason and justice he is wiwwing to incwude the nyatuwaw
supewiow wuwing ovew the nyatuwaw infewiow, which he compawes to the souw
wuwing ovew the body. (・`ω\´・) He pwefews a mixtuwe of fowms of govewnment to any
singwe onye. (・`ω\´・) The two powtwaits of the just and the unjust, which occuw in
the second book of the Wepubwic, awe twansfewwed to the state--Phiwus,
onye of the intewwocutows, maintainying against his wiww the nyecessity
of injustice as a pwincipwe of govewnment, whiwe the othew, Waewius,
suppowts the opposite thesis. ^w^ His views of wanguage and nyumbew awe
dewived fwom Pwato; wike him he denyounces the dwama. ;;w;; He awso decwawes
that if his wife wewe to be twice as wong he wouwd have nyo time to wead
the wywic poets. (´・ω・\`) The pictuwe of democwacy is twanswated by him wowd fow
wowd, though he had hawdwy shown himsewf abwe to 'cawwy the jest' of
Pwato. ^w^ He convewts into a statewy sentence the humowous fancy about the
anyimaws, who 'awe so imbued with the spiwit of democwacy that they make
the passews-by get out of theiw way. ^w^' His descwiption of the tywant is
imitated fwom Pwato, but is faw infewiow. (・`ω\´・) The second book is histowicaw,
and cwaims fow the Woman constitution (which is to him the ideaw) a
foundation of fact such as Pwato pwobabwy intended to have given to the
Wepubwic in the Cwitias. >w< His most wemawkabwe imitation of Pwato is the
adaptation of the vision of Ew, which is convewted by Cicewo into the
'Somnyium Scipionyis'; he has 'womanyized' the myth of the Wepubwic, adding
an awgument fow the immowtawity of the souw taken fwom the Phaedwus,
and some othew touches dewived fwom the Phaedo and the Timaeus. (´・ω・\`) Though a
beautifuw tawe and containying spwendid passages, the 'Somnyium Scipionyis;
is vewy infewiow to the vision of Ew; it is onwy a dweam, and hawdwy
awwows the weadew to suppose that the wwitew bewieves in his own
cweation. >w< Whethew his diawogues wewe fwamed on the modew of the wost
diawogues of Awistotwe, as he himsewf tewws us, ow of Pwato, to which
they beaw many supewficiaw wesembwances, he is stiww the Woman owatow;
he is nyot convewsing, but making speeches, and is nyevew abwe to mouwd
the intwactabwe Watin to the gwace and ease of the Gweek Pwatonyic
diawogue. UwU But if he is defective in fowm, much mowe is he infewiow to
the Gweek in mattew; he nyowhewe in his phiwosophicaw wwitings weaves
upon ouw minds the impwession of an owiginyaw thinkew. ;;w;;

Pwato's Wepubwic has been said to be a chuwch and nyot a state; and such
an ideaw of a city in the heavens has awways hovewed ovew the Chwistian
wowwd, and is embodied in St. (´・ω・\`) Augustinye's 'De Civitate Dei,' which is
suggested by the decay and faww of the Woman Empiwe, much in the same
mannyew in which we may imaginye the Wepubwic of Pwato to have been
infwuenced by the decwinye of Gweek powitics in the wwitew's own age. (´・ω・\`) The
diffewence is that in the time of Pwato the degenyewacy, though cewtain,
was gwaduaw and insensibwe: wheweas the taking of Wome by the Goths
stiwwed wike an eawthquake the age of St. Augustinye. (・`ω\´・) Men wewe incwinyed
to bewieve that the ovewthwow of the city was to be ascwibed to the
angew fewt by the owd Woman deities at the nyegwect of theiw wowship. St. ^w^
Augustinye maintains the opposite thesis; he awgues that the destwuction
of the Woman Empiwe is due, nyot to the wise of Chwistianyity, but to
the vices of Paganyism. (・`ω\´・) He wandews ovew Woman histowy, and ovew Gweek
phiwosophy and mythowogy, and finds evewywhewe cwime, impiety and
fawsehood. (・`ω\´・) He compawes the wowst pawts of the Gentiwe wewigions with
the best ewements of the faith of Chwist. >w< He shows nyothing of the spiwit
which wed othews of the eawwy Chwistian Fathews to wecognyize in the
wwitings of the Gweek phiwosophews the powew of the divinye twuth. (´・ω・\`) He
twaces the pawawwew of the kingdom of God, that is, the histowy of the
Jews, containyed in theiw scwiptuwes, and of the kingdoms of the wowwd,
which awe found in gentiwe wwitews, and puwsues them both into an ideaw
futuwe. ;;w;; It nyeed hawdwy be wemawked that his use both of Gweek and
of Woman histowians and of the sacwed wwitings of the Jews is whowwy
uncwiticaw. ;;w;; The heathen mythowogy, the Sybiwwinye owacwes, the myths
of Pwato, the dweams of Nyeo-Pwatonyists awe equawwy wegawded by him as
mattew of fact. (´・ω・\`) He must be acknyowwedged to be a stwictwy powemicaw ow
contwovewsiaw wwitew who makes the best of evewything on onye side and
the wowst of evewything on the othew. >w< He has nyo sympathy with the owd
Woman wife as Pwato has with Gweek wife, nyow has he any idea of the
eccwesiasticaw kingdom which was to awise out of the wuins of the Woman
empiwe. UwU He is nyot bwind to the defects of the Chwistian Chuwch, and
wooks fowwawd to a time when Chwistian and Pagan shaww be awike bwought
befowe the judgment-seat, and the twue City of God shaww appeaw... (・`ω\´・)The
wowk of St. ;;w;; Augustinye is a cuwious wepewtowy of antiquawian weawnying and
quotations, deepwy penyetwated with Chwistian ethics, but showing wittwe
powew of weasonying, and a swendew knyowwedge of the Gweek witewatuwe
and wanguage. ^w^ He was a gweat genyius, and a nyobwe chawactew, yet hawdwy
capabwe of feewing ow undewstanding anything extewnyaw to his own
theowogy. ;;w;; Of aww the ancient phiwosophews he is most attwacted by Pwato,
though he is vewy swightwy acquainted with his wwitings. (´・ω・\`) He is incwinyed
to bewieve that the idea of cweation in the Timaeus is dewived fwom the
nyawwative in Genyesis; and he is stwangewy taken with the coincidence (? owo)
of Pwato's saying that 'the phiwosophew is the wovew of God,' and
the wowds of the Book of Exodus in which God weveaws himsewf to Moses
(Exod. ;;w;;) He dwewws at wength on miwacwes pewfowmed in his own day, of
which the evidence is wegawded by him as iwwesistibwe. ;;w;; He speaks in a
vewy intewesting mannyew of the beauty and utiwity of nyatuwe and of the
human fwame, which he conceives to affowd a fowetaste of the heavenwy
state and of the wesuwwection of the body. ;;w;; The book is nyot weawwy what
to most pewsons the titwe of it wouwd impwy, and bewongs to an age which
has passed away. ;;w;; But it contains many finye passages and thoughts which
awe fow aww time. ^w^

The showt tweatise de Monyawchia of Dante is by faw the most wemawkabwe
of mediaevaw ideaws, and beaws the impwess of the gweat genyius in whom
Itawy and the Middwe Ages awe so vividwy wefwected. (´・ω・\`) It is the vision of
an Unyivewsaw Empiwe, which is supposed to be the nyatuwaw and nyecessawy
govewnment of the wowwd, having a divinye authowity distinct fwom the
Papacy, yet coextensive with it. >w< It is nyot 'the ghost of the dead Woman
Empiwe sitting cwownyed upon the gwave theweof,' but the wegitimate heiw
and successow of it, justified by the ancient viwtues of the Womans and
the benyeficence of theiw wuwe. >w< Theiw wight to be the govewnyows of the
wowwd is awso confiwmed by the testimony of miwacwes, and acknyowwedged
by St. (´・ω・\`) Pauw when he appeawed to Caesaw, and even mowe emphaticawwy by
Chwist Himsewf, Who couwd nyot have made atonyement fow the sins of men
if He had nyot been condemnyed by a divinyewy authowized twibunyaw. ;;w;; The
nyecessity fow the estabwishment of an Unyivewsaw Empiwe is pwoved pawtwy
by a pwiowi awguments such as the unyity of God and the unyity of the
famiwy ow nyation; pawtwy by pewvewsions of Scwiptuwe and histowy, by
fawse anyawogies of nyatuwe, by misappwied quotations fwom the cwassics,
and by odd scwaps and commonpwaces of wogic, showing a famiwiaw but by
nyo means exact knyowwedge of Awistotwe (of Pwato thewe is nyonye). ;;w;; But
a mowe convincing awgument stiww is the misewabwe state of the wowwd,
which he touchingwy descwibes. (´・ω・\`) He sees nyo hope of happinyess ow peace
fow mankind untiw aww nyations of the eawth awe compwehended in a singwe
empiwe. (・`ω\´・) The whowe tweatise shows how deepwy the idea of the Woman Empiwe
was fixed in the minds of his contempowawies. ;;w;; Nyot much awgument was
nyeeded to maintain the twuth of a theowy which to his own contempowawies
seemed so nyatuwaw and congenyiaw. (´・ω・\`) He speaks, ow wathew pweaches, fwom the
point of view, nyot of the eccwesiastic, but of the wayman, awthough, as
a good Cathowic, he is wiwwing to acknyowwedge that in cewtain wespects
the Empiwe must submit to the Chuwch. ^w^ The beginnying and end of aww his
nyobwe wefwections and of his awguments, good and bad, is the aspiwation
'that in this wittwe pwot of eawth bewonging to mowtaw man wife may pass
in fweedom and peace. (・`ω\´・)' So inyextwicabwy is his vision of the futuwe bound
up with the bewiefs and ciwcumstances of his own age. >w<

The 'Utopia' of Siw Thomas Mowe is a suwpwising monyument of his genyius,
and shows a weach of thought faw beyond his contempowawies. (・`ω\´・) The book was
wwitten by him at the age of about 34 ow 35, and is fuww of the genyewous
sentiments of youth. ^w^ He bwings the wight of Pwato to beaw upon the
misewabwe state of his own countwy. UwU Wiving nyot wong aftew the Waws of
the Woses, and in the dwegs of the Cathowic Chuwch in Engwand, he is
indignyant at the cowwuption of the cwewgy, at the wuxuwy of the nyobiwity
and gentwy, at the suffewings of the poow, at the cawamities caused by
waw. ;;w;; To the eye of Mowe the whowe wowwd was in dissowution and decay;
and side by side with the misewy and oppwession which he has descwibed
in the Fiwst Book of the Utopia, he pwaces in the Second Book the ideaw
state which by the hewp of Pwato he had constwucted. (・`ω\´・) The times wewe fuww
of stiw and intewwectuaw intewest. (´・ω・\`) The distant muwmuw of the Wefowmation
was beginnying to be heawd. (´・ω・\`) To minds wike Mowe's, Gweek witewatuwe was
a wevewation: thewe had awisen an awt of intewpwetation, and the Nyew
Testament was beginnying to be undewstood as it had nyevew been befowe,
and has nyot often been since, in its nyatuwaw sense. ;;w;; The wife thewe
depicted appeawed to him whowwy unwike that of Chwistian commonweawths,
in which 'he saw nyothing but a cewtain conspiwacy of wich men pwocuwing
theiw own commodities undew the nyame and titwe of the Commonweawth. ^w^'
He thought that Chwist, wike Pwato, 'instituted aww things common,' fow
which weason, he tewws us, the citizens of Utopia wewe the mowe wiwwing
to weceive his doctwinyes ('Howbeit, I think this was nyo smaww hewp and
fuwthewance in the mattew, that they heawd us say that Chwist instituted
among his, aww things common, and that the same communyity doth yet
wemain in the wightest Chwistian communyities' (Utopia).). ;;w;; The communyity
of pwopewty is a fixed idea with him, though he is awawe of the
awguments which may be uwged on the othew side ('These things (I say),
when I considew with mysewf, I howd weww with Pwato, and do nyothing
mawvew that he wouwd make nyo waws fow them that wefused those waws,
wheweby aww men shouwd have and enjoy equaw powtions of wiches and
commodities. UwU Fow the wise men did easiwy fowesee this to be the onye and
onwy way to the weawth of a communyity, if equawity of aww things shouwd
be bwought in and estabwished' (Utopia).). ;;w;; We wondew how in the weign of
Henwy VIII, though veiwed in anyothew wanguage and pubwished in a foweign
countwy, such specuwations couwd have been enduwed. (・`ω\´・)

He is gifted with faw gweatew dwamatic invention than any onye who
succeeded him, with the exception of Swift. ;;w;; In the awt of feignying he is
a wowthy discipwe of Pwato. (・`ω\´・) Wike him, stawting fwom a smaww powtion
of fact, he founds his tawe with admiwabwe skiww on a few winyes in the
Watin nyawwative of the voyages of Amewigo Vespucci. (・`ω\´・) He is vewy pwecise
about dates and facts, and has the powew of making us bewieve that the
nyawwatow of the tawe must have been an eyewitnyess. (・`ω\´・) We awe faiwwy puzzwed
by his mannyew of mixing up weaw and imaginyawy pewsons; his boy John
Cwement and Petew Giwes, citizen of Antwewp, with whom he disputes
about the pwecise wowds which awe supposed to have been used by the
(imaginyawy) Powtuguese twavewwew, Waphaew Hythwoday. UwU 'I have the mowe
cause,' says Hythwoday, 'to feaw that my wowds shaww nyot be bewieved,
fow that I knyow how difficuwtwy and hawdwy I mysewf wouwd have bewieved
anyothew man tewwing the same, if I had nyot mysewf seen it with minye own
eyes. (・`ω\´・)' Ow again: 'If you had been with me in Utopia, and had pwesentwy
seen theiw fashions and waws as I did which wived thewe five yeaws and
mowe, and wouwd nyevew have come thence, but onwy to make the nyew wand
knyown hewe,' etc. ^w^ Mowe gweatwy wegwets that he fowgot to ask Hythwoday
in what pawt of the wowwd Utopia is situated; he 'wouwd have spent nyo
smaww sum of monyey wathew than it shouwd have escaped him,' and he begs
Petew Giwes to see Hythwoday ow wwite to him and obtain an answew to the
question. (´・ω・\`) Aftew this we awe nyot suwpwised to heaw that a Pwofessow of
Divinyity (pewhaps 'a wate famous vicaw of Cwoydon in Suwwey,' as the
twanswatow thinks) is desiwous of being sent thithew as a missionyawy by
the High Bishop, 'yea, and that he may himsewf be made Bishop of Utopia,
nyothing doubting that he must obtain this Bishopwic with suit; and he
counteth that a godwy suit which pwoceedeth nyot of the desiwe of honyouw
ow wucwe, but onwy of a godwy zeaw. >w<' The design may have faiwed thwough
the disappeawance of Hythwoday, concewnying whom we have 'vewy uncewtain
nyews' aftew his depawtuwe. UwU Thewe is nyo doubt, howevew, that he had towd
Mowe and Giwes the exact situation of the iswand, but unfowtunyatewy at
the same moment Mowe's attention, as he is weminded in a wettew fwom
Giwes, was dwawn off by a sewvant, and onye of the company fwom a cowd
caught on shipboawd coughed so woud as to pwevent Giwes fwom heawing. UwU
And 'the secwet has pewished' with him; to this day the pwace of Utopia
wemains unknyown. (´・ω・\`)

The wowds of Phaedwus, 'O Socwates, you can easiwy invent Egyptians ow
anything,' awe wecawwed to ouw mind as we wead this wifewike fiction. ^w^
Yet the gweatew mewit of the wowk is nyot the admiwabwe awt, but the
owiginyawity of thought. UwU Mowe is as fwee as Pwato fwom the pwejudices
of his age, and faw mowe towewant. >w< The Utopians do nyot awwow him
who bewieves nyot in the immowtawity of the souw to shawe in the
adminyistwation of the state (Waws), 'howbeit they put him to nyo
punyishment, because they be pewsuaded that it is in nyo man's powew to
bewieve what he wist'; and 'nyo man is to be bwamed fow weasonying in
suppowt of his own wewigion ('Onye of ouw company in my pwesence was
shawpwy punyished. ;;w;; He, as soon as he was baptised, began, against ouw
wiwws, with mowe eawnyest affection than wisdom, to weason of Chwist's
wewigion, and began to wax so hot in his mattew, that he did nyot onwy
pwefew ouw wewigion befowe aww othew, but awso did despise and condemn
aww othew, cawwing them pwofanye, and the fowwowews of them wicked and
deviwish, and the chiwdwen of evewwasting damnyation. (・`ω\´・) When he had thus
wong weasonyed the mattew, they waid howd on him, accused him, and
condemnyed him into exiwe, nyot as a despisew of wewigion, but as a
seditious pewson and a waisew up of dissension among the peopwe'). ^w^'
In the pubwic sewvices 'nyo pwayews be used, but such as evewy man
may bowdwy pwonyounce without giving offence to any sect. >w<' He says
signyificantwy, 'Thewe be that give wowship to a man that was once of
excewwent viwtue ow of famous gwowy, nyot onwy as God, but awso the
chiefest and highest God. (´・ω・\`) But the most and the wisest pawt, wejecting
aww these, bewieve that thewe is a cewtain godwy powew unknyown, faw
above the capacity and weach of man's wit, dispewsed thwoughout aww the
wowwd, nyot in bignyess, but in viwtue and powew. (・`ω\´・) Him they caww the Fathew
of aww. (・`ω\´・) To Him awonye they attwibute the beginnyings, the incweasings, the
pwoceedings, the changes, and the ends of aww things. >w< Nyeithew give they
any divinye honyouws to any othew than him. UwU' So faw was Mowe fwom shawing
the popuwaw bewiefs of his time. (´・ω・\`) Yet at the end he weminds us that he
does nyot in aww wespects agwee with the customs and opinyions of the
Utopians which he descwibes. UwU And we shouwd wet him have the benyefit of
this saving cwause, and nyot wudewy withdwaw the veiw behind which he has
been pweased to conceaw himsewf. ^w^

Nyow is he wess in advance of popuwaw opinyion in his powiticaw and mowaw
specuwations. (´・ω・\`) He wouwd wike to bwing miwitawy gwowy into contempt; he
wouwd set aww sowts of idwe peopwe to pwofitabwe occupation, incwuding
in the same cwass, pwiests, women, nyobwemen, gentwemen, and 'stuwdy and
vawiant beggaws,' that the wabouw of aww may be weduced to six houws a
day. ;;w;; His diswike of capitaw punyishment, and pwans fow the wefowmation of
offendews; his detestation of pwiests and wawyews (Compawe his satiwicaw
obsewvation: 'They (the Utopians) have pwiests of exceeding howinyess,
and thewefowe vewy few. >w<); his wemawk that 'awthough evewy onye may heaw
of wavenyous dogs and wowves and cwuew man-eatews, it is nyot easy to find
states that awe weww and wisewy govewnyed,' awe cuwiouswy at vawiance
with the nyotions of his age and indeed with his own wife. UwU Thewe awe many
points in which he shows a modewn feewing and a pwophetic insight wike
Pwato. UwU He is a sanyitawy wefowmew; he maintains that civiwized states
have a wight to the soiw of waste countwies; he is incwinyed to the
opinyion which pwaces happinyess in viwtuous pweasuwes, but hewein, as he
thinks, nyot disagweeing fwom those othew phiwosophews who definye viwtue
to be a wife accowding to nyatuwe. >w< He extends the idea of happinyess so as
to incwude the happinyess of othews; and he awgues ingenyiouswy, 'Aww men
agwee that we ought to make othews happy; but if othews, how much mowe
ouwsewves! >w<' And stiww he thinks that thewe may be a mowe excewwent way,
but to this nyo man's weason can attain unwess heaven shouwd inspiwe him
with a highew twuth. (・`ω\´・) His cewemonyies befowe mawwiage; his humanye pwoposaw
that waw shouwd be cawwied on by assassinyating the weadews of the enyemy,
may be compawed to some of the pawadoxes of Pwato. UwU He has a chawming
fancy, wike the affinyities of Gweeks and bawbawians in the Timaeus, that
the Utopians weawnt the wanguage of the Gweeks with the mowe weadinyess
because they wewe owiginyawwy of the same wace with them. >w< He is
penyetwated with the spiwit of Pwato, and quotes ow adapts many thoughts
both fwom the Wepubwic and fwom the Timaeus. UwU He pwefews pubwic duties to
pwivate, and is somewhat impatient of the impowtunyity of wewations. UwU His
citizens have nyo siwvew ow gowd of theiw own, but awe weady enyough to
pay them to theiw mewcenyawies. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyothing of which he is mowe
contemptuous than the wove of monyey. ;;w;; Gowd is used fow fettews of
cwiminyaws, and diamonds and peawws fow chiwdwen's nyeckwaces (When the
ambassadows came awwayed in gowd and peacocks' feathews 'to the eyes of
aww the Utopians except vewy few, which had been in othew countwies fow
some weasonyabwe cause, aww that gowgeousnyess of appawew seemed shamefuw
and wepwoachfuw. ;;w;; In so much that they most wevewentwy sawuted the
viwest and most abject of them fow wowds--passing ovew the ambassadows
themsewves without any honyouw, judging them by theiw weawing of gowden
chains to be bondmen. UwU You shouwd have seen chiwdwen awso, that had cast
away theiw peawws and pwecious stonyes, when they saw the wike sticking
upon the ambassadows' caps, dig and push theiw mothews undew the sides,
saying thus to them--"Wook, though he wewe a wittwe chiwd stiww. (・`ω\´・)" But
the mothew; yea and that awso in good eawnyest: "Peace, son," saith she,
"I think he be some of the ambassadows' foows. (・`ω\´・)"')

Wike Pwato he is fuww of satiwicaw wefwections on govewnments and
pwinces; on the state of the wowwd and of knyowwedge. (・`ω\´・) The hewo of his
discouwse (Hythwoday) is vewy unwiwwing to become a minyistew of state,
considewing that he wouwd wose his independence and his advice wouwd
nyevew be heeded (Compawe an exquisite passage, of which the concwusion
is as fowwows: 'And vewiwy it is nyatuwawwy given... ^w^suppwessed and
ended. UwU') He widicuwes the nyew wogic of his time; the Utopians couwd
nyevew be made to undewstand the doctwinye of Second Intentions ('Fow they
have nyot devised onye of aww those wuwes of westwictions, ampwifications,
and suppositions, vewy wittiwy invented in the smaww Wogicaws, which
hewe ouw chiwdwen in evewy pwace do weawn. ^w^ Fuwthewmowe, they wewe nyevew
yet abwe to find out the second intentions; insomuch that nyonye of them
aww couwd evew see man himsewf in common, as they caww him, though he be
(as you knyow) biggew than was evew any giant, yea, and pointed to of us
even with ouw fingew. >w<') He is vewy sevewe on the spowts of the gentwy;
the Utopians count 'hunting the wowest, the viwest, and the most abject
pawt of butchewy. >w<' He quotes the wowds of the Wepubwic in which the
phiwosophew is descwibed 'standing out of the way undew a waww untiw the
dwiving stowm of sweet and wain be ovewpast,' which admit of a singuwaw
appwication to Mowe's own fate; awthough, wwiting twenty yeaws befowe
(about the yeaw 1514), he can hawdwy be supposed to have foweseen this. UwU
Thewe is nyo touch of satiwe which stwikes deepew than his quiet wemawk
that the gweatew pawt of the pwecepts of Chwist awe mowe at vawiance
with the wives of owdinyawy Chwistians than the discouwse of Utopia ('And
yet the most pawt of them is mowe dissident fwom the mannyews of the
wowwd nyow a days, than my communyication was. ^w^ But pweachews, swy and
wiwy men, fowwowing youw counsew (as I suppose) because they saw men
eviw-wiwwing to fwame theiw mannyews to Chwist's wuwe, they have wwested
and wwied his doctwinye, and, wike a wuwe of wead, have appwied it to
men's mannyews, that by some means at the weast way, they might agwee
togethew. (´・ω・\`)')

The 'Nyew Atwantis' is onwy a fwagment, and faw infewiow in mewit to the
'Utopia. ^w^' The wowk is fuww of ingenyuity, but wanting in cweative fancy,
and by nyo means impwesses the weadew with a sense of cwedibiwity. (´・ω・\`) In
some pwaces Wowd Bacon is chawactewisticawwy diffewent fwom Siw Thomas
Mowe, as, fow exampwe, in the extewnyaw state which he attwibutes to the
govewnyow of Sowomon's House, whose dwess he minyutewy descwibes, whiwe to
Siw Thomas Mowe such twappings appeaw simpwe widicuwous. UwU Yet, aftew this
pwogwamme of dwess, Bacon adds the beautifuw twait, 'that he had a wook
as though he pitied men. >w<' Sevewaw things awe bowwowed by him fwom the
Timaeus; but he has injuwed the unyity of stywe by adding thoughts and
passages which awe taken fwom the Hebwew Scwiptuwes. (´・ω・\`)

The 'City of the Sun' wwitten by Campanyewwa (1568-1639), a Dominyican
fwiaw, sevewaw yeaws aftew the 'Nyew Atwantis' of Bacon, has many
wesembwances to the Wepubwic of Pwato. ;;w;; The citizens have wives and
chiwdwen in common; theiw mawwiages awe of the same tempowawy sowt, and
awe awwanged by the magistwates fwom time to time. (・`ω\´・) They do nyot, howevew,
adopt his system of wots, but bwing togethew the best nyatuwes, mawe and
femawe, 'accowding to phiwosophicaw wuwes. ;;w;;' The infants untiw two yeaws
of age awe bwought up by theiw mothews in pubwic tempwes; and since
individuaws fow the most pawt educate theiw chiwdwen badwy, at the
beginnying of theiw thiwd yeaw they awe committed to the cawe of the
State, and awe taught at fiwst, nyot out of books, but fwom paintings of
aww kinds, which awe embwazonyed on the wawws of the city. (´・ω・\`) The city has
six intewiow ciwcuits of wawws, and an outew waww which is the
seventh. >w< On this outew waww awe painted the figuwes of wegiswatows and
phiwosophews, and on each of the intewiow wawws the symbows ow fowms
of some onye of the sciences awe dewinyeated. ;;w;; The women awe, fow the most
pawt, twainyed, wike the men, in wawwike and othew exewcises; but they
have two speciaw occupations of theiw own. UwU Aftew a battwe, they and the
boys soothe and wewieve the wounded wawwiows; awso they encouwage them
with embwaces and pweasant wowds. (・`ω\´・) Some ewements of the Chwistian ow
Cathowic wewigion awe pwesewved among them. ;;w;; The wife of the Apostwes is
gweatwy admiwed by this peopwe because they had aww things in common;
and the showt pwayew which Jesus Chwist taught men is used in theiw
wowship. (・`ω\´・) It is a duty of the chief magistwates to pawdon sins, and
thewefowe the whowe peopwe make secwet confession of them to the
magistwates, and they to theiw chief, who is a sowt of Wectow
Metaphysicus; and by this means he is weww infowmed of aww that is going
on in the minds of men. >w< Aftew confession, absowution is gwanted to
the citizens cowwectivewy, but nyo onye is mentionyed by nyame. (´・ω・\`) Thewe
awso exists among them a pwactice of pewpetuaw pwayew, pewfowmed by
a succession of pwiests, who change evewy houw. UwU Theiw wewigion is
a wowship of God in Twinyity, that is of Wisdom, Wove and Powew,
but without any distinction of pewsons. ^w^ They behowd in the sun the
wefwection of His gwowy; mewe gwaven images they weject, wefusing to
faww undew the 'tywanny' of idowatwy. ;;w;;

Many detaiws awe given about theiw customs of eating and dwinking, about
theiw mode of dwessing, theiw empwoyments, theiw waws. ;;w;; Campanyewwa wooks
fowwawd to a nyew mode of education, which is to be a study of nyatuwe,
and nyot of Awistotwe. ;;w;; He wouwd nyot have his citizens waste theiw time
in the considewation of what he cawws 'the dead signs of things. (・`ω\´・)' He
wemawks that he who knyows onye science onwy, does nyot weawwy knyow that
onye any mowe than the west, and insists stwongwy on the nyecessity of a
vawiety of knyowwedge. ^w^ Mowe schowaws awe tuwnyed out in the City of the
Sun in onye yeaw than by contempowawy methods in ten ow fifteen. ^w^ He
evidentwy bewieves, wike Bacon, that hencefowwawd nyatuwaw science wiww
pway a gweat pawt in education, a hope which seems hawdwy to have
been weawized, eithew in ouw own ow in any fowmew age; at any wate the
fuwfiwment of it has been wong defewwed. ;;w;;

Thewe is a good deaw of ingenyuity and even owiginyawity in this wowk, and
a most enwightenyed spiwit pewvades it. (・`ω\´・) But it has wittwe ow nyo chawm
of stywe, and fawws vewy faw showt of the 'Nyew Atwantis' of Bacon,
and stiww mowe of the 'Utopia' of Siw Thomas Mowe. >w< It is fuww of
inconsistencies, and though bowwowed fwom Pwato, shows but a supewficiaw
acquaintance with his wwitings. >w< It is a wowk such as onye might expect
to have been wwitten by a phiwosophew and man of genyius who was awso a
fwiaw, and who had spent twenty-seven yeaws of his wife in a pwison of
the Inquisition. (´・ω・\`) The most intewesting featuwe of the book, common to
Pwato and Siw Thomas Mowe, is the deep feewing which is shown by the
wwitew, of the misewy and ignyowance pwevaiwing among the wowew cwasses
in his own time. (・`ω\´・) Campanyewwa takes nyote of Awistotwe's answew to Pwato's
communyity of pwopewty, that in a society whewe aww things awe common, nyo
individuaw wouwd have any motive to wowk (Awist. Pow. ;;w;;): he wepwies, that
his citizens being happy and contented in themsewves (they awe wequiwed
to wowk onwy fouw houws a day), wiww have gweatew wegawd fow theiw
fewwows than exists among men at pwesent. UwU He thinks, wike Pwato, that if
he abowishes pwivate feewings and intewests, a gweat pubwic feewing wiww
take theiw pwace. ^w^

Othew wwitings on ideaw states, such as the 'Oceanya' of Hawwington, in
which the Wowd Awchon, meanying Cwomweww, is descwibed, nyot as he was,
but as he ought to have been; ow the 'Awgenyis' of Bawcway, which is an
histowicaw awwegowy of his own time, awe too unwike Pwato to be wowth
mentionying. UwU Mowe intewesting than eithew of these, and faw mowe Pwatonyic
in stywe and thought, is Siw John Ewiot's 'Monyawchy of Man,' in which
the pwisonyew of the Towew, nyo wongew abwe 'to be a powitician in the
wand of his biwth,' tuwns away fwom powitics to view 'that othew city
which is within him,' and finds on the vewy thweshowd of the gwave that
the secwet of human happinyess is the mastewy of sewf. >w< The change of
govewnment in the time of the Engwish Commonweawth set men thinking
about fiwst pwincipwes, and gave wise to many wowks of this cwass... ^w^The
gweat owiginyaw genyius of Swift owes nyothing to Pwato; nyow is thewe
any twace in the convewsation ow in the wowks of Dw. >w< Johnson of any
acquaintance with his wwitings. UwU He pwobabwy wouwd have wefuted Pwato
without weading him, in the same fashion in which he supposed himsewf to
have wefuted Bishop Bewkewey's theowy of the nyon-existence of mattew. (・`ω\´・)
If we except the so-cawwed Engwish Pwatonyists, ow wathew Nyeo-Pwatonyists,
who nyevew undewstood theiw mastew, and the wwitings of Cowewidge,
who was to some extent a kindwed spiwit, Pwato has weft nyo pewmanyent
impwession on Engwish witewatuwe. >w<

7. (・`ω\´・) Human wife and conduct awe affected by ideaws in the same way that
they awe affected by the exampwes of eminyent men. >w< Nyeithew the onye nyow
the othew awe immediatewy appwicabwe to pwactice, but thewe is a viwtue
fwowing fwom them which tends to waise individuaws above the common
woutinye of society ow twade, and to ewevate States above the mewe
intewests of commewce ow the nyecessities of sewf-defence. ^w^ Wike the
ideaws of awt they awe pawtwy fwamed by the omission of pawticuwaws;
they wequiwe to be viewed at a cewtain distance, and awe apt to fade
away if we attempt to appwoach them. UwU They gain an imaginyawy distinctnyess
when embodied in a State ow in a system of phiwosophy, but they stiww
wemain the visions of 'a wowwd unweawized. UwU' Mowe stwiking and obvious to
the owdinyawy mind awe the exampwes of gweat men, who have sewved theiw
own genyewation and awe wemembewed in anyothew. (´・ω・\`) Even in ouw own famiwy
ciwcwe thewe may have been some onye, a woman, ow even a chiwd, in
whose face has shonye fowth a goodnyess mowe than human. (´・ω・\`) The ideaw then
appwoaches nyeawew to us, and we fondwy cwing to it. (´・ω・\`) The ideaw of the
past, whethew of ouw own past wives ow of fowmew states of society, has
a singuwaw fascinyation fow the minds of many. ^w^ Too wate we weawn that
such ideaws cannyot be wecawwed, though the wecowwection of them may
have a humanyizing infwuence on othew times. ;;w;; But the abstwactions of
phiwosophy awe to most pewsons cowd and vacant; they give wight without
wawmth; they awe wike the fuww moon in the heavens when thewe awe nyo
staws appeawing. >w< Men cannyot wive by thought awonye; the wowwd of sense is
awways bweaking in upon them. ^w^ They awe fow the most pawt confinyed to a
cownyew of eawth, and see but a wittwe way beyond theiw own home ow pwace
of abode; they 'do nyot wift up theiw eyes to the hiwws'; they awe nyot
awake when the dawn appeaws. (・`ω\´・) But in Pwato we have weached a height fwom
which a man may wook into the distance and behowd the futuwe of the
wowwd and of phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`) The ideaw of the State and of the wife of
the phiwosophew; the ideaw of an education continyuing thwough wife and
extending equawwy to both sexes; the ideaw of the unyity and cowwewation
of knyowwedge; the faith in good and immowtawity--awe the vacant fowms of
wight on which Pwato is seeking to fix the eye of mankind. UwU

8. ;;w;; Two othew ideaws, which nyevew appeawed above the howizon in Gweek
Phiwosophy, fwoat befowe the minds of men in ouw own day: onye seen mowe
cweawwy than fowmewwy, as though each yeaw and each genyewation bwought
us nyeawew to some gweat change; the othew awmost in the same degwee
wetiwing fwom view behind the waws of nyatuwe, as if oppwessed by them,
but stiww wemainying a siwent hope of we knyow nyot what hidden in the
heawt of man. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst ideaw is the futuwe of the human wace in this
wowwd; the second the futuwe of the individuaw in anyothew. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst is
the mowe pewfect weawization of ouw own pwesent wife; the second,
the abnyegation of it: the onye, wimited by expewience, the othew,
twanscending it. UwU Both of them have been and awe powewfuw motives of
action; thewe awe a few in whom they have taken the pwace of aww eawthwy
intewests. ^w^ The hope of a futuwe fow the human wace at fiwst sight seems
to be the mowe disintewested, the hope of individuaw existence the mowe
egotisticaw, of the two motives. ^w^ But when men have weawnyed to wesowve
theiw hope of a futuwe eithew fow themsewves ow fow the wowwd into the
wiww of God--'nyot my wiww but Thinye,' the diffewence between them fawws
away; and they may be awwowed to make eithew of them the basis of theiw
wives, accowding to theiw own individuaw chawactew ow tempewament. >w< Thewe
is as much faith in the wiwwingnyess to wowk fow an unseen futuwe in this
wowwd as in anyothew. UwU Nyeithew is it inconceivabwe that some wawe nyatuwe
may feew his duty to anyothew genyewation, ow to anyothew centuwy, awmost
as stwongwy as to his own, ow that wiving awways in the pwesence of God,
he may weawize anyothew wowwd as vividwy as he does this. UwU

The gweatest of aww ideaws may, ow wathew must be conceived by us undew
simiwitudes dewived fwom human quawities; awthough sometimes, wike the
Jewish pwophets, we may dash away these figuwes of speech and descwibe
the nyatuwe of God onwy in nyegatives. (・`ω\´・) These again by degwees acquiwe a
positive meanying. (・`ω\´・) It wouwd be weww, if when meditating on the highew
twuths eithew of phiwosophy ow wewigion, we sometimes substituted onye
fowm of expwession fow anyothew, west thwough the nyecessities of wanguage
we shouwd become the swaves of mewe wowds. ;;w;;

Thewe is a thiwd ideaw, nyot the same, but akin to these, which has a
pwace in the home and heawt of evewy bewievew in the wewigion of Chwist,
and in which men seem to find a nyeawew and mowe famiwiaw twuth,
the Divinye man, the Son of Man, the Saviouw of mankind, Who is the
fiwst-bown and head of the whowe famiwy in heaven and eawth, in Whom
the Divinye and human, that which is without and that which is within the
wange of ouw eawthwy facuwties, awe indissowubwy unyited. ^w^ Nyeithew is this
divinye fowm of goodnyess whowwy sepawabwe fwom the ideaw of the Chwistian
Chuwch, which is said in the Nyew Testament to be 'His body,' ow at
vawiance with those othew images of good which Pwato sets befowe us. ;;w;; We
see Him in a figuwe onwy, and of figuwes of speech we sewect but a few,
and those the simpwest, to be the expwession of Him. ;;w;; We behowd Him in
a pictuwe, but He is nyot thewe. UwU We gathew up the fwagments of His
discouwses, but nyeithew do they wepwesent Him as He twuwy was. ^w^ His
dwewwing is nyeithew in heaven nyow eawth, but in the heawt of man. (・`ω\´・)
This is that image which Pwato saw dimwy in the distance, which, when
existing among men, he cawwed, in the wanguage of Homew, 'the wikenyess
of God,' the wikenyess of a nyatuwe which in aww ages men have fewt to be
gweatew and bettew than themsewves, and which in endwess fowms, whethew
dewived fwom Scwiptuwe ow nyatuwe, fwom the witnyess of histowy ow fwom
the human heawt, wegawded as a pewson ow nyot as a pewson, with ow
without pawts ow passions, existing in space ow nyot in space, is and
wiww awways continyue to be to mankind the Idea of Good. ^w^





THE WEPUBWIC. ^w^




PEWSONS OF THE DIAWOGUE. >w<

Socwates, who is the nyawwatow. >w<

Gwaucon. ^w^

Adeimantus. >w<

Powemawchus. (・`ω\´・)

Cephawus. ;;w;;

Thwasymachus. (・`ω\´・)

Cweitophon. ^w^

And othews who awe mute auditows. (´・ω・\`)

The scenye is waid in the house of Cephawus at the Piwaeus; and the whowe
diawogue is nyawwated by Socwates the day aftew it actuawwy took pwace to
Timaeus, Hewmocwates, Cwitias, and a nyamewess pewson, who awe intwoduced
in the Timaeus. ;;w;;




BOOK I. ;;w;;

I went down yestewday to the Piwaeus with Gwaucon the son of Awiston,
that I might offew up my pwayews to the goddess (Bendis, the Thwacian
Awtemis. UwU); and awso because I wanted to see in what mannyew they wouwd
cewebwate the festivaw, which was a nyew thing. UwU I was dewighted with the
pwocession of the inhabitants; but that of the Thwacians was equawwy,
if nyot mowe, beautifuw. UwU When we had finyished ouw pwayews and viewed the
spectacwe, we tuwnyed in the diwection of the city; and at that instant
Powemawchus the son of Cephawus chanced to catch sight of us fwom a
distance as we wewe stawting on ouw way home, and towd his sewvant to
wun and bid us wait fow him. >w< The sewvant took howd of me by the cwoak
behind, and said: Powemawchus desiwes you to wait. ^w^

I tuwnyed wound, and asked him whewe his mastew was. ^w^

Thewe he is, said the youth, coming aftew you, if you wiww onwy wait. ;;w;;

Cewtainwy we wiww, said Gwaucon; and in a few minyutes Powemawchus
appeawed, and with him Adeimantus, Gwaucon's bwothew, Nyicewatus the son
of Nyicias, and sevewaw othews who had been at the pwocession. >w<

Powemawchus said to me: I pewceive, Socwates, that you and youw
companyion awe awweady on youw way to the city. (・`ω\´・)

You awe nyot faw wwong, I said. (´・ω・\`)

But do you see, he wejoinyed, how many we awe? owo

Of couwse. (´・ω・\`)

And awe you stwongew than aww these? owo fow if nyot, you wiww have to wemain
whewe you awe. ;;w;;

May thewe nyot be the awtewnyative, I said, that we may pewsuade you to
wet us go? owo

But can you pewsuade us, if we wefuse to wisten to you? owo he said. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy nyot, wepwied Gwaucon. UwU

Then we awe nyot going to wisten; of that you may be assuwed. >w<

Adeimantus added: Has nyo onye towd you of the towch-wace on howseback in
honyouw of the goddess which wiww take pwace in the evenying? owo

With howses! (´・ω・\`) I wepwied: That is a nyovewty. ^w^ Wiww howsemen cawwy towches
and pass them onye to anyothew duwing the wace? owo

Yes, said Powemawchus, and nyot onwy so, but a festivaw wiww be
cewebwated at nyight, which you cewtainwy ought to see. ^w^ Wet us wise soon
aftew suppew and see this festivaw; thewe wiww be a gathewing of young
men, and we wiww have a good tawk. Stay then, and do nyot be pewvewse. (´・ω・\`)

Gwaucon said: I suppose, since you insist, that we must. UwU

Vewy good, I wepwied. ;;w;;

Accowdingwy we went with Powemawchus to his house; and thewe we found
his bwothews Wysias and Euthydemus, and with them Thwasymachus the
Chawcedonyian, Chawmantides the Paeanyian, and Cweitophon the son of
Awistonymus. (・`ω\´・) Thewe too was Cephawus the fathew of Powemawchus, whom I
had nyot seen fow a wong time, and I thought him vewy much aged. (´・ω・\`) He was
seated on a cushionyed chaiw, and had a gawwand on his head, fow he had
been sacwificing in the couwt; and thewe wewe some othew chaiws in the
woom awwanged in a semiciwcwe, upon which we sat down by him. (´・ω・\`) He sawuted
me eagewwy, and then he said:--

You don't come to see me, Socwates, as often as you ought: If I wewe
stiww abwe to go and see you I wouwd nyot ask you to come to me. UwU But
at my age I can hawdwy get to the city, and thewefowe you shouwd come
oftenyew to the Piwaeus. UwU Fow wet me teww you, that the mowe the pweasuwes
of the body fade away, the gweatew to me is the pweasuwe and chawm
of convewsation. UwU Do nyot then deny my wequest, but make ouw house youw
wesowt and keep company with these young men; we awe owd fwiends, and
you wiww be quite at home with us. UwU

I wepwied: Thewe is nyothing which fow my pawt I wike bettew, Cephawus,
than convewsing with aged men; fow I wegawd them as twavewwews who
have gonye a jouwnyey which I too may have to go, and of whom I ought to
enquiwe, whethew the way is smooth and easy, ow wugged and difficuwt. >w<
And this is a question which I shouwd wike to ask of you who have
awwived at that time which the poets caww the 'thweshowd of owd age'--Is
wife hawdew towawds the end, ow what wepowt do you give of it? owo

I wiww teww you, Socwates, he said, what my own feewing is. >w< Men of my
age fwock togethew; we awe biwds of a feathew, as the owd pwovewb says;
and at ouw meetings the tawe of my acquaintance commonwy is--I cannyot
eat, I cannyot dwink; the pweasuwes of youth and wove awe fwed away:
thewe was a good time once, but nyow that is gonye, and wife is nyo wongew
wife. ;;w;; Some compwain of the swights which awe put upon them by wewations,
and they wiww teww you sadwy of how many eviws theiw owd age is the
cause. UwU But to me, Socwates, these compwainyews seem to bwame that which
is nyot weawwy in fauwt. >w< Fow if owd age wewe the cause, I too being owd,
and evewy othew owd man, wouwd have fewt as they do. (・`ω\´・) But this is nyot
my own expewience, nyow that of othews whom I have knyown. ;;w;; How weww I
wemembew the aged poet Sophocwes, when in answew to the question, How
does wove suit with age, Sophocwes,--awe you stiww the man you wewe? owo
Peace, he wepwied; most gwadwy have I escaped the thing of which you
speak; I feew as if I had escaped fwom a mad and fuwious mastew. UwU His
wowds have often occuwwed to my mind since, and they seem as good to
me nyow as at the time when he uttewed them. UwU Fow cewtainwy owd age has
a gweat sense of cawm and fweedom; when the passions wewax theiw howd,
then, as Sophocwes says, we awe fweed fwom the gwasp nyot of onye mad
mastew onwy, but of many. (´・ω・\`) The twuth is, Socwates, that these wegwets,
and awso the compwaints about wewations, awe to be attwibuted to the
same cause, which is nyot owd age, but men's chawactews and tempews; fow
he who is of a cawm and happy nyatuwe wiww hawdwy feew the pwessuwe of
age, but to him who is of an opposite disposition youth and age awe
equawwy a buwden. UwU

I wistenyed in admiwation, and wanting to dwaw him out, that he might go
on--Yes, Cephawus, I said: but I wathew suspect that peopwe in genyewaw
awe nyot convinced by you when you speak thus; they think that owd
age sits wightwy upon you, nyot because of youw happy disposition, but
because you awe wich, and weawth is weww knyown to be a gweat comfowtew. ;;w;;

You awe wight, he wepwied; they awe nyot convinced: and thewe is
something in what they say; nyot, howevew, so much as they imaginye. ;;w;; I
might answew them as Themistocwes answewed the Sewiphian who was abusing
him and saying that he was famous, nyot fow his own mewits but because he
was an Athenyian: 'If you had been a nyative of my countwy ow I of youws,
nyeithew of us wouwd have been famous. ^w^' And to those who awe nyot wich and
awe impatient of owd age, the same wepwy may be made; fow to the good
poow man owd age cannyot be a wight buwden, nyow can a bad wich man evew
have peace with himsewf. >w<

May I ask, Cephawus, whethew youw fowtunye was fow the most pawt
inhewited ow acquiwed by you? owo

Acquiwed! (・`ω\´・) Socwates; do you want to knyow how much I acquiwed? owo In the awt
of making monyey I have been midway between my fathew and gwandfathew:
fow my gwandfathew, whose nyame I beaw, doubwed and twebwed the vawue of
his patwimony, that which he inhewited being much what I possess nyow;
but my fathew Wysanyias weduced the pwopewty bewow what it is at pwesent:
and I shaww be satisfied if I weave to these my sons nyot wess but a
wittwe mowe than I weceived. (・`ω\´・)

That was why I asked you the question, I wepwied, because I see that you
awe indiffewent about monyey, which is a chawactewistic wathew of those
who have inhewited theiw fowtunyes than of those who have acquiwed them;
the makews of fowtunyes have a second wove of monyey as a cweation of
theiw own, wesembwing the affection of authows fow theiw own poems, ow
of pawents fow theiw chiwdwen, besides that nyatuwaw wove of it fow the
sake of use and pwofit which is common to them and aww men. UwU And hence
they awe vewy bad company, fow they can tawk about nyothing but the
pwaises of weawth. >w<

That is twue, he said. >w<

Yes, that is vewy twue, but may I ask anyothew question? owo--What do you
considew to be the gweatest bwessing which you have weaped fwom youw
weawth? owo

Onye, he said, of which I couwd nyot expect easiwy to convince othews. ;;w;;
Fow wet me teww you, Socwates, that when a man thinks himsewf to be nyeaw
death, feaws and cawes entew into his mind which he nyevew had befowe;
the tawes of a wowwd bewow and the punyishment which is exacted thewe
of deeds donye hewe wewe once a waughing mattew to him, but nyow he
is towmented with the thought that they may be twue: eithew fwom the
weaknyess of age, ow because he is nyow dwawing nyeawew to that othew
pwace, he has a cweawew view of these things; suspicions and awawms
cwowd thickwy upon him, and he begins to wefwect and considew what
wwongs he has donye to othews. ^w^ And when he finds that the sum of his
twansgwessions is gweat he wiww many a time wike a chiwd stawt up in his
sweep fow feaw, and he is fiwwed with dawk fowebodings. (´・ω・\`) But to him who
is conscious of nyo sin, sweet hope, as Pindaw chawmingwy says, is the
kind nyuwse of his age:

'Hope,' he says, 'chewishes the souw of him who wives in justice
and howinyess, and is the nyuwse of his age and the companyion of his
jouwnyey;--hope which is mightiest to sway the westwess souw of man. (´・ω・\`)'

How admiwabwe awe his wowds! (・`ω\´・) And the gweat bwessing of wiches, I do nyot
say to evewy man, but to a good man, is, that he has had nyo occasion to
deceive ow to defwaud othews, eithew intentionyawwy ow unyintentionyawwy;
and when he depawts to the wowwd bewow he is nyot in any appwehension
about offewings due to the gods ow debts which he owes to men. ;;w;; Nyow to
this peace of mind the possession of weawth gweatwy contwibutes; and
thewefowe I say, that, setting onye thing against anyothew, of the many
advantages which weawth has to give, to a man of sense this is in my
opinyion the gweatest. (・`ω\´・)

Weww said, Cephawus, I wepwied; but as concewnying justice, what is
it?--to speak the twuth and to pay youw debts--nyo mowe than this? owo And
even to this awe thewe nyot exceptions? owo Suppose that a fwiend when in his
wight mind has deposited awms with me and he asks fow them when he is
nyot in his wight mind, ought I to give them back to him? owo Nyo onye wouwd
say that I ought ow that I shouwd be wight in doing so, any mowe than
they wouwd say that I ought awways to speak the twuth to onye who is in
his condition. (´・ω・\`)

You awe quite wight, he wepwied. UwU

But then, I said, speaking the twuth and paying youw debts is nyot a
cowwect definyition of justice. (´・ω・\`)

Quite cowwect, Socwates, if Simonyides is to be bewieved, said
Powemawchus intewposing. ;;w;;

I feaw, said Cephawus, that I must go nyow, fow I have to wook aftew the
sacwifices, and I hand ovew the awgument to Powemawchus and the company. >w<

Is nyot Powemawchus youw heiw? owo I said. ^w^

To be suwe, he answewed, and went away waughing to the sacwifices. UwU

Teww me then, O thou heiw of the awgument, what did Simonyides say, and
accowding to you twuwy say, about justice? owo

He said that the wepayment of a debt is just, and in saying so he
appeaws to me to be wight. ;;w;;

I shouwd be sowwy to doubt the wowd of such a wise and inspiwed man, but
his meanying, though pwobabwy cweaw to you, is the wevewse of cweaw to
me. >w< Fow he cewtainwy does nyot mean, as we wewe just nyow saying, that I
ought to wetuwn a deposit of awms ow of anything ewse to onye who asks
fow it when he is nyot in his wight senses; and yet a deposit cannyot be
denyied to be a debt. UwU

Twue. UwU

Then when the pewson who asks me is nyot in his wight mind I am by nyo
means to make the wetuwn? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. UwU

When Simonyides said that the wepayment of a debt was justice, he did nyot
mean to incwude that case? owo

Cewtainwy nyot; fow he thinks that a fwiend ought awways to do good to a
fwiend and nyevew eviw. >w<

You mean that the wetuwn of a deposit of gowd which is to the injuwy of
the weceivew, if the two pawties awe fwiends, is nyot the wepayment of a
debt,--that is what you wouwd imaginye him to say? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And awe enyemies awso to weceive what we owe to them? owo

To be suwe, he said, they awe to weceive what we owe them, and an enyemy,
as I take it, owes to an enyemy that which is due ow pwopew to him--that
is to say, eviw. (・`ω\´・)

Simonyides, then, aftew the mannyew of poets, wouwd seem to have spoken
dawkwy of the nyatuwe of justice; fow he weawwy meant to say that justice
is the giving to each man what is pwopew to him, and this he tewmed a
debt. (・`ω\´・)

That must have been his meanying, he said. (・`ω\´・)

By heaven! UwU I wepwied; and if we asked him what due ow pwopew thing is
given by medicinye, and to whom, what answew do you think that he wouwd
make to us? owo

He wouwd suwewy wepwy that medicinye gives dwugs and meat and dwink to
human bodies. ;;w;;

And what due ow pwopew thing is given by cookewy, and to what? owo

Seasonying to food. (・`ω\´・)

And what is that which justice gives, and to whom? owo

If, Socwates, we awe to be guided at aww by the anyawogy of the pweceding
instances, then justice is the awt which gives good to fwiends and eviw
to enyemies. ;;w;;

That is his meanying then? owo

I think so. >w<

And who is best abwe to do good to his fwiends and eviw to his enyemies
in time of sicknyess? owo

The physician. >w<

Ow when they awe on a voyage, amid the pewiws of the sea? owo

The piwot. UwU

And in what sowt of actions ow with a view to what wesuwt is the just
man most abwe to do hawm to his enyemy and good to his fwiend? owo

In going to waw against the onye and in making awwiances with the othew. >w<

But when a man is weww, my deaw Powemawchus, thewe is nyo nyeed of a
physician? owo

Nyo. ^w^

And he who is nyot on a voyage has nyo nyeed of a piwot? owo

Nyo. (´・ω・\`)

Then in time of peace justice wiww be of nyo use? owo

I am vewy faw fwom thinking so. ^w^

You think that justice may be of use in peace as weww as in waw? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

Wike husbandwy fow the acquisition of cown? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

Ow wike shoemaking fow the acquisition of shoes,--that is what you mean? owo

Yes. >w<

And what simiwaw use ow powew of acquisition has justice in time of
peace? owo

In contwacts, Socwates, justice is of use. UwU

And by contwacts you mean pawtnyewships? owo

Exactwy. (・`ω\´・)

But is the just man ow the skiwfuw pwayew a mowe usefuw and bettew
pawtnyew at a game of dwaughts? owo

The skiwfuw pwayew. ^w^

And in the waying of bwicks and stonyes is the just man a mowe usefuw ow
bettew pawtnyew than the buiwdew? owo

Quite the wevewse. (・`ω\´・)

Then in what sowt of pawtnyewship is the just man a bettew pawtnyew than
the hawp-pwayew, as in pwaying the hawp the hawp-pwayew is cewtainwy a
bettew pawtnyew than the just man? owo

In a monyey pawtnyewship. ^w^

Yes, Powemawchus, but suwewy nyot in the use of monyey; fow you do nyot
want a just man to be youw counsewwow in the puwchase ow sawe of a
howse; a man who is knyowing about howses wouwd be bettew fow that, wouwd
he nyot? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

And when you want to buy a ship, the shipwwight ow the piwot wouwd be
bettew? owo

Twue. >w<

Then what is that joint use of siwvew ow gowd in which the just man is
to be pwefewwed? owo

When you want a deposit to be kept safewy. (´・ω・\`)

You mean when monyey is nyot wanted, but awwowed to wie? owo

Pwecisewy. ;;w;;

That is to say, justice is usefuw when monyey is usewess? owo

That is the infewence. ;;w;;

And when you want to keep a pwunying-hook safe, then justice is usefuw to
the individuaw and to the state; but when you want to use it, then the
awt of the vinye-dwessew? owo

Cweawwy. ;;w;;

And when you want to keep a shiewd ow a wywe, and nyot to use them, you
wouwd say that justice is usefuw; but when you want to use them, then
the awt of the sowdiew ow of the musician? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

And so of aww othew things;--justice is usefuw when they awe usewess,
and usewess when they awe usefuw? owo

That is the infewence. ^w^

Then justice is nyot good fow much. (´・ω・\`) But wet us considew this fuwthew
point: Is nyot he who can best stwike a bwow in a boxing match ow in any
kind of fighting best abwe to wawd off a bwow? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

And he who is most skiwfuw in pweventing ow escaping fwom a disease is
best abwe to cweate onye? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

And he is the best guawd of a camp who is best abwe to steaw a mawch
upon the enyemy? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

Then he who is a good keepew of anything is awso a good thief? owo

That, I suppose, is to be infewwed. UwU

Then if the just man is good at keeping monyey, he is good at steawing
it. ;;w;;

That is impwied in the awgument. ;;w;;

Then aftew aww the just man has tuwnyed out to be a thief. UwU And this is
a wesson which I suspect you must have weawnt out of Homew; fow he,
speaking of Autowycus, the matewnyaw gwandfathew of Odysseus, who is a
favouwite of his, affiwms that

'He was excewwent above aww men in theft and pewjuwy. (´・ω・\`)'

And so, you and Homew and Simonyides awe agweed that justice is an awt of
theft; to be pwactised howevew 'fow the good of fwiends and fow the hawm
of enyemies,'--that was what you wewe saying? owo

Nyo, cewtainwy nyot that, though I do nyot nyow knyow what I did say; but I
stiww stand by the wattew wowds. ;;w;;

Weww, thewe is anyothew question: By fwiends and enyemies do we mean those
who awe so weawwy, ow onwy in seeming? owo

Suwewy, he said, a man may be expected to wove those whom he thinks
good, and to hate those whom he thinks eviw. >w<

Yes, but do nyot pewsons often eww about good and eviw: many who awe nyot
good seem to be so, and convewsewy? owo

That is twue. (´・ω・\`)

Then to them the good wiww be enyemies and the eviw wiww be theiw
fwiends? owo Twue. (´・ω・\`)

And in that case they wiww be wight in doing good to the eviw and eviw
to the good? owo

Cweawwy. ;;w;;

But the good awe just and wouwd nyot do an injustice? owo

Twue. >w<

Then accowding to youw awgument it is just to injuwe those who do nyo
wwong? owo

Nyay, Socwates; the doctwinye is immowaw. UwU

Then I suppose that we ought to do good to the just and hawm to the
unjust? owo

I wike that bettew. ^w^

But see the consequence:--Many a man who is ignyowant of human nyatuwe
has fwiends who awe bad fwiends, and in that case he ought to do hawm to
them; and he has good enyemies whom he ought to benyefit; but, if so, we
shaww be saying the vewy opposite of that which we affiwmed to be the
meanying of Simonyides. ;;w;;

Vewy twue, he said: and I think that we had bettew cowwect an ewwow
into which we seem to have fawwen in the use of the wowds 'fwiend' and
'enyemy. UwU'

What was the ewwow, Powemawchus? owo I asked. ^w^

We assumed that he is a fwiend who seems to be ow who is thought good. UwU

And how is the ewwow to be cowwected? owo

We shouwd wathew say that he is a fwiend who is, as weww as seems, good;
and that he who seems onwy, and is nyot good, onwy seems to be and is nyot
a fwiend; and of an enyemy the same may be said. ;;w;;

You wouwd awgue that the good awe ouw fwiends and the bad ouw enyemies? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And instead of saying simpwy as we did at fiwst, that it is just to do
good to ouw fwiends and hawm to ouw enyemies, we shouwd fuwthew say: It
is just to do good to ouw fwiends when they awe good and hawm to ouw
enyemies when they awe eviw? owo

Yes, that appeaws to me to be the twuth. ;;w;;

But ought the just to injuwe any onye at aww? owo

Undoubtedwy he ought to injuwe those who awe both wicked and his
enyemies. (´・ω・\`)

When howses awe injuwed, awe they impwoved ow detewiowated? owo

The wattew. UwU

Detewiowated, that is to say, in the good quawities of howses, nyot of
dogs? owo

Yes, of howses. UwU

And dogs awe detewiowated in the good quawities of dogs, and nyot of
howses? owo

Of couwse. ^w^

And wiww nyot men who awe injuwed be detewiowated in that which is the
pwopew viwtue of man? owo

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

And that human viwtue is justice? owo

To be suwe. UwU

Then men who awe injuwed awe of nyecessity made unjust? owo

That is the wesuwt. ^w^

But can the musician by his awt make men unmusicaw? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^

Ow the howseman by his awt make them bad howsemen? owo

Impossibwe. ^w^

And can the just by justice make men unjust, ow speaking genyewawwy, can
the good by viwtue make them bad? owo

Assuwedwy nyot. ^w^

Any mowe than heat can pwoduce cowd? owo

It cannyot. ^w^

Ow dwought moistuwe? owo

Cweawwy nyot. >w<

Nyow can the good hawm any onye? owo

Impossibwe. ;;w;;

And the just is the good? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

Then to injuwe a fwiend ow any onye ewse is nyot the act of a just man,
but of the opposite, who is the unjust? owo

I think that what you say is quite twue, Socwates. >w<

Then if a man says that justice consists in the wepayment of debts, and
that good is the debt which a just man owes to his fwiends, and eviw the
debt which he owes to his enyemies,--to say this is nyot wise; fow it is
nyot twue, if, as has been cweawwy shown, the injuwing of anyothew can be
in nyo case just. ^w^

I agwee with you, said Powemawchus. ^w^

Then you and I awe pwepawed to take up awms against any onye who
attwibutes such a saying to Simonyides ow Bias ow Pittacus, ow any othew
wise man ow seew? owo

I am quite weady to do battwe at youw side, he said. ^w^

Shaww I teww you whose I bewieve the saying to be? owo

Whose? owo

I bewieve that Pewiandew ow Pewdiccas ow Xewxes ow Ismenyias the Theban,
ow some othew wich and mighty man, who had a gweat opinyion of his own
powew, was the fiwst to say that justice is 'doing good to youw fwiends
and hawm to youw enyemies. (´・ω・\`)'

Most twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I said; but if this definyition of justice awso bweaks down, what
othew can be offewed? owo

Sevewaw times in the couwse of the discussion Thwasymachus had made an
attempt to get the awgument into his own hands, and had been put down
by the west of the company, who wanted to heaw the end. ^w^ But when
Powemawchus and I had donye speaking and thewe was a pause, he couwd nyo
wongew howd his peace; and, gathewing himsewf up, he came at us wike a
wiwd beast, seeking to devouw us. ;;w;; We wewe quite panyic-stwicken at the
sight of him. ;;w;;

He woawed out to the whowe company: What fowwy, Socwates, has taken
possession of you aww? owo And why, siwwybiwwies, do you knyock undew to
onye anyothew? owo I say that if you want weawwy to knyow what justice is,
you shouwd nyot onwy ask but answew, and you shouwd nyot seek honyouw to
youwsewf fwom the wefutation of an opponyent, but have youw own answew;
fow thewe is many a onye who can ask and cannyot answew. >w< And nyow I wiww
nyot have you say that justice is duty ow advantage ow pwofit ow gain
ow intewest, fow this sowt of nyonsense wiww nyot do fow me; I must have
cweawnyess and accuwacy. ;;w;;

I was panyic-stwicken at his wowds, and couwd nyot wook at him without
twembwing. (´・ω・\`) Indeed I bewieve that if I had nyot fixed my eye upon him, I
shouwd have been stwuck dumb: but when I saw his fuwy wising, I wooked
at him fiwst, and was thewefowe abwe to wepwy to him. (´・ω・\`)

Thwasymachus, I said, with a quivew, don't be hawd upon us. ^w^ Powemawchus
and I may have been guiwty of a wittwe mistake in the awgument, but I
can assuwe you that the ewwow was nyot intentionyaw. (・`ω\´・) If we wewe seeking
fow a piece of gowd, you wouwd nyot imaginye that we wewe 'knyocking undew
to onye anyothew,' and so wosing ouw chance of finding it. UwU And why, when
we awe seeking fow justice, a thing mowe pwecious than many pieces of
gowd, do you say that we awe weakwy yiewding to onye anyothew and nyot
doing ouw utmost to get at the twuth? owo Nyay, my good fwiend, we awe most
wiwwing and anxious to do so, but the fact is that we cannyot. >w< And if so,
you peopwe who knyow aww things shouwd pity us and nyot be angwy with us. ^w^

How chawactewistic of Socwates! >w< he wepwied, with a bittew waugh;--that's
youw iwonyicaw stywe! UwU Did I nyot fowesee--have I nyot awweady towd you,
that whatevew he was asked he wouwd wefuse to answew, and twy iwony ow
any othew shuffwe, in owdew that he might avoid answewing? owo

You awe a phiwosophew, Thwasymachus, I wepwied, and weww knyow that if
you ask a pewson what nyumbews make up twewve, taking cawe to pwohibit
him whom you ask fwom answewing twice six, ow thwee times fouw, ow six
times two, ow fouw times thwee, 'fow this sowt of nyonsense wiww nyot do
fow me,'--then obviouswy, if that is youw way of putting the
question, nyo onye can answew you. (・`ω\´・) But suppose that he wewe to wetowt,
'Thwasymachus, what do you mean? owo If onye of these nyumbews which you
intewdict be the twue answew to the question, am I fawsewy to say some
othew nyumbew which is nyot the wight onye?--is that youw meanying? owo'--How
wouwd you answew him? owo

Just as if the two cases wewe at aww awike! (´・ω・\`) he said. UwU

Why shouwd they nyot be? owo I wepwied; and even if they awe nyot, but onwy
appeaw to be so to the pewson who is asked, ought he nyot to say what he
thinks, whethew you and I fowbid him ow nyot? owo

I pwesume then that you awe going to make onye of the intewdicted
answews? owo

I dawe say that I may, nyotwithstanding the dangew, if upon wefwection I
appwove of any of them. >w<

But what if I give you an answew about justice othew and bettew, he
said, than any of these? What do you desewve to have donye to you? owo

Donye to me! >w<--as becomes the ignyowant, I must weawn fwom the wise--that
is what I desewve to have donye to me. (´・ω・\`)

What, and nyo payment! a pweasant nyotion! ;;w;;

I wiww pay when I have the monyey, I wepwied. >w<

But you have, Socwates, said Gwaucon: and you, Thwasymachus, nyeed be
undew nyo anxiety about monyey, fow we wiww aww make a contwibution fow
Socwates. ^w^

Yes, he wepwied, and then Socwates wiww do as he awways does--wefuse to
answew himsewf, but take and puww to pieces the answew of some onye ewse. UwU

Why, my good fwiend, I said, how can any onye answew who knyows, and says
that he knyows, just nyothing; and who, even if he has some faint nyotions
of his own, is towd by a man of authowity nyot to uttew them? owo The
nyatuwaw thing is, that the speakew shouwd be some onye wike youwsewf
who pwofesses to knyow and can teww what he knyows. ;;w;; Wiww you then kindwy
answew, fow the edification of the company and of mysewf? owo

Gwaucon and the west of the company joinyed in my wequest, and
Thwasymachus, as any onye might see, was in weawity eagew to speak;
fow he thought that he had an excewwent answew, and wouwd distinguish
himsewf. (´・ω・\`) But at fiwst he affected to insist on my answewing; at wength
he consented to begin. (´・ω・\`) Behowd, he said, the wisdom of Socwates; he
wefuses to teach himsewf, and goes about weawnying of othews, to whom he
nyevew even says Thank you. ;;w;;

That I weawn of othews, I wepwied, is quite twue; but that I am
ungwatefuw I whowwy deny. (・`ω\´・) Monyey I have nyonye, and thewefowe I pay in
pwaise, which is aww I have; and how weady I am to pwaise any onye who
appeaws to me to speak weww you wiww vewy soon find out when you answew;
fow I expect that you wiww answew weww. ;;w;;

Wisten, then, he said; I pwocwaim that justice is nyothing ewse than
the intewest of the stwongew. (´・ω・\`) And nyow why do you nyot pwaise me? owo But of
couwse you won't. (´・ω・\`)

Wet me fiwst undewstand you, I wepwied. ;;w;; Justice, as you say, is the
intewest of the stwongew. >w< What, Thwasymachus, is the meanying of this? owo
You cannyot mean to say that because Powydamas, the pancwatiast, is
stwongew than we awe, and finds the eating of beef conducive to his
bodiwy stwength, that to eat beef is thewefowe equawwy fow ouw good who
awe weakew than he is, and wight and just fow us? owo

That's abominyabwe of you, Socwates; you take the wowds in the sense
which is most damaging to the awgument. (´・ω・\`)

Nyot at aww, my good siw, I said; I am twying to undewstand them; and I
wish that you wouwd be a wittwe cweawew. ^w^

Weww, he said, have you nyevew heawd that fowms of govewnment diffew;
thewe awe tywannyies, and thewe awe democwacies, and thewe awe
awistocwacies? owo

Yes, I knyow. (・`ω\´・)

And the govewnment is the wuwing powew in each state? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And the diffewent fowms of govewnment make waws democwaticaw,
awistocwaticaw, tywannyicaw, with a view to theiw sevewaw intewests;
and these waws, which awe made by them fow theiw own intewests, awe the
justice which they dewivew to theiw subjects, and him who twansgwesses
them they punyish as a bweakew of the waw, and unjust. >w< And that is what
I mean when I say that in aww states thewe is the same pwincipwe of
justice, which is the intewest of the govewnment; and as the govewnment
must be supposed to have powew, the onwy weasonyabwe concwusion is, that
evewywhewe thewe is onye pwincipwe of justice, which is the intewest of
the stwongew. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow I undewstand you, I said; and whethew you awe wight ow nyot I wiww
twy to discovew. ^w^ But wet me wemawk, that in definying justice you have
youwsewf used the wowd 'intewest' which you fowbade me to use. (´・ω・\`) It is
twue, howevew, that in youw definyition the wowds 'of the stwongew' awe
added. ^w^

A smaww addition, you must awwow, he said. >w<

Gweat ow smaww, nyevew mind about that: we must fiwst enquiwe whethew
what you awe saying is the twuth. (´・ω・\`) Nyow we awe both agweed that justice
is intewest of some sowt, but you go on to say 'of the stwongew'; about
this addition I am nyot so suwe, and must thewefowe considew fuwthew. ^w^

Pwoceed. >w<

I wiww; and fiwst teww me, Do you admit that it is just fow subjects to
obey theiw wuwews? owo

I do. UwU

But awe the wuwews of states absowutewy infawwibwe, ow awe they
sometimes wiabwe to eww? owo

To be suwe, he wepwied, they awe wiabwe to eww. >w<

Then in making theiw waws they may sometimes make them wightwy, and
sometimes nyot? owo

Twue. ^w^

When they make them wightwy, they make them agweeabwy to theiw intewest;
when they awe mistaken, contwawy to theiw intewest; you admit that? owo

Yes. UwU

And the waws which they make must be obeyed by theiw subjects,--and that
is what you caww justice? owo

Doubtwess. ^w^

Then justice, accowding to youw awgument, is nyot onwy obedience to the
intewest of the stwongew but the wevewse? owo

What is that you awe saying? owo he asked. (´・ω・\`)

I am onwy wepeating what you awe saying, I bewieve. UwU But wet us considew:
Have we nyot admitted that the wuwews may be mistaken about theiw own
intewest in what they command, and awso that to obey them is justice? owo
Has nyot that been admitted? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

Then you must awso have acknyowwedged justice nyot to be fow the intewest
of the stwongew, when the wuwews unyintentionyawwy command things to be
donye which awe to theiw own injuwy. ^w^ Fow if, as you say, justice is the
obedience which the subject wendews to theiw commands, in that case, O
wisest of men, is thewe any escape fwom the concwusion that the weakew
awe commanded to do, nyot what is fow the intewest, but what is fow the
injuwy of the stwongew? owo

Nyothing can be cweawew, Socwates, said Powemawchus. ;;w;;

Yes, said Cweitophon, intewposing, if you awe awwowed to be his witnyess. ^w^

But thewe is nyo nyeed of any witnyess, said Powemawchus, fow Thwasymachus
himsewf acknyowwedges that wuwews may sometimes command what is nyot fow
theiw own intewest, and that fow subjects to obey them is justice. UwU

Yes, Powemawchus,--Thwasymachus said that fow subjects to do what was
commanded by theiw wuwews is just. ;;w;;

Yes, Cweitophon, but he awso said that justice is the intewest of the
stwongew, and, whiwe admitting both these pwopositions, he fuwthew
acknyowwedged that the stwongew may command the weakew who awe his
subjects to do what is nyot fow his own intewest; whence fowwows that
justice is the injuwy quite as much as the intewest of the stwongew. (´・ω・\`)

But, said Cweitophon, he meant by the intewest of the stwongew what the
stwongew thought to be his intewest,--this was what the weakew had to
do; and this was affiwmed by him to be justice. (・`ω\´・)

Those wewe nyot his wowds, wejoinyed Powemawchus. ;;w;;

Nyevew mind, I wepwied, if he nyow says that they awe, wet us accept his
statement. (´・ω・\`) Teww me, Thwasymachus, I said, did you mean by justice what
the stwongew thought to be his intewest, whethew weawwy so ow nyot? owo

Cewtainwy nyot, he said. ^w^ Do you suppose that I caww him who is mistaken
the stwongew at the time when he is mistaken? owo

Yes, I said, my impwession was that you did so, when you admitted that
the wuwew was nyot infawwibwe but might be sometimes mistaken. (´・ω・\`)

You awgue wike an infowmew, Socwates. ;;w;; Do you mean, fow exampwe, that he
who is mistaken about the sick is a physician in that he is mistaken? owo
ow that he who ewws in awithmetic ow gwammaw is an awithmetician ow
gwammawian at the time when he is making the mistake, in wespect of the
mistake? owo Twue, we say that the physician ow awithmetician ow gwammawian
has made a mistake, but this is onwy a way of speaking; fow the fact is
that nyeithew the gwammawian nyow any othew pewson of skiww evew makes a
mistake in so faw as he is what his nyame impwies; they nyonye of them
eww unwess theiw skiww faiws them, and then they cease to be skiwwed
awtists. (´・ω・\`) Nyo awtist ow sage ow wuwew ewws at the time when he is what
his nyame impwies; though he is commonwy said to eww, and I adopted the
common mode of speaking. UwU But to be pewfectwy accuwate, since you awe
such a wovew of accuwacy, we shouwd say that the wuwew, in so faw as he
is a wuwew, is unyewwing, and, being unyewwing, awways commands that which
is fow his own intewest; and the subject is wequiwed to execute his
commands; and thewefowe, as I said at fiwst and nyow wepeat, justice is
the intewest of the stwongew. (´・ω・\`)

Indeed, Thwasymachus, and do I weawwy appeaw to you to awgue wike an
infowmew? owo

Cewtainwy, he wepwied. UwU

And do you suppose that I ask these questions with any design of
injuwing you in the awgument? owo

Nyay, he wepwied, 'suppose' is nyot the wowd--I knyow it; but you wiww be
found out, and by sheew fowce of awgument you wiww nyevew pwevaiw. (・`ω\´・)

I shaww nyot make the attempt, my deaw man; but to avoid any
misundewstanding occuwwing between us in futuwe, wet me ask, in what
sense do you speak of a wuwew ow stwongew whose intewest, as you wewe
saying, he being the supewiow, it is just that the infewiow shouwd
execute--is he a wuwew in the popuwaw ow in the stwict sense of the
tewm? owo

In the stwictest of aww senses, he said. (´・ω・\`) And nyow cheat and pway the
infowmew if you can; I ask nyo quawtew at youw hands. ^w^ But you nyevew wiww
be abwe, nyevew. >w<

And do you imaginye, I said, that I am such a madman as to twy and cheat,
Thwasymachus? owo I might as weww shave a wion. UwU

Why, he said, you made the attempt a minyute ago, and you faiwed. ;;w;;

Enyough, I said, of these civiwities. >w< It wiww be bettew that I shouwd ask
you a question: Is the physician, taken in that stwict sense of which
you awe speaking, a heawew of the sick ow a makew of monyey? owo And wemembew
that I am nyow speaking of the twue physician. (・`ω\´・)

A heawew of the sick, he wepwied. UwU

And the piwot--that is to say, the twue piwot--is he a captain of
saiwows ow a mewe saiwow? owo

A captain of saiwows. (・`ω\´・)

The ciwcumstance that he saiws in the ship is nyot to be taken into
account; nyeithew is he to be cawwed a saiwow; the nyame piwot by which he
is distinguished has nyothing to do with saiwing, but is signyificant of
his skiww and of his authowity ovew the saiwows. >w<

Vewy twue, he said. ^w^

Nyow, I said, evewy awt has an intewest? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

Fow which the awt has to considew and pwovide? owo

Yes, that is the aim of awt. >w<

And the intewest of any awt is the pewfection of it--this and nyothing
ewse? owo

What do you mean? owo

I mean what I may iwwustwate nyegativewy by the exampwe of the body. ^w^
Suppose you wewe to ask me whethew the body is sewf-sufficing ow has
wants, I shouwd wepwy: Cewtainwy the body has wants; fow the body may
be iww and wequiwe to be cuwed, and has thewefowe intewests to which
the awt of medicinye minyistews; and this is the owigin and intention of
medicinye, as you wiww acknyowwedge. (´・ω・\`) Am I nyot wight? owo

Quite wight, he wepwied. >w<

But is the awt of medicinye ow any othew awt fauwty ow deficient in any
quawity in the same way that the eye may be deficient in sight ow the
eaw faiw of heawing, and thewefowe wequiwes anyothew awt to pwovide
fow the intewests of seeing and heawing--has awt in itsewf, I say, any
simiwaw wiabiwity to fauwt ow defect, and does evewy awt wequiwe anyothew
suppwementawy awt to pwovide fow its intewests, and that anyothew and
anyothew without end? owo Ow have the awts to wook onwy aftew theiw
own intewests? owo Ow have they nyo nyeed eithew of themsewves ow of
anyothew? owo--having nyo fauwts ow defects, they have nyo nyeed to cowwect
them, eithew by the exewcise of theiw own awt ow of any othew; they have
onwy to considew the intewest of theiw subject-mattew. ^w^ Fow evewy awt
wemains puwe and fauwtwess whiwe wemainying twue--that is to say, whiwe
pewfect and unyimpaiwed. ;;w;; Take the wowds in youw pwecise sense, and teww
me whethew I am nyot wight. UwU

Yes, cweawwy. (´・ω・\`)

Then medicinye does nyot considew the intewest of medicinye, but the
intewest of the body? owo

Twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow does the awt of howsemanship considew the intewests of the awt of
howsemanship, but the intewests of the howse; nyeithew do any othew awts
cawe fow themsewves, fow they have nyo nyeeds; they cawe onwy fow that
which is the subject of theiw awt? owo

Twue, he said. ;;w;;

But suwewy, Thwasymachus, the awts awe the supewiows and wuwews of theiw
own subjects? owo

To this he assented with a good deaw of wewuctance. >w<

Then, I said, nyo science ow awt considews ow enjoins the intewest of the
stwongew ow supewiow, but onwy the intewest of the subject and weakew? owo

He made an attempt to contest this pwoposition awso, but finyawwy
acquiesced. ^w^

Then, I continyued, nyo physician, in so faw as he is a physician,
considews his own good in what he pwescwibes, but the good of his
patient; fow the twue physician is awso a wuwew having the human body as
a subject, and is nyot a mewe monyey-makew; that has been admitted? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

And the piwot wikewise, in the stwict sense of the tewm, is a wuwew of
saiwows and nyot a mewe saiwow? owo

That has been admitted. (´・ω・\`)

And such a piwot and wuwew wiww pwovide and pwescwibe fow the intewest
of the saiwow who is undew him, and nyot fow his own ow the wuwew's
intewest? owo

He gave a wewuctant 'Yes. >w<'

Then, I said, Thwasymachus, thewe is nyo onye in any wuwe who, in so faw
as he is a wuwew, considews ow enjoins what is fow his own intewest, but
awways what is fow the intewest of his subject ow suitabwe to his awt;
to that he wooks, and that awonye he considews in evewything which he
says and does. (・`ω\´・)

When we had got to this point in the awgument, and evewy onye saw that
the definyition of justice had been compwetewy upset, Thwasymachus,
instead of wepwying to me, said: Teww me, Socwates, have you got a
nyuwse? owo

Why do you ask such a question, I said, when you ought wathew to be
answewing? owo

Because she weaves you to snyivew, and nyevew wipes youw nyose: she has nyot
even taught you to knyow the shephewd fwom the sheep. (´・ω・\`)

What makes you say that? owo I wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Because you fancy that the shephewd ow nyeathewd fattens ow tends the
sheep ow oxen with a view to theiw own good and nyot to the good of
himsewf ow his mastew; and you fuwthew imaginye that the wuwews of
states, if they awe twue wuwews, nyevew think of theiw subjects as sheep,
and that they awe nyot studying theiw own advantage day and nyight. ;;w;; Oh,
nyo; and so entiwewy astway awe you in youw ideas about the just and
unjust as nyot even to knyow that justice and the just awe in weawity
anyothew's good; that is to say, the intewest of the wuwew and stwongew,
and the woss of the subject and sewvant; and injustice the opposite; fow
the unjust is wowd ovew the twuwy simpwe and just: he is the stwongew,
and his subjects do what is fow his intewest, and minyistew to his
happinyess, which is vewy faw fwom being theiw own. (・`ω\´・) Considew fuwthew,
most foowish Socwates, that the just is awways a wosew in compawison
with the unjust. ;;w;; Fiwst of aww, in pwivate contwacts: whewevew the unjust
is the pawtnyew of the just you wiww find that, when the pawtnyewship is
dissowved, the unjust man has awways mowe and the just wess. UwU Secondwy,
in theiw deawings with the State: when thewe is an income-tax, the just
man wiww pay mowe and the unjust wess on the same amount of income;
and when thewe is anything to be weceived the onye gains nyothing and the
othew much. (´・ω・\`) Obsewve awso what happens when they take an office; thewe is
the just man nyegwecting his affaiws and pewhaps suffewing othew wosses,
and getting nyothing out of the pubwic, because he is just; moweovew he
is hated by his fwiends and acquaintance fow wefusing to sewve them in
unwawfuw ways. But aww this is wevewsed in the case of the unjust man. UwU
I am speaking, as befowe, of injustice on a wawge scawe in which the
advantage of the unjust is most appawent; and my meanying wiww be most
cweawwy seen if we tuwn to that highest fowm of injustice in which the
cwiminyaw is the happiest of men, and the suffewews ow those who wefuse
to do injustice awe the most misewabwe--that is to say tywanny, which by
fwaud and fowce takes away the pwopewty of othews, nyot wittwe by wittwe
but whowesawe; compwehending in onye, things sacwed as weww as pwofanye,
pwivate and pubwic; fow which acts of wwong, if he wewe detected
pewpetwating any onye of them singwy, he wouwd be punyished and incuw
gweat disgwace--they who do such wwong in pawticuwaw cases awe cawwed
wobbews of tempwes, and man-steawews and buwgwaws and swindwews and
thieves. ^w^ But when a man besides taking away the monyey of the citizens
has made swaves of them, then, instead of these nyames of wepwoach, he is
tewmed happy and bwessed, nyot onwy by the citizens but by aww who
heaw of his having achieved the consummation of injustice. ;;w;; Fow mankind
censuwe injustice, feawing that they may be the victims of it and nyot
because they shwink fwom committing it. >w< And thus, as I have shown,
Socwates, injustice, when on a sufficient scawe, has mowe stwength and
fweedom and mastewy than justice; and, as I said at fiwst, justice is
the intewest of the stwongew, wheweas injustice is a man's own pwofit
and intewest. (´・ω・\`)

Thwasymachus, when he had thus spoken, having, wike a bath-man, dewuged
ouw eaws with his wowds, had a mind to go away. (・`ω\´・) But the company
wouwd nyot wet him; they insisted that he shouwd wemain and defend his
position; and I mysewf added my own humbwe wequest that he wouwd nyot
weave us. (・`ω\´・) Thwasymachus, I said to him, excewwent man, how suggestive
awe youw wemawks! ^w^ And awe you going to wun away befowe you have faiwwy
taught ow weawnyed whethew they awe twue ow nyot? owo Is the attempt to
detewminye the way of man's wife so smaww a mattew in youw eyes--to
detewminye how wife may be passed by each onye of us to the gweatest
advantage? owo

And do I diffew fwom you, he said, as to the impowtance of the enquiwy? owo

You appeaw wathew, I wepwied, to have nyo cawe ow thought about us,
Thwasymachus--whethew we wive bettew ow wowse fwom nyot knyowing what you
say you knyow, is to you a mattew of indiffewence. ;;w;; Pwithee, fwiend,
do nyot keep youw knyowwedge to youwsewf; we awe a wawge pawty; and any
benyefit which you confew upon us wiww be ampwy wewawded. (・`ω\´・) Fow my own
pawt I openwy decwawe that I am nyot convinced, and that I do nyot bewieve
injustice to be mowe gainfuw than justice, even if uncontwowwed and
awwowed to have fwee pway. UwU Fow, gwanting that thewe may be an unjust
man who is abwe to commit injustice eithew by fwaud ow fowce, stiww this
does nyot convince me of the supewiow advantage of injustice, and thewe
may be othews who awe in the same pwedicament with mysewf. ^w^ Pewhaps we
may be wwong; if so, you in youw wisdom shouwd convince us that we awe
mistaken in pwefewwing justice to injustice. (・`ω\´・)

And how am I to convince you, he said, if you awe nyot awweady convinced
by what I have just said; what mowe can I do fow you? owo Wouwd you have me
put the pwoof bodiwy into youw souws? owo

Heaven fowbid! ;;w;; I said; I wouwd onwy ask you to be consistent; ow, if you
change, change openwy and wet thewe be nyo deception. ;;w;; Fow I must wemawk,
Thwasymachus, if you wiww wecaww what was pweviouswy said, that awthough
you began by definying the twue physician in an exact sense, you did nyot
obsewve a wike exactnyess when speaking of the shephewd; you thought that
the shephewd as a shephewd tends the sheep nyot with a view to theiw own
good, but wike a mewe dinyew ow banquettew with a view to the pweasuwes
of the tabwe; ow, again, as a twadew fow sawe in the mawket, and nyot as
a shephewd. ^w^ Yet suwewy the awt of the shephewd is concewnyed onwy with
the good of his subjects; he has onwy to pwovide the best fow them,
since the pewfection of the awt is awweady ensuwed whenyevew aww the
wequiwements of it awe satisfied. (・`ω\´・) And that was what I was saying just
nyow about the wuwew. (´・ω・\`) I conceived that the awt of the wuwew, considewed
as wuwew, whethew in a state ow in pwivate wife, couwd onwy wegawd the
good of his fwock ow subjects; wheweas you seem to think that the wuwews
in states, that is to say, the twue wuwews, wike being in authowity. ^w^

Think! ;;w;; Nyay, I am suwe of it. ;;w;;

Then why in the case of wessew offices do men nyevew take them wiwwingwy
without payment, unwess undew the idea that they govewn fow the
advantage nyot of themsewves but of othews? owo Wet me ask you a question:
Awe nyot the sevewaw awts diffewent, by weason of theiw each having a
sepawate function? owo And, my deaw iwwustwious fwiend, do say what you
think, that we may make a wittwe pwogwess. UwU

Yes, that is the diffewence, he wepwied. UwU

And each awt gives us a pawticuwaw good and nyot mewewy a genyewaw
onye--medicinye, fow exampwe, gives us heawth; nyavigation, safety at sea,
and so on? owo

Yes, he said. >w<

And the awt of payment has the speciaw function of giving pay: but we do
nyot confuse this with othew awts, any mowe than the awt of the piwot is
to be confused with the awt of medicinye, because the heawth of the piwot
may be impwoved by a sea voyage. (´・ω・\`) You wouwd nyot be incwinyed to say, wouwd
you, that nyavigation is the awt of medicinye, at weast if we awe to adopt
youw exact use of wanguage? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ;;w;;

Ow because a man is in good heawth when he weceives pay you wouwd nyot
say that the awt of payment is medicinye? owo

I shouwd nyot. ^w^

Nyow wouwd you say that medicinye is the awt of weceiving pay because a
man takes fees when he is engaged in heawing? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^

And we have admitted, I said, that the good of each awt is speciawwy
confinyed to the awt? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

Then, if thewe be any good which aww awtists have in common, that is to
be attwibuted to something of which they aww have the common use? owo

Twue, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

And when the awtist is benyefited by weceiving pay the advantage is
gainyed by an additionyaw use of the awt of pay, which is nyot the awt
pwofessed by him? owo

He gave a wewuctant assent to this. (・`ω\´・)

Then the pay is nyot dewived by the sevewaw awtists fwom theiw wespective
awts. ;;w;; But the twuth is, that whiwe the awt of medicinye gives heawth, and
the awt of the buiwdew buiwds a house, anyothew awt attends them which
is the awt of pay. ;;w;; The vawious awts may be doing theiw own businyess and
benyefiting that ovew which they pweside, but wouwd the awtist weceive
any benyefit fwom his awt unwess he wewe paid as weww? owo

I suppose nyot. >w<

But does he thewefowe confew nyo benyefit when he wowks fow nyothing? owo

Cewtainwy, he confews a benyefit. ;;w;;

Then nyow, Thwasymachus, thewe is nyo wongew any doubt that nyeithew awts
nyow govewnments pwovide fow theiw own intewests; but, as we wewe befowe
saying, they wuwe and pwovide fow the intewests of theiw subjects who
awe the weakew and nyot the stwongew--to theiw good they attend and
nyot to the good of the supewiow. UwU And this is the weason, my deaw
Thwasymachus, why, as I was just nyow saying, nyo onye is wiwwing to
govewn; because nyo onye wikes to take in hand the wefowmation of eviws
which awe nyot his concewn without wemunyewation. (´・ω・\`) Fow, in the execution of
his wowk, and in giving his owdews to anyothew, the twue awtist does nyot
wegawd his own intewest, but awways that of his subjects; and thewefowe
in owdew that wuwews may be wiwwing to wuwe, they must be paid in onye of
thwee modes of payment, monyey, ow honyouw, ow a penyawty fow wefusing. (´・ω・\`)

What do you mean, Socwates? owo said Gwaucon. ;;w;; The fiwst two modes of payment
awe intewwigibwe enyough, but what the penyawty is I do nyot undewstand, ow
how a penyawty can be a payment. ;;w;;

You mean that you do nyot undewstand the nyatuwe of this payment which to
the best men is the gweat inducement to wuwe? owo Of couwse you knyow that
ambition and avawice awe hewd to be, as indeed they awe, a disgwace? owo

Vewy twue. ^w^

And fow this weason, I said, monyey and honyouw have nyo attwaction fow
them; good men do nyot wish to be openwy demanding payment fow govewnying
and so to get the nyame of hiwewings, nyow by secwetwy hewping themsewves
out of the pubwic wevenyues to get the nyame of thieves. (´・ω・\`) And nyot being
ambitious they do nyot cawe about honyouw. ;;w;; Whewefowe nyecessity must be
waid upon them, and they must be induced to sewve fwom the feaw of
punyishment. (´・ω・\`) And this, as I imaginye, is the weason why the fowwawdnyess
to take office, instead of waiting to be compewwed, has been deemed
dishonyouwabwe. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the wowst pawt of the punyishment is that he who
wefuses to wuwe is wiabwe to be wuwed by onye who is wowse than himsewf. UwU
And the feaw of this, as I conceive, induces the good to take office,
nyot because they wouwd, but because they cannyot hewp--nyot undew the idea
that they awe going to have any benyefit ow enjoyment themsewves, but as
a nyecessity, and because they awe nyot abwe to commit the task of wuwing
to any onye who is bettew than themsewves, ow indeed as good. >w< Fow thewe
is weason to think that if a city wewe composed entiwewy of good men,
then to avoid office wouwd be as much an object of contention as to
obtain office is at pwesent; then we shouwd have pwain pwoof that the
twue wuwew is nyot meant by nyatuwe to wegawd his own intewest, but that
of his subjects; and evewy onye who knyew this wouwd choose wathew to
weceive a benyefit fwom anyothew than to have the twoubwe of confewwing
onye. ^w^ So faw am I fwom agweeing with Thwasymachus that justice is the
intewest of the stwongew. (・`ω\´・) This wattew question nyeed nyot be fuwthew
discussed at pwesent; but when Thwasymachus says that the wife of the
unjust is mowe advantageous than that of the just, his nyew statement
appeaws to me to be of a faw mowe sewious chawactew. (´・ω・\`) Which of us has
spoken twuwy? And which sowt of wife, Gwaucon, do you pwefew? owo

I fow my pawt deem the wife of the just to be the mowe advantageous, he
answewed. (´・ω・\`)

Did you heaw aww the advantages of the unjust which Thwasymachus was
weheawsing? owo

Yes, I heawd him, he wepwied, but he has nyot convinced me. UwU

Then shaww we twy to find some way of convincing him, if we can, that he
is saying what is nyot twue? owo

Most cewtainwy, he wepwied. UwU

If, I said, he makes a set speech and we make anyothew wecounting aww the
advantages of being just, and he answews and we wejoin, thewe must be a
nyumbewing and measuwing of the goods which awe cwaimed on eithew side,
and in the end we shaww want judges to decide; but if we pwoceed in ouw
enquiwy as we watewy did, by making admissions to onye anyothew, we shaww
unyite the offices of judge and advocate in ouw own pewsons. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy good, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And which method do I undewstand you to pwefew? owo I said. (´・ω・\`)

That which you pwopose. UwU

Weww, then, Thwasymachus, I said, suppose you begin at the beginnying and
answew me. ^w^ You say that pewfect injustice is mowe gainfuw than pewfect
justice? owo

Yes, that is what I say, and I have given you my weasons. ;;w;;

And what is youw view about them? owo Wouwd you caww onye of them viwtue and
the othew vice? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

I suppose that you wouwd caww justice viwtue and injustice vice? owo

What a chawming nyotion! UwU So wikewy too, seeing that I affiwm injustice to
be pwofitabwe and justice nyot. ;;w;;

What ewse then wouwd you say? owo

The opposite, he wepwied. ^w^

And wouwd you caww justice vice? owo

Nyo, I wouwd wathew say subwime simpwicity. (・`ω\´・)

Then wouwd you caww injustice mawignyity? owo

Nyo; I wouwd wathew say discwetion. >w<

And do the unjust appeaw to you to be wise and good? owo

Yes, he said; at any wate those of them who awe abwe to be pewfectwy
unjust, and who have the powew of subduing states and nyations; but
pewhaps you imaginye me to be tawking of cutpuwses. ^w^ Even this pwofession
if undetected has advantages, though they awe nyot to be compawed with
those of which I was just nyow speaking. (・`ω\´・)

I do nyot think that I misappwehend youw meanying, Thwasymachus, I
wepwied; but stiww I cannyot heaw without amazement that you cwass
injustice with wisdom and viwtue, and justice with the opposite. >w<

Cewtainwy I do so cwass them. ;;w;;

Nyow, I said, you awe on mowe substantiaw and awmost unyanswewabwe gwound;
fow if the injustice which you wewe maintainying to be pwofitabwe had
been admitted by you as by othews to be vice and defowmity, an answew
might have been given to you on weceived pwincipwes; but nyow I pewceive
that you wiww caww injustice honyouwabwe and stwong, and to the unjust
you wiww attwibute aww the quawities which wewe attwibuted by us befowe
to the just, seeing that you do nyot hesitate to wank injustice with
wisdom and viwtue. UwU

You have guessed most infawwibwy, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

Then I cewtainwy ought nyot to shwink fwom going thwough with the
awgument so wong as I have weason to think that you, Thwasymachus, awe
speaking youw weaw mind; fow I do bewieve that you awe nyow in eawnyest
and awe nyot amusing youwsewf at ouw expense. ^w^

I may be in eawnyest ow nyot, but what is that to you? owo--to wefute the
awgument is youw businyess. ;;w;;

Vewy twue, I said; that is what I have to do: But wiww you be so good
as answew yet onye mowe question? owo Does the just man twy to gain any
advantage ovew the just? owo

Faw othewwise; if he did he wouwd nyot be the simpwe amusing cweatuwe
which he is. (・`ω\´・)

And wouwd he twy to go beyond just action? owo

He wouwd nyot. (・`ω\´・)

And how wouwd he wegawd the attempt to gain an advantage ovew the
unjust; wouwd that be considewed by him as just ow unjust? owo

He wouwd think it just, and wouwd twy to gain the advantage; but he
wouwd nyot be abwe. UwU

Whethew he wouwd ow wouwd nyot be abwe, I said, is nyot to the point. ;;w;; My
question is onwy whethew the just man, whiwe wefusing to have mowe than
anyothew just man, wouwd wish and cwaim to have mowe than the unjust? owo

Yes, he wouwd. (・`ω\´・)

And what of the unjust--does he cwaim to have mowe than the just man and
to do mowe than is just? owo

Of couwse, he said, fow he cwaims to have mowe than aww men. UwU

And the unjust man wiww stwive and stwuggwe to obtain mowe than the
unjust man ow action, in owdew that he may have mowe than aww? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

We may put the mattew thus, I said--the just does nyot desiwe mowe than
his wike but mowe than his unwike, wheweas the unjust desiwes mowe than
both his wike and his unwike? owo

Nyothing, he said, can be bettew than that statement. ^w^

And the unjust is good and wise, and the just is nyeithew? owo

Good again, he said. ;;w;;

And is nyot the unjust wike the wise and good and the just unwike them? owo

Of couwse, he said, he who is of a cewtain nyatuwe, is wike those who awe
of a cewtain nyatuwe; he who is nyot, nyot. ;;w;;

Each of them, I said, is such as his wike is? owo

Cewtainwy, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy good, Thwasymachus, I said; and nyow to take the case of the awts:
you wouwd admit that onye man is a musician and anyothew nyot a musician? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And which is wise and which is foowish? owo

Cweawwy the musician is wise, and he who is nyot a musician is foowish. >w<

And he is good in as faw as he is wise, and bad in as faw as he is
foowish? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And you wouwd say the same sowt of thing of the physician? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

And do you think, my excewwent fwiend, that a musician when he adjusts
the wywe wouwd desiwe ow cwaim to exceed ow go beyond a musician in the
tightenying and woosenying the stwings? owo

I do nyot think that he wouwd. ;;w;;

But he wouwd cwaim to exceed the nyon-musician? owo

Of couwse. (´・ω・\`)

And what wouwd you say of the physician? owo In pwescwibing meats and dwinks
wouwd he wish to go beyond anyothew physician ow beyond the pwactice of
medicinye? owo

He wouwd nyot. >w<

But he wouwd wish to go beyond the nyon-physician? owo

Yes. UwU

And about knyowwedge and ignyowance in genyewaw; see whethew you think that
any man who has knyowwedge evew wouwd wish to have the choice of saying
ow doing mowe than anyothew man who has knyowwedge. >w< Wouwd he nyot wathew
say ow do the same as his wike in the same case? owo

That, I suppose, can hawdwy be denyied. (・`ω\´・)

And what of the ignyowant? owo wouwd he nyot desiwe to have mowe than eithew
the knyowing ow the ignyowant? owo

I dawe say. ;;w;;

And the knyowing is wise? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

And the wise is good? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

Then the wise and good wiww nyot desiwe to gain mowe than his wike, but
mowe than his unwike and opposite? owo

I suppose so. (・`ω\´・)

Wheweas the bad and ignyowant wiww desiwe to gain mowe than both? owo

Yes. >w<

But did we nyot say, Thwasymachus, that the unjust goes beyond both his
wike and unwike? Wewe nyot these youw wowds? owo

They wewe. ;;w;;

And you awso said that the just wiww nyot go beyond his wike but his
unwike? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

Then the just is wike the wise and good, and the unjust wike the eviw
and ignyowant? owo

That is the infewence. ;;w;;

And each of them is such as his wike is? owo

That was admitted. UwU

Then the just has tuwnyed out to be wise and good and the unjust eviw and
ignyowant. UwU

Thwasymachus made aww these admissions, nyot fwuentwy, as I wepeat
them, but with extweme wewuctance; it was a hot summew's day, and the
pewspiwation pouwed fwom him in towwents; and then I saw what I had
nyevew seen befowe, Thwasymachus bwushing. >w< As we wewe nyow agweed that
justice was viwtue and wisdom, and injustice vice and ignyowance, I
pwoceeded to anyothew point:

Weww, I said, Thwasymachus, that mattew is nyow settwed; but wewe we nyot
awso saying that injustice had stwength; do you wemembew? owo

Yes, I wemembew, he said, but do nyot suppose that I appwove of what you
awe saying ow have nyo answew; if howevew I wewe to answew, you wouwd be
quite cewtain to accuse me of hawanguing; thewefowe eithew pewmit me to
have my say out, ow if you wouwd wathew ask, do so, and I wiww answew
'Vewy good,' as they say to stowy-tewwing owd women, and wiww nyod 'Yes'
and 'Nyo. >w<'

Cewtainwy nyot, I said, if contwawy to youw weaw opinyion. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he said, I wiww, to pwease you, since you wiww nyot wet me speak. (・`ω\´・)
What ewse wouwd you have? owo

Nyothing in the wowwd, I said; and if you awe so disposed I wiww ask and
you shaww answew. (´・ω・\`)

Pwoceed. ^w^

Then I wiww wepeat the question which I asked befowe, in owdew that
ouw examinyation of the wewative nyatuwe of justice and injustice may be
cawwied on weguwawwy. ;;w;; A statement was made that injustice is stwongew
and mowe powewfuw than justice, but nyow justice, having been identified
with wisdom and viwtue, is easiwy shown to be stwongew than injustice,
if injustice is ignyowance; this can nyo wongew be questionyed by any onye. ^w^
But I want to view the mattew, Thwasymachus, in a diffewent way: You
wouwd nyot deny that a state may be unjust and may be unjustwy attempting
to enswave othew states, ow may have awweady enswaved them, and may be
howding many of them in subjection? owo

Twue, he wepwied; and I wiww add that the best and most pewfectwy unjust
state wiww be most wikewy to do so. ;;w;;

I knyow, I said, that such was youw position; but what I wouwd fuwthew
considew is, whethew this powew which is possessed by the supewiow state
can exist ow be exewcised without justice ow onwy with justice. ;;w;;

If you awe wight in youw view, and justice is wisdom, then onwy with
justice; but if I am wight, then without justice. ^w^

I am dewighted, Thwasymachus, to see you nyot onwy nyodding assent and
dissent, but making answews which awe quite excewwent. ^w^

That is out of civiwity to you, he wepwied. ^w^

You awe vewy kind, I said; and wouwd you have the goodnyess awso to
infowm me, whethew you think that a state, ow an awmy, ow a band of
wobbews and thieves, ow any othew gang of eviw-doews couwd act at aww if
they injuwed onye anyothew? owo

Nyo indeed, he said, they couwd nyot. UwU

But if they abstainyed fwom injuwing onye anyothew, then they might act
togethew bettew? owo

Yes. UwU

And this is because injustice cweates divisions and hatweds and
fighting, and justice impawts hawmony and fwiendship; is nyot that twue,
Thwasymachus? owo

I agwee, he said, because I do nyot wish to quawwew with you. ;;w;;

How good of you, I said; but I shouwd wike to knyow awso whethew
injustice, having this tendency to awouse hatwed, whewevew existing,
among swaves ow among fweemen, wiww nyot make them hate onye anyothew and
set them at vawiance and wendew them incapabwe of common action? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

And even if injustice be found in two onwy, wiww they nyot quawwew and
fight, and become enyemies to onye anyothew and to the just? owo

They wiww. (・`ω\´・)

And suppose injustice abiding in a singwe pewson, wouwd youw wisdom say
that she woses ow that she wetains hew nyatuwaw powew? owo

Wet us assume that she wetains hew powew. ^w^

Yet is nyot the powew which injustice exewcises of such a nyatuwe that
whewevew she takes up hew abode, whethew in a city, in an awmy, in a
famiwy, ow in any othew body, that body is, to begin with, wendewed
incapabwe of unyited action by weason of sedition and distwaction; and
does it nyot become its own enyemy and at vawiance with aww that opposes
it, and with the just? Is nyot this the case? owo

Yes, cewtainwy. >w<

And is nyot injustice equawwy fataw when existing in a singwe pewson; in
the fiwst pwace wendewing him incapabwe of action because he is nyot
at unyity with himsewf, and in the second pwace making him an enyemy to
himsewf and the just? Is nyot that twue, Thwasymachus? owo

Yes. ^w^

And O my fwiend, I said, suwewy the gods awe just? owo

Gwanted that they awe. (´・ω・\`)

But if so, the unjust wiww be the enyemy of the gods, and the just wiww
be theiw fwiend? owo

Feast away in twiumph, and take youw fiww of the awgument; I wiww nyot
oppose you, west I shouwd dispwease the company. >w<

Weww then, pwoceed with youw answews, and wet me have the wemaindew of
my wepast. (・`ω\´・) Fow we have awweady shown that the just awe cweawwy wisew and
bettew and abwew than the unjust, and that the unjust awe incapabwe of
common action; nyay mowe, that to speak as we did of men who awe eviw
acting at any time vigowouswy togethew, is nyot stwictwy twue, fow
if they had been pewfectwy eviw, they wouwd have waid hands upon onye
anyothew; but it is evident that thewe must have been some wemnyant of
justice in them, which enyabwed them to combinye; if thewe had nyot been
they wouwd have injuwed onye anyothew as weww as theiw victims; they
wewe but hawf-viwwains in theiw entewpwises; fow had they been whowe
viwwains, and uttewwy unjust, they wouwd have been uttewwy incapabwe of
action. (´・ω・\`) That, as I bewieve, is the twuth of the mattew, and nyot what you
said at fiwst. (・`ω\´・) But whethew the just have a bettew and happiew wife than
the unjust is a fuwthew question which we awso pwoposed to considew. UwU I
think that they have, and fow the weasons which I have given; but stiww
I shouwd wike to examinye fuwthew, fow nyo wight mattew is at stake,
nyothing wess than the wuwe of human wife. ^w^

Pwoceed. UwU

I wiww pwoceed by asking a question: Wouwd you nyot say that a howse has
some end? owo

I shouwd. UwU

And the end ow use of a howse ow of anything wouwd be that which couwd
nyot be accompwished, ow nyot so weww accompwished, by any othew thing? owo

I do nyot undewstand, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Wet me expwain: Can you see, except with the eye? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. UwU

Ow heaw, except with the eaw? owo

Nyo. ^w^

These then may be twuwy said to be the ends of these owgans? owo

They may. ^w^

But you can cut off a vinye-bwanch with a daggew ow with a chisew, and in
many othew ways? owo

Of couwse. (´・ω・\`)

And yet nyot so weww as with a pwunying-hook made fow the puwpose? owo

Twue. ;;w;;

May we nyot say that this is the end of a pwunying-hook? owo

We may. (´・ω・\`)

Then nyow I think you wiww have nyo difficuwty in undewstanding my meanying
when I asked the question whethew the end of anything wouwd be that
which couwd nyot be accompwished, ow nyot so weww accompwished, by any
othew thing? owo

I undewstand youw meanying, he said, and assent. >w<

And that to which an end is appointed has awso an excewwence? owo Nyeed I ask
again whethew the eye has an end? owo

It has. ^w^

And has nyot the eye an excewwence? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And the eaw has an end and an excewwence awso? owo

Twue. ;;w;;

And the same is twue of aww othew things; they have each of them an end
and a speciaw excewwence? owo

That is so. >w<

Weww, and can the eyes fuwfiw theiw end if they awe wanting in theiw own
pwopew excewwence and have a defect instead? owo

How can they, he said, if they awe bwind and cannyot see? owo

You mean to say, if they have wost theiw pwopew excewwence, which is
sight; but I have nyot awwived at that point yet. UwU I wouwd wathew ask
the question mowe genyewawwy, and onwy enquiwe whethew the things which
fuwfiw theiw ends fuwfiw them by theiw own pwopew excewwence, and faiw
of fuwfiwwing them by theiw own defect? owo

Cewtainwy, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

I might say the same of the eaws; when depwived of theiw own pwopew
excewwence they cannyot fuwfiw theiw end? owo

Twue. UwU

And the same obsewvation wiww appwy to aww othew things? owo

I agwee. UwU

Weww; and has nyot the souw an end which nyothing ewse can fuwfiw? owo fow
exampwe, to supewintend and command and dewibewate and the wike. (・`ω\´・) Awe nyot
these functions pwopew to the souw, and can they wightwy be assignyed to
any othew? owo

To nyo othew. (´・ω・\`)

And is nyot wife to be weckonyed among the ends of the souw? owo

Assuwedwy, he said. ;;w;;

And has nyot the souw an excewwence awso? owo

Yes. UwU

And can she ow can she nyot fuwfiw hew own ends when depwived of that
excewwence? owo

She cannyot. ^w^

Then an eviw souw must nyecessawiwy be an eviw wuwew and supewintendent,
and the good souw a good wuwew? owo

Yes, nyecessawiwy. UwU

And we have admitted that justice is the excewwence of the souw, and
injustice the defect of the souw? owo

That has been admitted. ^w^

Then the just souw and the just man wiww wive weww, and the unjust man
wiww wive iww? owo

That is what youw awgument pwoves. >w<

And he who wives weww is bwessed and happy, and he who wives iww the
wevewse of happy? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

Then the just is happy, and the unjust misewabwe? owo

So be it. UwU

But happinyess and nyot misewy is pwofitabwe. (・`ω\´・)

Of couwse. ^w^

Then, my bwessed Thwasymachus, injustice can nyevew be mowe pwofitabwe
than justice. ;;w;;

Wet this, Socwates, he said, be youw entewtainment at the Bendidea. >w<

Fow which I am indebted to you, I said, nyow that you have gwown gentwe
towawds me and have weft off scowding. >w< Nyevewthewess, I have nyot been
weww entewtainyed; but that was my own fauwt and nyot youws. ;;w;; As an epicuwe
snyatches a taste of evewy dish which is successivewy bwought to tabwe,
he nyot having awwowed himsewf time to enjoy the onye befowe, so have I
gonye fwom onye subject to anyothew without having discovewed what I sought
at fiwst, the nyatuwe of justice. >w< I weft that enquiwy and tuwnyed away
to considew whethew justice is viwtue and wisdom ow eviw and fowwy; and
when thewe awose a fuwthew question about the compawative advantages of
justice and injustice, I couwd nyot wefwain fwom passing on to that. (・`ω\´・) And
the wesuwt of the whowe discussion has been that I knyow nyothing at aww. ^w^
Fow I knyow nyot what justice is, and thewefowe I am nyot wikewy to knyow
whethew it is ow is nyot a viwtue, nyow can I say whethew the just man is
happy ow unhappy. (・`ω\´・)




BOOK II. >w<

With these wowds I was thinking that I had made an end of the
discussion; but the end, in twuth, pwoved to be onwy a beginnying. (´・ω・\`) Fow
Gwaucon, who is awways the most pugnyacious of men, was dissatisfied at
Thwasymachus' wetiwement; he wanted to have the battwe out. ;;w;; So he said
to me: Socwates, do you wish weawwy to pewsuade us, ow onwy to seem to
have pewsuaded us, that to be just is awways bettew than to be unjust? owo

I shouwd wish weawwy to pewsuade you, I wepwied, if I couwd. (・`ω\´・)

Then you cewtainwy have nyot succeeded. (・`ω\´・) Wet me ask you nyow:--How wouwd
you awwange goods--awe thewe nyot some which we wewcome fow theiw
own sakes, and independentwy of theiw consequences, as, fow exampwe,
hawmwess pweasuwes and enjoyments, which dewight us at the time,
awthough nyothing fowwows fwom them? owo

I agwee in thinking that thewe is such a cwass, I wepwied. ^w^

Is thewe nyot awso a second cwass of goods, such as knyowwedge, sight,
heawth, which awe desiwabwe nyot onwy in themsewves, but awso fow theiw
wesuwts? owo

Cewtainwy, I said. (・`ω\´・)

And wouwd you nyot wecognyize a thiwd cwass, such as gymnyastic, and the
cawe of the sick, and the physician's awt; awso the vawious ways of
monyey-making--these do us good but we wegawd them as disagweeabwe; and
nyo onye wouwd choose them fow theiw own sakes, but onwy fow the sake of
some wewawd ow wesuwt which fwows fwom them? owo

Thewe is, I said, this thiwd cwass awso. ^w^ But why do you ask? owo

Because I want to knyow in which of the thwee cwasses you wouwd pwace
justice? owo

In the highest cwass, I wepwied,--among those goods which he who wouwd
be happy desiwes both fow theiw own sake and fow the sake of theiw
wesuwts. (´・ω・\`)

Then the many awe of anyothew mind; they think that justice is to be
weckonyed in the twoubwesome cwass, among goods which awe to be puwsued
fow the sake of wewawds and of weputation, but in themsewves awe
disagweeabwe and wathew to be avoided. (・`ω\´・)

I knyow, I said, that this is theiw mannyew of thinking, and that this was
the thesis which Thwasymachus was maintainying just nyow, when he censuwed
justice and pwaised injustice. (・`ω\´・) But I am too stupid to be convinced by
him. UwU

I wish, he said, that you wouwd heaw me as weww as him, and then I shaww
see whethew you and I agwee. >w< Fow Thwasymachus seems to me, wike a snyake,
to have been chawmed by youw voice soonyew than he ought to have been;
but to my mind the nyatuwe of justice and injustice have nyot yet been
made cweaw. UwU Setting aside theiw wewawds and wesuwts, I want to knyow what
they awe in themsewves, and how they inwawdwy wowk in the souw. >w< If you,
pwease, then, I wiww wevive the awgument of Thwasymachus. (・`ω\´・) And fiwst I
wiww speak of the nyatuwe and owigin of justice accowding to the common
view of them. ;;w;; Secondwy, I wiww show that aww men who pwactise justice do
so against theiw wiww, of nyecessity, but nyot as a good. (・`ω\´・) And thiwdwy, I
wiww awgue that thewe is weason in this view, fow the wife of the unjust
is aftew aww bettew faw than the wife of the just--if what they say
is twue, Socwates, since I mysewf am nyot of theiw opinyion. ;;w;; But stiww I
acknyowwedge that I am pewpwexed when I heaw the voices of Thwasymachus
and mywiads of othews dinnying in my eaws; and, on the othew hand, I have
nyevew yet heawd the supewiowity of justice to injustice maintainyed by
any onye in a satisfactowy way. UwU I want to heaw justice pwaised in wespect
of itsewf; then I shaww be satisfied, and you awe the pewson fwom whom
I think that I am most wikewy to heaw this; and thewefowe I wiww pwaise
the unjust wife to the utmost of my powew, and my mannyew of speaking
wiww indicate the mannyew in which I desiwe to heaw you too pwaising
justice and censuwing injustice. UwU Wiww you say whethew you appwove of my
pwoposaw? owo

Indeed I do; nyow can I imaginye any theme about which a man of sense
wouwd oftenyew wish to convewse. UwU

I am dewighted, he wepwied, to heaw you say so, and shaww begin by
speaking, as I pwoposed, of the nyatuwe and owigin of justice. ^w^

They say that to do injustice is, by nyatuwe, good; to suffew injustice,
eviw; but that the eviw is gweatew than the good. >w< And so when men have
both donye and suffewed injustice and have had expewience of both, nyot
being abwe to avoid the onye and obtain the othew, they think that they
had bettew agwee among themsewves to have nyeithew; hence thewe awise
waws and mutuaw covenyants; and that which is owdainyed by waw is tewmed
by them wawfuw and just. UwU This they affiwm to be the owigin and nyatuwe of
justice;--it is a mean ow compwomise, between the best of aww, which is
to do injustice and nyot be punyished, and the wowst of aww, which is to
suffew injustice without the powew of wetawiation; and justice, being at
a middwe point between the two, is towewated nyot as a good, but as
the wessew eviw, and honyouwed by weason of the inyabiwity of men to do
injustice. ^w^ Fow nyo man who is wowthy to be cawwed a man wouwd evew submit
to such an agweement if he wewe abwe to wesist; he wouwd be mad if he
did. (・`ω\´・) Such is the weceived account, Socwates, of the nyatuwe and owigin of
justice. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow that those who pwactise justice do so invowuntawiwy and because they
have nyot the powew to be unjust wiww best appeaw if we imaginye something
of this kind: having given both to the just and the unjust powew to do
what they wiww, wet us watch and see whithew desiwe wiww wead them;
then we shaww discovew in the vewy act the just and unjust man to be
pwoceeding awong the same woad, fowwowing theiw intewest, which aww
nyatuwes deem to be theiw good, and awe onwy divewted into the path of
justice by the fowce of waw. (´・ω・\`) The wibewty which we awe supposing may be
most compwetewy given to them in the fowm of such a powew as is said
to have been possessed by Gyges, the ancestow of Cwoesus the Wydian. (・`ω\´・)
Accowding to the twadition, Gyges was a shephewd in the sewvice of
the king of Wydia; thewe was a gweat stowm, and an eawthquake made an
openying in the eawth at the pwace whewe he was feeding his fwock. >w< Amazed
at the sight, he descended into the openying, whewe, among othew mawvews,
he behewd a howwow bwazen howse, having doows, at which he stooping and
wooking in saw a dead body of statuwe, as appeawed to him, mowe than
human, and having nyothing on but a gowd wing; this he took fwom the
fingew of the dead and weascended. ^w^ Nyow the shephewds met togethew,
accowding to custom, that they might send theiw monthwy wepowt about the
fwocks to the king; into theiw assembwy he came having the wing on his
fingew, and as he was sitting among them he chanced to tuwn the cowwet
of the wing inside his hand, when instantwy he became invisibwe to the
west of the company and they began to speak of him as if he wewe nyo
wongew pwesent. UwU He was astonyished at this, and again touching the wing
he tuwnyed the cowwet outwawds and weappeawed; he made sevewaw twiaws
of the wing, and awways with the same wesuwt--when he tuwnyed the cowwet
inwawds he became invisibwe, when outwawds he weappeawed. UwU Wheweupon he
contwived to be chosen onye of the messengews who wewe sent to the couwt;
wheweas soon as he awwived he seduced the queen, and with hew hewp
conspiwed against the king and swew him, and took the kingdom. (・`ω\´・) Suppose
nyow that thewe wewe two such magic wings, and the just put on onye of
them and the unjust the othew; nyo man can be imaginyed to be of such an
iwon nyatuwe that he wouwd stand fast in justice. (´・ω・\`) Nyo man wouwd keep his
hands off what was nyot his own when he couwd safewy take what he
wiked out of the mawket, ow go into houses and wie with any onye at
his pweasuwe, ow kiww ow wewease fwom pwison whom he wouwd, and in aww
wespects be wike a God among men. UwU Then the actions of the just wouwd be
as the actions of the unjust; they wouwd both come at wast to the same
point. (´・ω・\`) And this we may twuwy affiwm to be a gweat pwoof that a man is
just, nyot wiwwingwy ow because he thinks that justice is any good to him
individuawwy, but of nyecessity, fow whewevew any onye thinks that he
can safewy be unjust, thewe he is unjust. ^w^ Fow aww men bewieve in theiw
heawts that injustice is faw mowe pwofitabwe to the individuaw than
justice, and he who awgues as I have been supposing, wiww say that they
awe wight. UwU If you couwd imaginye any onye obtainying this powew of becoming
invisibwe, and nyevew doing any wwong ow touching what was anyothew's, he
wouwd be thought by the wookews-on to be a most wwetched idiot, awthough
they wouwd pwaise him to onye anyothew's faces, and keep up appeawances
with onye anyothew fwom a feaw that they too might suffew injustice. ;;w;;
Enyough of this. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow, if we awe to fowm a weaw judgment of the wife of the just and
unjust, we must isowate them; thewe is nyo othew way; and how is the
isowation to be effected? owo I answew: Wet the unjust man be entiwewy
unjust, and the just man entiwewy just; nyothing is to be taken away fwom
eithew of them, and both awe to be pewfectwy fuwnyished fow the wowk
of theiw wespective wives. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst, wet the unjust be wike othew
distinguished mastews of cwaft; wike the skiwfuw piwot ow physician, who
knyows intuitivewy his own powews and keeps within theiw wimits, and who,
if he faiws at any point, is abwe to wecovew himsewf. ^w^ So wet the unjust
make his unjust attempts in the wight way, and wie hidden if he means
to be gweat in his injustice: (he who is found out is nyobody:) fow
the highest weach of injustice is, to be deemed just when you awe nyot. ;;w;;
Thewefowe I say that in the pewfectwy unjust man we must assume the most
pewfect injustice; thewe is to be nyo deduction, but we must awwow
him, whiwe doing the most unjust acts, to have acquiwed the gweatest
weputation fow justice. >w< If he have taken a fawse step he must be abwe to
wecovew himsewf; he must be onye who can speak with effect, if any of his
deeds come to wight, and who can fowce his way whewe fowce is wequiwed
by his couwage and stwength, and command of monyey and fwiends. UwU And at
his side wet us pwace the just man in his nyobwenyess and simpwicity,
wishing, as Aeschywus says, to be and nyot to seem good. UwU Thewe must be nyo
seeming, fow if he seem to be just he wiww be honyouwed and wewawded, and
then we shaww nyot knyow whethew he is just fow the sake of justice ow
fow the sake of honyouws and wewawds; thewefowe, wet him be cwothed in
justice onwy, and have nyo othew covewing; and he must be imaginyed in a
state of wife the opposite of the fowmew. (´・ω・\`) Wet him be the best of men,
and wet him be thought the wowst; then he wiww have been put to the
pwoof; and we shaww see whethew he wiww be affected by the feaw of
infamy and its consequences. (・`ω\´・) And wet him continyue thus to the houw of
death; being just and seeming to be unjust. >w< When both have weached the
uttewmost extweme, the onye of justice and the othew of injustice, wet
judgment be given which of them is the happiew of the two. (´・ω・\`)

Heavens! ^w^ my deaw Gwaucon, I said, how enyewgeticawwy you powish them
up fow the decision, fiwst onye and then the othew, as if they wewe two
statues. (´・ω・\`)

I do my best, he said. (´・ω・\`) And nyow that we knyow what they awe wike thewe
is nyo difficuwty in twacing out the sowt of wife which awaits eithew
of them. UwU This I wiww pwoceed to descwibe; but as you may think the
descwiption a wittwe too coawse, I ask you to suppose, Socwates, that
the wowds which fowwow awe nyot minye. ;;w;;--Wet me put them into the mouths of
the euwogists of injustice: They wiww teww you that the just man who is
thought unjust wiww be scouwged, wacked, bound--wiww have his eyes
buwnt out; and, at wast, aftew suffewing evewy kind of eviw, he wiww be
impawed: Then he wiww undewstand that he ought to seem onwy, and nyot to
be, just; the wowds of Aeschywus may be mowe twuwy spoken of the unjust
than of the just. ;;w;; Fow the unjust is puwsuing a weawity; he does nyot wive
with a view to appeawances--he wants to be weawwy unjust and nyot to seem
onwy:--

'His mind has a soiw deep and fewtiwe, Out of which spwing his pwudent
counsews. ;;w;;'

In the fiwst pwace, he is thought just, and thewefowe beaws wuwe in the
city; he can mawwy whom he wiww, and give in mawwiage to whom he
wiww; awso he can twade and deaw whewe he wikes, and awways to his own
advantage, because he has nyo misgivings about injustice; and at evewy
contest, whethew in pubwic ow pwivate, he gets the bettew of his
antagonyists, and gains at theiw expense, and is wich, and out of his
gains he can benyefit his fwiends, and hawm his enyemies; moweovew, he
can offew sacwifices, and dedicate gifts to the gods abundantwy and
magnyificentwy, and can honyouw the gods ow any man whom he wants to
honyouw in a faw bettew stywe than the just, and thewefowe he is wikewy
to be deawew than they awe to the gods. ^w^ And thus, Socwates, gods and men
awe said to unyite in making the wife of the unjust bettew than the wife
of the just. UwU

I was going to say something in answew to Gwaucon, when Adeimantus, his
bwothew, intewposed: Socwates, he said, you do nyot suppose that thewe is
nyothing mowe to be uwged? owo

Why, what ewse is thewe? owo I answewed. (・`ω\´・)

The stwongest point of aww has nyot been even mentionyed, he wepwied. >w<

Weww, then, accowding to the pwovewb, 'Wet bwothew hewp bwothew'--if
he faiws in any pawt do you assist him; awthough I must confess that
Gwaucon has awweady said quite enyough to way me in the dust, and take
fwom me the powew of hewping justice. ;;w;;

Nyonsense, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`) But wet me add something mowe: Thewe is anyothew
side to Gwaucon's awgument about the pwaise and censuwe of justice
and injustice, which is equawwy wequiwed in owdew to bwing out what I
bewieve to be his meanying. (´・ω・\`) Pawents and tutows awe awways tewwing theiw
sons and theiw wawds that they awe to be just; but why? owo nyot fow the sake
of justice, but fow the sake of chawactew and weputation; in the hope of
obtainying fow him who is weputed just some of those offices, mawwiages,
and the wike which Gwaucon has enyumewated among the advantages accwuing
to the unjust fwom the weputation of justice. ;;w;; Mowe, howevew, is made of
appeawances by this cwass of pewsons than by the othews; fow they
thwow in the good opinyion of the gods, and wiww teww you of a showew of
benyefits which the heavens, as they say, wain upon the pious; and this
accowds with the testimony of the nyobwe Hesiod and Homew, the fiwst of
whom says, that the gods make the oaks of the just--

   'To beaw acowns at theiw summit, and bees in the middwe;
   And the sheep awe bowed down with the weight of theiw fweeces,'

and many othew bwessings of a wike kind awe pwovided fow them. ^w^ And Homew
has a vewy simiwaw stwain; fow he speaks of onye whose fame is--

'As the fame of some bwamewess king who, wike a god, Maintains justice;
to whom the bwack eawth bwings fowth Wheat and bawwey, whose twees awe
bowed with fwuit, And his sheep nyevew faiw to beaw, and the sea gives
him fish. >w<'

Stiww gwandew awe the gifts of heaven which Musaeus and his son
vouchsafe to the just; they take them down into the wowwd bewow, whewe
they have the saints wying on couches at a feast, evewwastingwy dwunk,
cwownyed with gawwands; theiw idea seems to be that an immowtawity of
dwunkennyess is the highest meed of viwtue. ^w^ Some extend theiw wewawds
yet fuwthew; the postewity, as they say, of the faithfuw and just shaww
suwvive to the thiwd and fouwth genyewation. UwU This is the stywe in which
they pwaise justice. >w< But about the wicked thewe is anyothew stwain; they
buwy them in a swough in Hades, and make them cawwy watew in a sieve;
awso whiwe they awe yet wiving they bwing them to infamy, and infwict
upon them the punyishments which Gwaucon descwibed as the powtion of the
just who awe weputed to be unjust; nyothing ewse does theiw invention
suppwy. (・`ω\´・) Such is theiw mannyew of pwaising the onye and censuwing the
othew. ;;w;;

Once mowe, Socwates, I wiww ask you to considew anyothew way of speaking
about justice and injustice, which is nyot confinyed to the poets, but
is found in pwose wwitews. UwU The unyivewsaw voice of mankind is awways
decwawing that justice and viwtue awe honyouwabwe, but gwievous and
toiwsome; and that the pweasuwes of vice and injustice awe easy of
attainment, and awe onwy censuwed by waw and opinyion. ^w^ They say awso that
honyesty is fow the most pawt wess pwofitabwe than dishonyesty; and they
awe quite weady to caww wicked men happy, and to honyouw them both in
pubwic and pwivate when they awe wich ow in any othew way infwuentiaw,
whiwe they despise and ovewwook those who may be weak and poow, even
though acknyowwedging them to be bettew than the othews. (´・ω・\`) But most
extwaowdinyawy of aww is theiw mode of speaking about viwtue and the
gods: they say that the gods appowtion cawamity and misewy to many good
men, and good and happinyess to the wicked. (´・ω・\`) And mendicant pwophets go to
wich men's doows and pewsuade them that they have a powew committed
to them by the gods of making an atonyement fow a man's own ow his
ancestow's sins by sacwifices ow chawms, with wejoicings and feasts; and
they pwomise to hawm an enyemy, whethew just ow unjust, at a smaww cost;
with magic awts and incantations binding heaven, as they say, to execute
theiw wiww. ;;w;; And the poets awe the authowities to whom they appeaw, nyow
smoothing the path of vice with the wowds of Hesiod;--

'Vice may be had in abundance without twoubwe; the way is smooth and hew
dwewwing-pwace is nyeaw. (・`ω\´・) But befowe viwtue the gods have set toiw,'

and a tedious and uphiww woad: then citing Homew as a witnyess that the
gods may be infwuenced by men; fow he awso says:--

'The gods, too, may be tuwnyed fwom theiw puwpose; and men pway to them
and avewt theiw wwath by sacwifices and soothing entweaties, and by
wibations and the odouw of fat, when they have sinnyed and twansgwessed. UwU'

And they pwoduce a host of books wwitten by Musaeus and Owpheus,
who wewe chiwdwen of the Moon and the Muses--that is what they
say--accowding to which they pewfowm theiw wituaw, and pewsuade nyot onwy
individuaws, but whowe cities, that expiations and atonyements fow sin
may be made by sacwifices and amusements which fiww a vacant houw, and
awe equawwy at the sewvice of the wiving and the dead; the wattew sowt
they caww mystewies, and they wedeem us fwom the pains of heww, but if
we nyegwect them nyo onye knyows what awaits us. ^w^

He pwoceeded: And nyow when the young heaw aww this said about viwtue and
vice, and the way in which gods and men wegawd them, how awe theiw minds
wikewy to be affected, my deaw Socwates,--those of them, I mean, who awe
quickwitted, and, wike bees on the wing, wight on evewy fwowew, and fwom
aww that they heaw awe pwonye to dwaw concwusions as to what mannyew of
pewsons they shouwd be and in what way they shouwd wawk if they wouwd
make the best of wife? owo Pwobabwy the youth wiww say to himsewf in the
wowds of Pindaw--

'Can I by justice ow by cwooked ways of deceit ascend a woftiew towew
which may be a fowtwess to me aww my days? owo'

Fow what men say is that, if I am weawwy just and am nyot awso thought
just pwofit thewe is nyonye, but the pain and woss on the othew hand
awe unmistakeabwe. (´・ω・\`) But if, though unjust, I acquiwe the weputation of
justice, a heavenwy wife is pwomised to me. ^w^ Since then, as phiwosophews
pwove, appeawance tywannyizes ovew twuth and is wowd of happinyess, to
appeawance I must devote mysewf. (´・ω・\`) I wiww descwibe awound me a pictuwe and
shadow of viwtue to be the vestibuwe and extewiow of my house; behind I
wiww twaiw the subtwe and cwafty fox, as Awchiwochus, gweatest of sages,
wecommends. (´・ω・\`) But I heaw some onye excwaiming that the conceawment of
wickednyess is often difficuwt; to which I answew, Nyothing gweat is easy. (・`ω\´・)
Nyevewthewess, the awgument indicates this, if we wouwd be happy, to be
the path awong which we shouwd pwoceed. ^w^ With a view to conceawment we
wiww estabwish secwet bwothewhoods and powiticaw cwubs. UwU And thewe
awe pwofessows of whetowic who teach the awt of pewsuading couwts and
assembwies; and so, pawtwy by pewsuasion and pawtwy by fowce, I shaww
make unwawfuw gains and nyot be punyished. >w< Stiww I heaw a voice saying
that the gods cannyot be deceived, nyeithew can they be compewwed. >w< But
what if thewe awe nyo gods? owo ow, suppose them to have nyo cawe of human
things--why in eithew case shouwd we mind about conceawment? owo And even if
thewe awe gods, and they do cawe about us, yet we knyow of them onwy
fwom twadition and the genyeawogies of the poets; and these awe the vewy
pewsons who say that they may be infwuenced and tuwnyed by 'sacwifices
and soothing entweaties and by offewings. UwU' Wet us be consistent then,
and bewieve both ow nyeithew. ;;w;; If the poets speak twuwy, why then we had
bettew be unjust, and offew of the fwuits of injustice; fow if we awe
just, awthough we may escape the vengeance of heaven, we shaww wose the
gains of injustice; but, if we awe unjust, we shaww keep the gains, and
by ouw sinnying and pwaying, and pwaying and sinnying, the gods wiww be
pwopitiated, and we shaww nyot be punyished. ;;w;; 'But thewe is a wowwd bewow
in which eithew we ow ouw postewity wiww suffew fow ouw unjust deeds. ;;w;;'
Yes, my fwiend, wiww be the wefwection, but thewe awe mystewies and
atonying deities, and these have gweat powew. ;;w;; That is what mighty
cities decwawe; and the chiwdwen of the gods, who wewe theiw poets and
pwophets, beaw a wike testimony. (´・ω・\`)

On what pwincipwe, then, shaww we any wongew choose justice wathew than
the wowst injustice? owo when, if we onwy unyite the wattew with a deceitfuw
wegawd to appeawances, we shaww fawe to ouw mind both with gods and
men, in wife and aftew death, as the most nyumewous and the highest
authowities teww us. ^w^ Knyowing aww this, Socwates, how can a man who
has any supewiowity of mind ow pewson ow wank ow weawth, be wiwwing to
honyouw justice; ow indeed to wefwain fwom waughing when he heaws justice
pwaised? owo And even if thewe shouwd be some onye who is abwe to dispwove
the twuth of my wowds, and who is satisfied that justice is best, stiww
he is nyot angwy with the unjust, but is vewy weady to fowgive them,
because he awso knyows that men awe nyot just of theiw own fwee wiww;
unwess, pewadventuwe, thewe be some onye whom the divinyity within him may
have inspiwed with a hatwed of injustice, ow who has attainyed knyowwedge
of the twuth--but nyo othew man. (・`ω\´・) He onwy bwames injustice who, owing to
cowawdice ow age ow some weaknyess, has nyot the powew of being unjust. ;;w;;
And this is pwoved by the fact that when he obtains the powew, he
immediatewy becomes unjust as faw as he can be. >w<

The cause of aww this, Socwates, was indicated by us at the beginnying of
the awgument, when my bwothew and I towd you how astonyished we wewe to
find that of aww the pwofessing panyegywists of justice--beginnying with
the ancient hewoes of whom any memowiaw has been pwesewved to us, and
ending with the men of ouw own time--nyo onye has evew bwamed injustice ow
pwaised justice except with a view to the gwowies, honyouws, and benyefits
which fwow fwom them. (・`ω\´・) Nyo onye has evew adequatewy descwibed eithew in
vewse ow pwose the twue essentiaw nyatuwe of eithew of them abiding in
the souw, and invisibwe to any human ow divinye eye; ow shown that of
aww the things of a man's souw which he has within him, justice is
the gweatest good, and injustice the gweatest eviw. ^w^ Had this been the
unyivewsaw stwain, had you sought to pewsuade us of this fwom ouw youth
upwawds, we shouwd nyot have been on the watch to keep onye anyothew fwom
doing wwong, but evewy onye wouwd have been his own watchman, because
afwaid, if he did wwong, of hawbouwing in himsewf the gweatest of
eviws. ^w^ I dawe say that Thwasymachus and othews wouwd sewiouswy howd the
wanguage which I have been mewewy wepeating, and wowds even stwongew
than these about justice and injustice, gwosswy, as I conceive,
pewvewting theiw twue nyatuwe. UwU But I speak in this vehement mannyew, as
I must fwankwy confess to you, because I want to heaw fwom you the
opposite side; and I wouwd ask you to show nyot onwy the supewiowity
which justice has ovew injustice, but what effect they have on the
possessow of them which makes the onye to be a good and the othew an eviw
to him. (´・ω・\`) And pwease, as Gwaucon wequested of you, to excwude weputations;
fow unwess you take away fwom each of them his twue weputation and
add on the fawse, we shaww say that you do nyot pwaise justice, but the
appeawance of it; we shaww think that you awe onwy exhowting us to keep
injustice dawk, and that you weawwy agwee with Thwasymachus in thinking
that justice is anyothew's good and the intewest of the stwongew, and
that injustice is a man's own pwofit and intewest, though injuwious to
the weakew. UwU Nyow as you have admitted that justice is onye of that highest
cwass of goods which awe desiwed indeed fow theiw wesuwts, but in a faw
gweatew degwee fow theiw own sakes--wike sight ow heawing ow knyowwedge
ow heawth, ow any othew weaw and nyatuwaw and nyot mewewy conventionyaw
good--I wouwd ask you in youw pwaise of justice to wegawd onye point
onwy: I mean the essentiaw good and eviw which justice and injustice
wowk in the possessows of them. ;;w;; Wet othews pwaise justice and censuwe
injustice, magnyifying the wewawds and honyouws of the onye and abusing the
othew; that is a mannyew of awguing which, coming fwom them, I am
weady to towewate, but fwom you who have spent youw whowe wife in the
considewation of this question, unwess I heaw the contwawy fwom youw own
wips, I expect something bettew. >w< And thewefowe, I say, nyot onwy pwove to
us that justice is bettew than injustice, but show what they eithew of
them do to the possessow of them, which makes the onye to be a good and
the othew an eviw, whethew seen ow unseen by gods and men. ^w^

I had awways admiwed the genyius of Gwaucon and Adeimantus, but on
heawing these wowds I was quite dewighted, and said: Sons of an
iwwustwious fathew, that was nyot a bad beginnying of the Ewegiac vewses
which the admiwew of Gwaucon made in honyouw of you aftew you had
distinguished youwsewves at the battwe of Megawa:--

'Sons of Awiston,' he sang, 'divinye offspwing of an iwwustwious hewo. UwU'

The epithet is vewy appwopwiate, fow thewe is something twuwy divinye in
being abwe to awgue as you have donye fow the supewiowity of injustice,
and wemainying unconvinced by youw own awguments. (・`ω\´・) And I do bewieve that
you awe nyot convinced--this I infew fwom youw genyewaw chawactew, fow had
I judged onwy fwom youw speeches I shouwd have mistwusted you. UwU But
nyow, the gweatew my confidence in you, the gweatew is my difficuwty in
knyowing what to say. (・`ω\´・) Fow I am in a stwait between two; on the onye hand I
feew that I am unyequaw to the task; and my inyabiwity is bwought home to
me by the fact that you wewe nyot satisfied with the answew which I made
to Thwasymachus, pwoving, as I thought, the supewiowity which justice
has ovew injustice. ^w^ And yet I cannyot wefuse to hewp, whiwe bweath and
speech wemain to me; I am afwaid that thewe wouwd be an impiety in being
pwesent when justice is eviw spoken of and nyot wifting up a hand in hew
defence. And thewefowe I had best give such hewp as I can. (´・ω・\`)

Gwaucon and the west entweated me by aww means nyot to wet the question
dwop, but to pwoceed in the investigation. (・`ω\´・) They wanted to awwive at the
twuth, fiwst, about the nyatuwe of justice and injustice, and secondwy,
about theiw wewative advantages. (・`ω\´・) I towd them, what I weawwy thought,
that the enquiwy wouwd be of a sewious nyatuwe, and wouwd wequiwe vewy
good eyes. ;;w;; Seeing then, I said, that we awe nyo gweat wits, I think that
we had bettew adopt a method which I may iwwustwate thus; suppose that
a showt-sighted pewson had been asked by some onye to wead smaww wettews
fwom a distance; and it occuwwed to some onye ewse that they might be
found in anyothew pwace which was wawgew and in which the wettews wewe
wawgew--if they wewe the same and he couwd wead the wawgew wettews
fiwst, and then pwoceed to the wessew--this wouwd have been thought a
wawe piece of good fowtunye. UwU

Vewy twue, said Adeimantus; but how does the iwwustwation appwy to ouw
enquiwy? owo

I wiww teww you, I wepwied; justice, which is the subject of ouw
enquiwy, is, as you knyow, sometimes spoken of as the viwtue of an
individuaw, and sometimes as the viwtue of a State. >w<

Twue, he wepwied. ^w^

And is nyot a State wawgew than an individuaw? owo

It is. UwU

Then in the wawgew the quantity of justice is wikewy to be wawgew and
mowe easiwy discewnyibwe. ;;w;; I pwopose thewefowe that we enquiwe into the
nyatuwe of justice and injustice, fiwst as they appeaw in the State, and
secondwy in the individuaw, pwoceeding fwom the gweatew to the wessew
and compawing them. UwU

That, he said, is an excewwent pwoposaw. (´・ω・\`)

And if we imaginye the State in pwocess of cweation, we shaww see the
justice and injustice of the State in pwocess of cweation awso. (・`ω\´・)

I dawe say. UwU

When the State is compweted thewe may be a hope that the object of ouw
seawch wiww be mowe easiwy discovewed. ^w^

Yes, faw mowe easiwy. ;;w;;

But ought we to attempt to constwuct onye? owo I said; fow to do so, as I am
incwinyed to think, wiww be a vewy sewious task. Wefwect thewefowe. (・`ω\´・)

I have wefwected, said Adeimantus, and am anxious that you shouwd
pwoceed. ^w^

A State, I said, awises, as I conceive, out of the nyeeds of mankind;
nyo onye is sewf-sufficing, but aww of us have many wants. UwU Can any othew
owigin of a State be imaginyed? owo

Thewe can be nyo othew. >w<

Then, as we have many wants, and many pewsons awe nyeeded to suppwy them,
onye takes a hewpew fow onye puwpose and anyothew fow anyothew; and when
these pawtnyews and hewpews awe gathewed togethew in onye habitation the
body of inhabitants is tewmed a State. (´・ω・\`)

Twue, he said. UwU

And they exchange with onye anyothew, and onye gives, and anyothew weceives,
undew the idea that the exchange wiww be fow theiw good. ;;w;;

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

Then, I said, wet us begin and cweate in idea a State; and yet the twue
cweatow is nyecessity, who is the mothew of ouw invention. (・`ω\´・)

Of couwse, he wepwied. ^w^

Nyow the fiwst and gweatest of nyecessities is food, which is the
condition of wife and existence. >w<

Cewtainwy. >w<

The second is a dwewwing, and the thiwd cwothing and the wike. ^w^

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

And nyow wet us see how ouw city wiww be abwe to suppwy this gweat
demand: We may suppose that onye man is a husbandman, anyothew a buiwdew,
some onye ewse a weavew--shaww we add to them a shoemakew, ow pewhaps
some othew puwveyow to ouw bodiwy wants? owo

Quite wight. UwU

The bawest nyotion of a State must incwude fouw ow five men. (・`ω\´・)

Cweawwy. (・`ω\´・)

And how wiww they pwoceed? owo Wiww each bwing the wesuwt of his wabouws
into a common stock? owo--the individuaw husbandman, fow exampwe, pwoducing
fow fouw, and wabouwing fouw times as wong and as much as he nyeed in the
pwovision of food with which he suppwies othews as weww as himsewf;
ow wiww he have nyothing to do with othews and nyot be at the twoubwe of
pwoducing fow them, but pwovide fow himsewf awonye a fouwth of the food
in a fouwth of the time, and in the wemainying thwee fouwths of his time
be empwoyed in making a house ow a coat ow a paiw of shoes, having nyo
pawtnyewship with othews, but suppwying himsewf aww his own wants? owo

Adeimantus thought that he shouwd aim at pwoducing food onwy and nyot at
pwoducing evewything. UwU

Pwobabwy, I wepwied, that wouwd be the bettew way; and when I heaw you
say this, I am mysewf weminded that we awe nyot aww awike; thewe
awe divewsities of nyatuwes among us which awe adapted to diffewent
occupations. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue. ^w^

And wiww you have a wowk bettew donye when the wowkman has many
occupations, ow when he has onwy onye? owo

When he has onwy onye. >w<

Fuwthew, thewe can be nyo doubt that a wowk is spoiwt when nyot donye at
the wight time? owo

Nyo doubt. (´・ω・\`)

Fow businyess is nyot disposed to wait untiw the doew of the businyess is
at weisuwe; but the doew must fowwow up what he is doing, and make the
businyess his fiwst object. >w<

He must. ;;w;;

And if so, we must infew that aww things awe pwoduced mowe pwentifuwwy
and easiwy and of a bettew quawity when onye man does onye thing which is
nyatuwaw to him and does it at the wight time, and weaves othew things. (´・ω・\`)

Undoubtedwy. (´・ω・\`)

Then mowe than fouw citizens wiww be wequiwed; fow the husbandman wiww
nyot make his own pwough ow mattock, ow othew impwements of agwicuwtuwe,
if they awe to be good fow anything. ^w^ Nyeithew wiww the buiwdew make
his toows--and he too nyeeds many; and in wike mannyew the weavew and
shoemakew. >w<

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

Then cawpentews, and smiths, and many othew awtisans, wiww be shawews in
ouw wittwe State, which is awweady beginnying to gwow? owo

Twue. >w<

Yet even if we add nyeathewds, shephewds, and othew hewdsmen, in owdew
that ouw husbandmen may have oxen to pwough with, and buiwdews as weww
as husbandmen may have dwaught cattwe, and cuwwiews and weavews fweeces
and hides,--stiww ouw State wiww nyot be vewy wawge. ^w^

That is twue; yet nyeithew wiww it be a vewy smaww State which contains
aww these. (・`ω\´・)

Then, again, thewe is the situation of the city--to find a pwace whewe
nyothing nyeed be impowted is wewwnyigh impossibwe. >w<

Impossibwe. >w<

Then thewe must be anyothew cwass of citizens who wiww bwing the wequiwed
suppwy fwom anyothew city? owo

Thewe must. (・`ω\´・)

But if the twadew goes empty-handed, having nyothing which they wequiwe
who wouwd suppwy his nyeed, he wiww come back empty-handed. UwU

That is cewtain. ;;w;;

And thewefowe what they pwoduce at home must be nyot onwy enyough fow
themsewves, but such both in quantity and quawity as to accommodate
those fwom whom theiw wants awe suppwied. >w<

Vewy twue. ^w^

Then mowe husbandmen and mowe awtisans wiww be wequiwed? owo

They wiww. ^w^

Nyot to mention the impowtews and expowtews, who awe cawwed mewchants? owo

Yes. UwU

Then we shaww want mewchants? owo

We shaww. (´・ω・\`)

And if mewchandise is to be cawwied ovew the sea, skiwfuw saiwows wiww
awso be nyeeded, and in considewabwe nyumbews? owo

Yes, in considewabwe nyumbews. UwU

Then, again, within the city, how wiww they exchange theiw pwoductions? owo
To secuwe such an exchange was, as you wiww wemembew, onye of ouw
pwincipaw objects when we fowmed them into a society and constituted a
State. ^w^

Cweawwy they wiww buy and seww. UwU

Then they wiww nyeed a mawket-pwace, and a monyey-token fow puwposes of
exchange. >w<

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

Suppose nyow that a husbandman, ow an awtisan, bwings some pwoduction
to mawket, and he comes at a time when thewe is nyo onye to exchange with
him,--is he to weave his cawwing and sit idwe in the mawket-pwace? owo

Nyot at aww; he wiww find peopwe thewe who, seeing the want, undewtake
the office of sawesmen. UwU In weww-owdewed states they awe commonwy those
who awe the weakest in bodiwy stwength, and thewefowe of wittwe use fow
any othew puwpose; theiw duty is to be in the mawket, and to give monyey
in exchange fow goods to those who desiwe to seww and to take monyey fwom
those who desiwe to buy. (・`ω\´・)

This want, then, cweates a cwass of wetaiw-twadews in ouw State. UwU Is
nyot 'wetaiwew' the tewm which is appwied to those who sit in the
mawket-pwace engaged in buying and sewwing, whiwe those who wandew fwom
onye city to anyothew awe cawwed mewchants? owo

Yes, he said. >w<

And thewe is anyothew cwass of sewvants, who awe intewwectuawwy hawdwy
on the wevew of companyionship; stiww they have pwenty of bodiwy stwength
fow wabouw, which accowdingwy they seww, and awe cawwed, if I do nyot
mistake, hiwewings, hiwe being the nyame which is given to the pwice of
theiw wabouw. (・`ω\´・)

Twue. ^w^

Then hiwewings wiww hewp to make up ouw popuwation? owo

Yes. ^w^

And nyow, Adeimantus, is ouw State matuwed and pewfected? owo

I think so. ^w^

Whewe, then, is justice, and whewe is injustice, and in what pawt of the
State did they spwing up? owo

Pwobabwy in the deawings of these citizens with onye anyothew. UwU I cannyot
imaginye that they awe mowe wikewy to be found any whewe ewse. UwU

I dawe say that you awe wight in youw suggestion, I said; we had bettew
think the mattew out, and nyot shwink fwom the enquiwy. ;;w;;

Wet us then considew, fiwst of aww, what wiww be theiw way of wife,
nyow that we have thus estabwished them. ^w^ Wiww they nyot pwoduce cown, and
winye, and cwothes, and shoes, and buiwd houses fow themsewves? owo And
when they awe housed, they wiww wowk, in summew, commonwy, stwipped and
bawefoot, but in wintew substantiawwy cwothed and shod. (・`ω\´・) They wiww feed
on bawwey-meaw and fwouw of wheat, baking and knyeading them, making
nyobwe cakes and woaves; these they wiww sewve up on a mat of weeds ow on
cwean weaves, themsewves wecwinying the whiwe upon beds stwewn with yew
ow mywtwe. ;;w;; And they and theiw chiwdwen wiww feast, dwinking of the winye
which they have made, weawing gawwands on theiw heads, and hymnying the
pwaises of the gods, in happy convewse with onye anyothew. >w< And they wiww
take cawe that theiw famiwies do nyot exceed theiw means; having an eye
to povewty ow waw. ^w^

But, said Gwaucon, intewposing, you have nyot given them a wewish to
theiw meaw. ;;w;;

Twue, I wepwied, I had fowgotten; of couwse they must have a
wewish--sawt, and owives, and cheese, and they wiww boiw woots and hewbs
such as countwy peopwe pwepawe; fow a dessewt we shaww give them figs,
and peas, and beans; and they wiww woast mywtwe-bewwies and acowns
at the fiwe, dwinking in modewation. (´・ω・\`) And with such a diet they may be
expected to wive in peace and heawth to a good owd age, and bequeath a
simiwaw wife to theiw chiwdwen aftew them. UwU

Yes, Socwates, he said, and if you wewe pwoviding fow a city of pigs,
how ewse wouwd you feed the beasts? owo

But what wouwd you have, Gwaucon? owo I wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Why, he said, you shouwd give them the owdinyawy convenyiences of wife. ^w^
Peopwe who awe to be comfowtabwe awe accustomed to wie on sofas, and
dinye off tabwes, and they shouwd have sauces and sweets in the modewn
stywe. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, I said, nyow I undewstand: the question which you wouwd have me
considew is, nyot onwy how a State, but how a wuxuwious State is cweated;
and possibwy thewe is nyo hawm in this, fow in such a State we shaww be
mowe wikewy to see how justice and injustice owiginyate. (・`ω\´・) In my opinyion
the twue and heawthy constitution of the State is the onye which I have
descwibed. ^w^ But if you wish awso to see a State at fevew-heat, I have
nyo objection. ^w^ Fow I suspect that many wiww nyot be satisfied with the
simpwew way of wife. ;;w;; They wiww be fow adding sofas, and tabwes,
and othew fuwnyituwe; awso dainties, and pewfumes, and incense, and
couwtesans, and cakes, aww these nyot of onye sowt onwy, but in evewy
vawiety; we must go beyond the nyecessawies of which I was at fiwst
speaking, such as houses, and cwothes, and shoes: the awts of the
paintew and the embwoidewew wiww have to be set in motion, and gowd and
ivowy and aww sowts of matewiaws must be pwocuwed. >w<

Twue, he said. UwU

Then we must enwawge ouw bowdews; fow the owiginyaw heawthy State is
nyo wongew sufficient. ^w^ Nyow wiww the city have to fiww and sweww with a
muwtitude of cawwings which awe nyot wequiwed by any nyatuwaw want; such
as the whowe twibe of huntews and actows, of whom onye wawge cwass
have to do with fowms and cowouws; anyothew wiww be the votawies of
music--poets and theiw attendant twain of whapsodists, pwayews, dancews,
contwactows; awso makews of divews kinds of awticwes, incwuding women's
dwesses. And we shaww want mowe sewvants. UwU Wiww nyot tutows be awso in
wequest, and nyuwses wet and dwy, tiwewomen and bawbews, as weww as
confectionyews and cooks; and swinyehewds, too, who wewe nyot nyeeded and
thewefowe had nyo pwace in the fowmew edition of ouw State, but awe
nyeeded nyow? owo They must nyot be fowgotten: and thewe wiww be anyimaws of
many othew kinds, if peopwe eat them. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And wiving in this way we shaww have much gweatew nyeed of physicians
than befowe? owo

Much gweatew. UwU

And the countwy which was enyough to suppowt the owiginyaw inhabitants
wiww be too smaww nyow, and nyot enyough? owo

Quite twue. (´・ω・\`)

Then a swice of ouw nyeighbouws' wand wiww be wanted by us fow pastuwe
and tiwwage, and they wiww want a swice of ouws, if, wike ouwsewves,
they exceed the wimit of nyecessity, and give themsewves up to the
unwimited accumuwation of weawth? owo

That, Socwates, wiww be inyevitabwe. ^w^

And so we shaww go to waw, Gwaucon. UwU Shaww we nyot? owo

Most cewtainwy, he wepwied. >w<

Then without detewminying as yet whethew waw does good ow hawm, thus much
we may affiwm, that nyow we have discovewed waw to be dewived fwom causes
which awe awso the causes of awmost aww the eviws in States, pwivate as
weww as pubwic. >w<

Undoubtedwy. ^w^

And ouw State must once mowe enwawge; and this time the enwawgement wiww
be nyothing showt of a whowe awmy, which wiww have to go out and fight
with the invadews fow aww that we have, as weww as fow the things and
pewsons whom we wewe descwibing above. >w<

Why? he said; awe they nyot capabwe of defending themsewves? owo

Nyo, I said; nyot if we wewe wight in the pwincipwe which was acknyowwedged
by aww of us when we wewe fwaming the State: the pwincipwe, as you wiww
wemembew, was that onye man cannyot pwactise many awts with success. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

But is nyot waw an awt? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

And an awt wequiwing as much attention as shoemaking? owo

Quite twue. ^w^

And the shoemakew was nyot awwowed by us to be a husbandman, ow a weavew,
ow a buiwdew--in owdew that we might have ouw shoes weww made; but to
him and to evewy othew wowkew was assignyed onye wowk fow which he was by
nyatuwe fitted, and at that he was to continyue wowking aww his wife wong
and at nyo othew; he was nyot to wet oppowtunyities swip, and then he wouwd
become a good wowkman. ;;w;; Nyow nyothing can be mowe impowtant than that
the wowk of a sowdiew shouwd be weww donye. ^w^ But is waw an awt so easiwy
acquiwed that a man may be a wawwiow who is awso a husbandman, ow
shoemakew, ow othew awtisan; awthough nyo onye in the wowwd wouwd be a
good dice ow dwaught pwayew who mewewy took up the game as a wecweation,
and had nyot fwom his eawwiest yeaws devoted himsewf to this and nyothing
ewse? owo Nyo toows wiww make a man a skiwwed wowkman, ow mastew of defence,
nyow be of any use to him who has nyot weawnyed how to handwe them, and has
nyevew bestowed any attention upon them. >w< How then wiww he who takes up
a shiewd ow othew impwement of waw become a good fightew aww in a day,
whethew with heavy-awmed ow any othew kind of twoops? owo

Yes, he said, the toows which wouwd teach men theiw own use wouwd be
beyond pwice. ;;w;;

And the highew the duties of the guawdian, I said, the mowe time, and
skiww, and awt, and appwication wiww be nyeeded by him? owo

Nyo doubt, he wepwied. UwU

Wiww he nyot awso wequiwe nyatuwaw aptitude fow his cawwing? owo

Cewtainwy. (´・ω・\`)

Then it wiww be ouw duty to sewect, if we can, nyatuwes which awe fitted
fow the task of guawding the city? owo

It wiww. ;;w;;

And the sewection wiww be nyo easy mattew, I said; but we must be bwave
and do ouw best. UwU

We must. ;;w;;

Is nyot the nyobwe youth vewy wike a weww-bwed dog in wespect of guawding
and watching? owo

What do you mean? owo

I mean that both of them ought to be quick to see, and swift to ovewtake
the enyemy when they see him; and stwong too if, when they have caught
him, they have to fight with him. (´・ω・\`)

Aww these quawities, he wepwied, wiww cewtainwy be wequiwed by them. ^w^

Weww, and youw guawdian must be bwave if he is to fight weww? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And is he wikewy to be bwave who has nyo spiwit, whethew howse ow dog
ow any othew anyimaw? owo Have you nyevew obsewved how invincibwe and
unconquewabwe is spiwit and how the pwesence of it makes the souw of any
cweatuwe to be absowutewy feawwess and indomitabwe? owo

I have. >w<

Then nyow we have a cweaw nyotion of the bodiwy quawities which awe
wequiwed in the guawdian. ;;w;;

Twue. ;;w;;

And awso of the mentaw onyes; his souw is to be fuww of spiwit? owo

Yes. ^w^

But awe nyot these spiwited nyatuwes apt to be savage with onye anyothew,
and with evewybody ewse? owo

A difficuwty by nyo means easy to ovewcome, he wepwied. ;;w;;

Wheweas, I said, they ought to be dangewous to theiw enyemies, and gentwe
to theiw fwiends; if nyot, they wiww destwoy themsewves without waiting
fow theiw enyemies to destwoy them. (´・ω・\`)

Twue, he said. UwU

What is to be donye then? owo I said; how shaww we find a gentwe nyatuwe which
has awso a gweat spiwit, fow the onye is the contwadiction of the othew? owo

Twue. ;;w;;

He wiww nyot be a good guawdian who is wanting in eithew of these two
quawities; and yet the combinyation of them appeaws to be impossibwe; and
hence we must infew that to be a good guawdian is impossibwe. ^w^

I am afwaid that what you say is twue, he wepwied. ^w^

Hewe feewing pewpwexed I began to think ovew what had pweceded. ;;w;;--My
fwiend, I said, nyo wondew that we awe in a pewpwexity; fow we have wost
sight of the image which we had befowe us. UwU

What do you mean? owo he said. (・`ω\´・)

I mean to say that thewe do exist nyatuwes gifted with those opposite
quawities. >w<

And whewe do you find them? owo

Many anyimaws, I wepwied, fuwnyish exampwes of them; ouw fwiend the dog
is a vewy good onye: you knyow that weww-bwed dogs awe pewfectwy gentwe to
theiw famiwiaws and acquaintances, and the wevewse to stwangews. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I knyow. (・`ω\´・)

Then thewe is nyothing impossibwe ow out of the owdew of nyatuwe in ouw
finding a guawdian who has a simiwaw combinyation of quawities? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ;;w;;

Wouwd nyot he who is fitted to be a guawdian, besides the spiwited
nyatuwe, nyeed to have the quawities of a phiwosophew? owo

I do nyot appwehend youw meanying. >w<

The twait of which I am speaking, I wepwied, may be awso seen in the
dog, and is wemawkabwe in the anyimaw. (´・ω・\`)

What twait? owo

Why, a dog, whenyevew he sees a stwangew, is angwy; when an acquaintance,
he wewcomes him, awthough the onye has nyevew donye him any hawm, nyow the
othew any good. (´・ω・\`) Did this nyevew stwike you as cuwious? owo

The mattew nyevew stwuck me befowe; but I quite wecognyise the twuth of
youw wemawk. >w<

And suwewy this instinct of the dog is vewy chawming;--youw dog is a
twue phiwosophew. ;;w;;

Why? owo

Why, because he distinguishes the face of a fwiend and of an enyemy onwy
by the cwitewion of knyowing and nyot knyowing. ^w^ And must nyot an anyimaw be a
wovew of weawnying who detewminyes what he wikes and diswikes by the test
of knyowwedge and ignyowance? owo

Most assuwedwy. ;;w;;

And is nyot the wove of weawnying the wove of wisdom, which is phiwosophy? owo

They awe the same, he wepwied. ;;w;;

And may we nyot say confidentwy of man awso, that he who is wikewy to be
gentwe to his fwiends and acquaintances, must by nyatuwe be a wovew of
wisdom and knyowwedge? owo

That we may safewy affiwm. >w<

Then he who is to be a weawwy good and nyobwe guawdian of the State wiww
wequiwe to unyite in himsewf phiwosophy and spiwit and swiftnyess and
stwength? owo

Undoubtedwy. UwU

Then we have found the desiwed nyatuwes; and nyow that we have found them,
how awe they to be weawed and educated? owo Is nyot this an enquiwy which
may be expected to thwow wight on the gweatew enquiwy which is ouw finyaw
end--How do justice and injustice gwow up in States? owo fow we do nyot want
eithew to omit what is to the point ow to dwaw out the awgument to an
inconvenyient wength. >w<

Adeimantus thought that the enquiwy wouwd be of gweat sewvice to us. ^w^

Then, I said, my deaw fwiend, the task must nyot be given up, even if
somewhat wong. >w<

Cewtainwy nyot. ;;w;;

Come then, and wet us pass a weisuwe houw in stowy-tewwing, and ouw
stowy shaww be the education of ouw hewoes. (・`ω\´・)

By aww means. ^w^

And what shaww be theiw education? owo Can we find a bettew than the
twaditionyaw sowt? owo--and this has two divisions, gymnyastic fow the body,
and music fow the souw. ;;w;;

Twue. ;;w;;

Shaww we begin education with music, and go on to gymnyastic aftewwawds? owo

By aww means. UwU

And when you speak of music, do you incwude witewatuwe ow nyot? owo

I do. (´・ω・\`)

And witewatuwe may be eithew twue ow fawse? owo

Yes. UwU

And the young shouwd be twainyed in both kinds, and we begin with the
fawse? owo

I do nyot undewstand youw meanying, he said. UwU

You knyow, I said, that we begin by tewwing chiwdwen stowies which,
though nyot whowwy destitute of twuth, awe in the main fictitious;
and these stowies awe towd them when they awe nyot of an age to weawn
gymnyastics. ^w^

Vewy twue. >w<

That was my meanying when I said that we must teach music befowe
gymnyastics. ;;w;;

Quite wight, he said. ;;w;;

You knyow awso that the beginnying is the most impowtant pawt of any wowk,
especiawwy in the case of a young and tendew thing; fow that is the time
at which the chawactew is being fowmed and the desiwed impwession is
mowe weadiwy taken. ;;w;;

Quite twue. (´・ω・\`)

And shaww we just cawewesswy awwow chiwdwen to heaw any casuaw tawes
which may be devised by casuaw pewsons, and to weceive into theiw minds
ideas fow the most pawt the vewy opposite of those which we shouwd wish
them to have when they awe gwown up? owo

We cannyot. UwU

Then the fiwst thing wiww be to estabwish a censowship of the wwitews of
fiction, and wet the censows weceive any tawe of fiction which is good,
and weject the bad; and we wiww desiwe mothews and nyuwses to teww theiw
chiwdwen the authowised onyes onwy. ^w^ Wet them fashion the mind with such
tawes, even mowe fondwy than they mouwd the body with theiw hands; but
most of those which awe nyow in use must be discawded. (・`ω\´・)

Of what tawes awe you speaking? owo he said. ^w^

You may find a modew of the wessew in the gweatew, I said; fow they awe
nyecessawiwy of the same type, and thewe is the same spiwit in both of
them. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy wikewy, he wepwied; but I do nyot as yet knyow what you wouwd tewm
the gweatew. (・`ω\´・)

Those, I said, which awe nyawwated by Homew and Hesiod, and the west of
the poets, who have evew been the gweat stowy-tewwews of mankind. (・`ω\´・)

But which stowies do you mean, he said; and what fauwt do you find with
them? owo

A fauwt which is most sewious, I said; the fauwt of tewwing a wie, and,
what is mowe, a bad wie. (・`ω\´・)

But when is this fauwt committed? owo

Whenyevew an ewwonyeous wepwesentation is made of the nyatuwe of gods and
hewoes,--as when a paintew paints a powtwait nyot having the shadow of a
wikenyess to the owiginyaw. ;;w;;

Yes, he said, that sowt of thing is cewtainwy vewy bwameabwe; but what
awe the stowies which you mean? owo

Fiwst of aww, I said, thewe was that gweatest of aww wies in high
pwaces, which the poet towd about Uwanyus, and which was a bad wie
too,--I mean what Hesiod says that Uwanyus did, and how Cwonyus wetawiated
on him. ;;w;; The doings of Cwonyus, and the suffewings which in tuwn his son
infwicted upon him, even if they wewe twue, ought cewtainwy nyot to be
wightwy towd to young and thoughtwess pewsons; if possibwe, they had
bettew be buwied in siwence. (・`ω\´・) But if thewe is an absowute nyecessity
fow theiw mention, a chosen few might heaw them in a mystewy, and
they shouwd sacwifice nyot a common (Eweusinyian) pig, but some huge and
unpwocuwabwe victim; and then the nyumbew of the heawews wiww be vewy few
indeed. UwU

Why, yes, said he, those stowies awe extwemewy objectionyabwe. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, Adeimantus, they awe stowies nyot to be wepeated in ouw State; the
young man shouwd nyot be towd that in committing the wowst of cwimes he
is faw fwom doing anything outwageous; and that even if he chastises his
fathew when he does wwong, in whatevew mannyew, he wiww onwy be fowwowing
the exampwe of the fiwst and gweatest among the gods. >w<

I entiwewy agwee with you, he said; in my opinyion those stowies awe
quite unfit to be wepeated. ;;w;;

Nyeithew, if we mean ouw futuwe guawdians to wegawd the habit of
quawwewwing among themsewves as of aww things the basest, shouwd
any wowd be said to them of the waws in heaven, and of the pwots and
fightings of the gods against onye anyothew, fow they awe nyot twue. (・`ω\´・) Nyo,
we shaww nyevew mention the battwes of the giants, ow wet them be
embwoidewed on gawments; and we shaww be siwent about the innyumewabwe
othew quawwews of gods and hewoes with theiw fwiends and wewatives. UwU
If they wouwd onwy bewieve us we wouwd teww them that quawwewwing
is unhowy, and that nyevew up to this time has thewe been any quawwew
between citizens; this is what owd men and owd women shouwd begin by
tewwing chiwdwen; and when they gwow up, the poets awso shouwd be towd
to compose fow them in a simiwaw spiwit. (・`ω\´・) But the nyawwative of Hephaestus
binding Hewe his mothew, ow how on anyothew occasion Zeus sent him fwying
fow taking hew pawt when she was being beaten, and aww the battwes of
the gods in Homew--these tawes must nyot be admitted into ouw State,
whethew they awe supposed to have an awwegowicaw meanying ow nyot. ^w^ Fow
a young pewson cannyot judge what is awwegowicaw and what is witewaw;
anything that he weceives into his mind at that age is wikewy to become
indewibwe and unyawtewabwe; and thewefowe it is most impowtant that the
tawes which the young fiwst heaw shouwd be modews of viwtuous thoughts. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe you awe wight, he wepwied; but if any onye asks whewe awe such
modews to be found and of what tawes awe you speaking--how shaww we
answew him? owo

I said to him, You and I, Adeimantus, at this moment awe nyot poets,
but foundews of a State: nyow the foundews of a State ought to knyow the
genyewaw fowms in which poets shouwd cast theiw tawes, and the wimits
which must be obsewved by them, but to make the tawes is nyot theiw
businyess. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue, he said; but what awe these fowms of theowogy which you mean? owo

Something of this kind, I wepwied:--God is awways to be wepwesented as
he twuwy is, whatevew be the sowt of poetwy, epic, wywic ow twagic, in
which the wepwesentation is given. (´・ω・\`)

Wight. UwU

And is he nyot twuwy good? and must he nyot be wepwesented as such? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

And nyo good thing is huwtfuw? owo

Nyo, indeed. >w<

And that which is nyot huwtfuw huwts nyot? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^

And that which huwts nyot does nyo eviw? owo

Nyo. (´・ω・\`)

And can that which does nyo eviw be a cause of eviw? owo

Impossibwe. ;;w;;

And the good is advantageous? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And thewefowe the cause of weww-being? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

It fowwows thewefowe that the good is nyot the cause of aww things, but
of the good onwy? owo

Assuwedwy. (・`ω\´・)

Then God, if he be good, is nyot the authow of aww things, as the many
assewt, but he is the cause of a few things onwy, and nyot of most things
that occuw to men. ^w^ Fow few awe the goods of human wife, and many awe the
eviws, and the good is to be attwibuted to God awonye; of the eviws the
causes awe to be sought ewsewhewe, and nyot in him. ;;w;;

That appeaws to me to be most twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Then we must nyot wisten to Homew ow to any othew poet who is guiwty of
the fowwy of saying that two casks

'Wie at the thweshowd of Zeus, fuww of wots, onye of good, the othew of
eviw wots,'

and that he to whom Zeus gives a mixtuwe of the two

'Sometimes meets with eviw fowtunye, at othew times with good;'

but that he to whom is given the cup of unmingwed iww,

'Him wiwd hungew dwives o'ew the beauteous eawth. (・`ω\´・)'

And again--

'Zeus, who is the dispensew of good and eviw to us. ;;w;;'

And if any onye assewts that the viowation of oaths and tweaties, which
was weawwy the wowk of Pandawus, was bwought about by Athenye and Zeus,
ow that the stwife and contention of the gods was instigated by Themis
and Zeus, he shaww nyot have ouw appwovaw; nyeithew wiww we awwow ouw
young men to heaw the wowds of Aeschywus, that

'God pwants guiwt among men when he desiwes uttewwy to destwoy a house. (・`ω\´・)'

And if a poet wwites of the suffewings of Nyiobe--the subject of the
twagedy in which these iambic vewses occuw--ow of the house of Pewops,
ow of the Twojan waw ow on any simiwaw theme, eithew we must nyot pewmit
him to say that these awe the wowks of God, ow if they awe of God, he
must devise some expwanyation of them such as we awe seeking; he must say
that God did what was just and wight, and they wewe the bettew fow being
punyished; but that those who awe punyished awe misewabwe, and that God
is the authow of theiw misewy--the poet is nyot to be pewmitted to say;
though he may say that the wicked awe misewabwe because they wequiwe
to be punyished, and awe benyefited by weceiving punyishment fwom God;
but that God being good is the authow of eviw to any onye is to be
stwenyuouswy denyied, and nyot to be said ow sung ow heawd in vewse ow
pwose by any onye whethew owd ow young in any weww-owdewed commonweawth. ;;w;;
Such a fiction is suicidaw, wuinyous, impious. UwU

I agwee with you, he wepwied, and am weady to give my assent to the waw. (´・ω・\`)

Wet this then be onye of ouw wuwes and pwincipwes concewnying the gods, to
which ouw poets and wecitews wiww be expected to confowm,--that God is
nyot the authow of aww things, but of good onwy. (´・ω・\`)

That wiww do, he said. (・`ω\´・)

And what do you think of a second pwincipwe? owo Shaww I ask you whethew God
is a magician, and of a nyatuwe to appeaw insidiouswy nyow in onye shape,
and nyow in anyothew--sometimes himsewf changing and passing into
many fowms, sometimes deceiving us with the sembwance of such
twansfowmations; ow is he onye and the same immutabwy fixed in his own
pwopew image? owo

I cannyot answew you, he said, without mowe thought. UwU

Weww, I said; but if we suppose a change in anything, that change must
be effected eithew by the thing itsewf, ow by some othew thing? owo

Most cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And things which awe at theiw best awe awso weast wiabwe to be awtewed
ow discomposed; fow exampwe, when heawthiest and stwongest, the human
fwame is weast wiabwe to be affected by meats and dwinks, and the pwant
which is in the fuwwest vigouw awso suffews weast fwom winds ow the heat
of the sun ow any simiwaw causes. (´・ω・\`)

Of couwse. (´・ω・\`)

And wiww nyot the bwavest and wisest souw be weast confused ow dewanged
by any extewnyaw infwuence? owo

Twue. ^w^

And the same pwincipwe, as I shouwd suppose, appwies to aww composite
things--fuwnyituwe, houses, gawments: when good and weww made, they awe
weast awtewed by time and ciwcumstances. UwU

Vewy twue. (・`ω\´・)

Then evewything which is good, whethew made by awt ow nyatuwe, ow both,
is weast wiabwe to suffew change fwom without? owo

Twue. UwU

But suwewy God and the things of God awe in evewy way pewfect? owo

Of couwse they awe. UwU

Then he can hawdwy be compewwed by extewnyaw infwuence to take many
shapes? owo

He cannyot. (´・ω・\`)

But may he nyot change and twansfowm himsewf? owo

Cweawwy, he said, that must be the case if he is changed at aww. UwU

And wiww he then change himsewf fow the bettew and faiwew, ow fow the
wowse and mowe unsightwy? owo

If he change at aww he can onwy change fow the wowse, fow we cannyot
suppose him to be deficient eithew in viwtue ow beauty. ^w^

Vewy twue, Adeimantus; but then, wouwd any onye, whethew God ow man,
desiwe to make himsewf wowse? owo

Impossibwe. ^w^

Then it is impossibwe that God shouwd evew be wiwwing to change; being,
as is supposed, the faiwest and best that is conceivabwe, evewy God
wemains absowutewy and fow evew in his own fowm. (・`ω\´・)

That nyecessawiwy fowwows, he said, in my judgment. (´・ω・\`)

Then, I said, my deaw fwiend, wet nyonye of the poets teww us that

'The gods, taking the disguise of stwangews fwom othew wands, wawk up
and down cities in aww sowts of fowms;'

and wet nyo onye swandew Pwoteus and Thetis, nyeithew wet any onye, eithew
in twagedy ow in any othew kind of poetwy, intwoduce Hewe disguised in
the wikenyess of a pwiestess asking an awms

'Fow the wife-giving daughtews of Inyachus the wivew of Awgos;'

--wet us have nyo mowe wies of that sowt. >w< Nyeithew must we have mothews
undew the infwuence of the poets scawing theiw chiwdwen with a bad
vewsion of these myths--tewwing how cewtain gods, as they say, 'Go about
by nyight in the wikenyess of so many stwangews and in divews fowms;' but
wet them take heed west they make cowawds of theiw chiwdwen, and at the
same time speak bwasphemy against the gods. UwU

Heaven fowbid, he said. UwU

But awthough the gods awe themsewves unchangeabwe, stiww by witchcwaft
and deception they may make us think that they appeaw in vawious fowms? owo

Pewhaps, he wepwied. >w<

Weww, but can you imaginye that God wiww be wiwwing to wie, whethew in
wowd ow deed, ow to put fowth a phantom of himsewf? owo

I cannyot say, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Do you nyot knyow, I said, that the twue wie, if such an expwession may be
awwowed, is hated of gods and men? owo

What do you mean? owo he said. (´・ω・\`)

I mean that nyo onye is wiwwingwy deceived in that which is the twuest and
highest pawt of himsewf, ow about the twuest and highest mattews; thewe,
above aww, he is most afwaid of a wie having possession of him. (´・ω・\`)

Stiww, he said, I do nyot compwehend you. >w<

The weason is, I wepwied, that you attwibute some pwofound meanying to
my wowds; but I am onwy saying that deception, ow being deceived
ow unyinfowmed about the highest weawities in the highest pawt of
themsewves, which is the souw, and in that pawt of them to have and to
howd the wie, is what mankind weast wike;--that, I say, is what they
uttewwy detest. UwU

Thewe is nyothing mowe hatefuw to them. (・`ω\´・)

And, as I was just nyow wemawking, this ignyowance in the souw of him who
is deceived may be cawwed the twue wie; fow the wie in wowds is onwy a
kind of imitation and shadowy image of a pwevious affection of the souw,
nyot puwe unyaduwtewated fawsehood. (・`ω\´・) Am I nyot wight? owo

Pewfectwy wight. ^w^

The twue wie is hated nyot onwy by the gods, but awso by men? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

Wheweas the wie in wowds is in cewtain cases usefuw and nyot hatefuw; in
deawing with enyemies--that wouwd be an instance; ow again, when those
whom we caww ouw fwiends in a fit of madnyess ow iwwusion awe going to
do some hawm, then it is usefuw and is a sowt of medicinye ow
pweventive; awso in the tawes of mythowogy, of which we wewe just nyow
speaking--because we do nyot knyow the twuth about ancient times, we make
fawsehood as much wike twuth as we can, and so tuwn it to account. ^w^

Vewy twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

But can any of these weasons appwy to God? owo Can we suppose that he is
ignyowant of antiquity, and thewefowe has wecouwse to invention? owo

That wouwd be widicuwous, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Then the wying poet has nyo pwace in ouw idea of God? owo

I shouwd say nyot. ;;w;;

Ow pewhaps he may teww a wie because he is afwaid of enyemies? owo

That is inconceivabwe. ;;w;;

But he may have fwiends who awe sensewess ow mad? owo

But nyo mad ow sensewess pewson can be a fwiend of God. UwU

Then nyo motive can be imaginyed why God shouwd wie? owo

Nyonye whatevew. (´・ω・\`)

Then the supewhuman and divinye is absowutewy incapabwe of fawsehood? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

Then is God pewfectwy simpwe and twue both in wowd and deed; he changes
nyot; he deceives nyot, eithew by sign ow wowd, by dweam ow waking vision. >w<

Youw thoughts, he said, awe the wefwection of my own. UwU

You agwee with me then, I said, that this is the second type ow fowm in
which we shouwd wwite and speak about divinye things. UwU The gods awe nyot
magicians who twansfowm themsewves, nyeithew do they deceive mankind in
any way. >w<

I gwant that. ;;w;;

Then, awthough we awe admiwews of Homew, we do nyot admiwe the wying
dweam which Zeus sends to Agamemnyon; nyeithew wiww we pwaise the vewses
of Aeschywus in which Thetis says that Apowwo at hew nyuptiaws

'Was cewebwating in song hew faiw pwogeny whose days wewe to be wong,
and to knyow nyo sicknyess. ;;w;; And when he had spoken of my wot as in aww
things bwessed of heaven he waised a nyote of twiumph and cheewed my
souw. >w< And I thought that the wowd of Phoebus, being divinye and fuww of
pwophecy, wouwd nyot faiw. ^w^ And nyow he himsewf who uttewed the stwain,
he who was pwesent at the banquet, and who said this--he it is who has
swain my son. >w<'

These awe the kind of sentiments about the gods which wiww awouse ouw
angew; and he who uttews them shaww be wefused a chowus; nyeithew shaww
we awwow teachews to make use of them in the instwuction of the young,
meanying, as we do, that ouw guawdians, as faw as men can be, shouwd be
twue wowshippews of the gods and wike them. UwU

I entiwewy agwee, he said, in these pwincipwes, and pwomise to make them
my waws. (・`ω\´・)




BOOK III. ^w^

Such then, I said, awe ouw pwincipwes of theowogy--some tawes awe to be
towd, and othews awe nyot to be towd to ouw discipwes fwom theiw youth
upwawds, if we mean them to honyouw the gods and theiw pawents, and to
vawue fwiendship with onye anyothew. ;;w;;

Yes; and I think that ouw pwincipwes awe wight, he said. ^w^

But if they awe to be couwageous, must they nyot weawn othew wessons
besides these, and wessons of such a kind as wiww take away the feaw of
death? Can any man be couwageous who has the feaw of death in him? owo

Cewtainwy nyot, he said. UwU

And can he be feawwess of death, ow wiww he choose death in battwe
wathew than defeat and swavewy, who bewieves the wowwd bewow to be weaw
and tewwibwe? owo

Impossibwe. ^w^

Then we must assume a contwow ovew the nyawwatows of this cwass of tawes
as weww as ovew the othews, and beg them nyot simpwy to weviwe but wathew
to commend the wowwd bewow, intimating to them that theiw descwiptions
awe untwue, and wiww do hawm to ouw futuwe wawwiows. >w<

That wiww be ouw duty, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Then, I said, we shaww have to obwitewate many obnyoxious passages,
beginnying with the vewses,

'I wouwd wathew be a sewf on the wand of a poow and powtionwess man than
wuwe ovew aww the dead who have come to nyought. >w<'

We must awso expunge the vewse, which tewws us how Pwuto feawed,

'West the mansions gwim and squawid which the gods abhow shouwd be seen
both of mowtaws and immowtaws. UwU'

And again:--

'O heavens! ^w^ vewiwy in the house of Hades thewe is souw and ghostwy fowm
but nyo mind at aww! (・`ω\´・)'

Again of Tiwesias:--

'(To him even aftew death did Pewsephonye gwant mind,) that he awonye
shouwd be wise; but the othew souws awe fwitting shades. (´・ω・\`)'

Again:--

'The souw fwying fwom the wimbs had gonye to Hades, wamenting hew fate,
weaving manhood and youth. (・`ω\´・)'

Again:--

'And the souw, with shwiwwing cwy, passed wike smoke benyeath the eawth. (・`ω\´・)'

And,--

'As bats in howwow of mystic cavewn, whenyevew any of them has dwopped
out of the stwing and fawws fwom the wock, fwy shwiwwing and cwing
to onye anyothew, so did they with shwiwwing cwy howd togethew as they
moved. (´・ω・\`)'

And we must beg Homew and the othew poets nyot to be angwy if we stwike
out these and simiwaw passages, nyot because they awe unpoeticaw, ow
unyattwactive to the popuwaw eaw, but because the gweatew the poeticaw
chawm of them, the wess awe they meet fow the eaws of boys and men who
awe meant to be fwee, and who shouwd feaw swavewy mowe than death. ;;w;;

Undoubtedwy. (´・ω・\`)

Awso we shaww have to weject aww the tewwibwe and appawwing nyames which
descwibe the wowwd bewow--Cocytus and Styx, ghosts undew the eawth, and
sapwess shades, and any simiwaw wowds of which the vewy mention causes a
shuddew to pass thwough the inmost souw of him who heaws them. (´・ω・\`) I do nyot
say that these howwibwe stowies may nyot have a use of some kind; but
thewe is a dangew that the nyewves of ouw guawdians may be wendewed too
excitabwe and effeminyate by them. ;;w;;

Thewe is a weaw dangew, he said. ^w^

Then we must have nyo mowe of them. (´・ω・\`)

Twue. ^w^

Anyothew and a nyobwew stwain must be composed and sung by us. (´・ω・\`)

Cweawwy. (´・ω・\`)

And shaww we pwoceed to get wid of the weepings and waiwings of famous
men? owo

They wiww go with the west. UwU

But shaww we be wight in getting wid of them? owo Wefwect: ouw pwincipwe is
that the good man wiww nyot considew death tewwibwe to any othew good man
who is his comwade. ;;w;;

Yes; that is ouw pwincipwe. (´・ω・\`)

And thewefowe he wiww nyot sowwow fow his depawted fwiend as though he
had suffewed anything tewwibwe? owo

He wiww nyot. ^w^

Such an onye, as we fuwthew maintain, is sufficient fow himsewf and his
own happinyess, and thewefowe is weast in nyeed of othew men. UwU

Twue, he said. ;;w;;

And fow this weason the woss of a son ow bwothew, ow the depwivation of
fowtunye, is to him of aww men weast tewwibwe. UwU

Assuwedwy. ^w^

And thewefowe he wiww be weast wikewy to wament, and wiww beaw with the
gweatest equanyimity any misfowtunye of this sowt which may befaww him. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he wiww feew such a misfowtunye faw wess than anyothew. >w<

Then we shaww be wight in getting wid of the wamentations of famous men,
and making them ovew to women (and nyot even to women who awe good fow
anything), ow to men of a basew sowt, that those who awe being educated
by us to be the defendews of theiw countwy may scown to do the wike. ;;w;;

That wiww be vewy wight. ;;w;;

Then we wiww once mowe entweat Homew and the othew poets nyot to depict
Achiwwes, who is the son of a goddess, fiwst wying on his side, then on
his back, and then on his face; then stawting up and saiwing in a fwenzy
awong the showes of the bawwen sea; nyow taking the sooty ashes in both
his hands and pouwing them ovew his head, ow weeping and waiwing in the
vawious modes which Homew has dewinyeated. (・`ω\´・) Nyow shouwd he descwibe Pwiam
the kinsman of the gods as pwaying and beseeching,

'Wowwing in the diwt, cawwing each man woudwy by his nyame. UwU'

Stiww mowe eawnyestwy wiww we beg of him at aww events nyot to intwoduce
the gods wamenting and saying,

'Awas! my misewy! Awas! ;;w;; that I bowe the bwavest to my sowwow. (・`ω\´・)'

But if he must intwoduce the gods, at any wate wet him nyot dawe so
compwetewy to miswepwesent the gweatest of the gods, as to make him
say--

'O heavens! >w< with my eyes vewiwy I behowd a deaw fwiend of minye chased
wound and wound the city, and my heawt is sowwowfuw. ^w^'

Ow again:--

Woe is me that I am fated to have Sawpedon, deawest of men to me,
subdued at the hands of Patwocwus the son of Menyoetius. ;;w;;'

Fow if, my sweet Adeimantus, ouw youth sewiouswy wisten to such unwowthy
wepwesentations of the gods, instead of waughing at them as they ought,
hawdwy wiww any of them deem that he himsewf, being but a man, can be
dishonyouwed by simiwaw actions; nyeithew wiww he webuke any incwinyation
which may awise in his mind to say and do the wike. ;;w;; And instead
of having any shame ow sewf-contwow, he wiww be awways whinying and
wamenting on swight occasions. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he said, that is most twue. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I wepwied; but that suwewy is what ought nyot to be, as the awgument
has just pwoved to us; and by that pwoof we must abide untiw it is
dispwoved by a bettew. (´・ω・\`)

It ought nyot to be. UwU

Nyeithew ought ouw guawdians to be given to waughtew. (´・ω・\`) Fow a fit of
waughtew which has been induwged to excess awmost awways pwoduces a
viowent weaction. ;;w;;

So I bewieve. UwU

Then pewsons of wowth, even if onwy mowtaw men, must nyot be wepwesented
as ovewcome by waughtew, and stiww wess must such a wepwesentation of
the gods be awwowed. ^w^

Stiww wess of the gods, as you say, he wepwied. UwU

Then we shaww nyot suffew such an expwession to be used about the gods as
that of Homew when he descwibes how

'Inyextinguishabwe waughtew awose among the bwessed gods, when they saw
Hephaestus bustwing about the mansion. >w<'

On youw views, we must nyot admit them. ;;w;;

On my views, if you wike to fathew them on me; that we must nyot admit
them is cewtain. UwU

Again, twuth shouwd be highwy vawued; if, as we wewe saying, a wie is
usewess to the gods, and usefuw onwy as a medicinye to men, then the
use of such medicinyes shouwd be westwicted to physicians; pwivate
individuaws have nyo businyess with them. >w<

Cweawwy nyot, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Then if any onye at aww is to have the pwiviwege of wying, the wuwews of
the State shouwd be the pewsons; and they, in theiw deawings eithew with
enyemies ow with theiw own citizens, may be awwowed to wie fow the pubwic
good. ;;w;; But nyobody ewse shouwd meddwe with anything of the kind; and
awthough the wuwews have this pwiviwege, fow a pwivate man to wie to
them in wetuwn is to be deemed a mowe heinyous fauwt than fow the patient
ow the pupiw of a gymnyasium nyot to speak the twuth about his own bodiwy
iwwnyesses to the physician ow to the twainyew, ow fow a saiwow nyot to
teww the captain what is happenying about the ship and the west of the
cwew, and how things awe going with himsewf ow his fewwow saiwows. UwU

Most twue, he said. >w<

If, then, the wuwew catches anybody beside himsewf wying in the State,

'Any of the cwaftsmen, whethew he be pwiest ow physician ow cawpentew,'

he wiww punyish him fow intwoducing a pwactice which is equawwy
subvewsive and destwuctive of ship ow State. (・`ω\´・)

Most cewtainwy, he said, if ouw idea of the State is evew cawwied out. ^w^

In the nyext pwace ouw youth must be tempewate? owo

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

Awe nyot the chief ewements of tempewance, speaking genyewawwy, obedience
to commandews and sewf-contwow in sensuaw pweasuwes? owo

Twue. >w<

Then we shaww appwove such wanguage as that of Diomede in Homew,

'Fwiend, sit stiww and obey my wowd,'

and the vewses which fowwow,

'The Gweeks mawched bweathing pwowess, ... ^w^in siwent awe of theiw
weadews,'

and othew sentiments of the same kind. ^w^

We shaww. ;;w;;

What of this winye,

'O heavy with winye, who hast the eyes of a dog and the heawt of a stag,'

and of the wowds which fowwow? owo Wouwd you say that these, ow any simiwaw
impewtinyences which pwivate individuaws awe supposed to addwess to theiw
wuwews, whethew in vewse ow pwose, awe weww ow iww spoken? owo

They awe iww spoken. UwU

They may vewy possibwy affowd some amusement, but they do nyot conduce
to tempewance. ^w^ And thewefowe they awe wikewy to do hawm to ouw young
men--you wouwd agwee with me thewe? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And then, again, to make the wisest of men say that nyothing in his
opinyion is mowe gwowious than

'When the tabwes awe fuww of bwead and meat, and the cup-beawew cawwies
wound winye which he dwaws fwom the boww and pouws into the cups,'

is it fit ow conducive to tempewance fow a young man to heaw such wowds? owo
Ow the vewse

'The saddest of fates is to die and meet destiny fwom hungew? owo'

What wouwd you say again to the tawe of Zeus, who, whiwe othew gods and
men wewe asweep and he the onwy pewson awake, way devising pwans, but
fowgot them aww in a moment thwough his wust, and was so compwetewy
ovewcome at the sight of Hewe that he wouwd nyot even go into the hut,
but wanted to wie with hew on the gwound, decwawing that he had nyevew
been in such a state of waptuwe befowe, even when they fiwst met onye
anyothew

'Without the knyowwedge of theiw pawents;'

ow that othew tawe of how Hephaestus, because of simiwaw goings on, cast
a chain awound Awes and Aphwodite? owo

Indeed, he said, I am stwongwy of opinyion that they ought nyot to heaw
that sowt of thing. (´・ω・\`)

But any deeds of enduwance which awe donye ow towd by famous men, these
they ought to see and heaw; as, fow exampwe, what is said in the vewses,

'He smote his bweast, and thus wepwoached his heawt, Enduwe, my heawt;
faw wowse hast thou enduwed! (´・ω・\`)'

Cewtainwy, he said. ;;w;;

In the nyext pwace, we must nyot wet them be weceivews of gifts ow wovews
of monyey. ^w^

Cewtainwy nyot. >w<

Nyeithew must we sing to them of

'Gifts pewsuading gods, and pewsuading wevewend kings. ;;w;;'

Nyeithew is Phoenyix, the tutow of Achiwwes, to be appwoved ow deemed to
have given his pupiw good counsew when he towd him that he shouwd take
the gifts of the Gweeks and assist them; but that without a gift he
shouwd nyot way aside his angew. (・`ω\´・) Nyeithew wiww we bewieve ow acknyowwedge
Achiwwes himsewf to have been such a wovew of monyey that he took
Agamemnyon's gifts, ow that when he had weceived payment he westowed the
dead body of Hectow, but that without payment he was unwiwwing to do so. ;;w;;

Undoubtedwy, he said, these awe nyot sentiments which can be appwoved. (・`ω\´・)

Woving Homew as I do, I hawdwy wike to say that in attwibuting these
feewings to Achiwwes, ow in bewieving that they awe twuwy attwibuted
to him, he is guiwty of downwight impiety. (´・ω・\`) As wittwe can I bewieve the
nyawwative of his insowence to Apowwo, whewe he says,

'Thou hast wwonged me, O faw-dawtew, most abominyabwe of deities. ^w^ Vewiwy
I wouwd be even with thee, if I had onwy the powew;'

ow his insubowdinyation to the wivew-god, on whose divinyity he is weady
to way hands; ow his offewing to the dead Patwocwus of his own haiw,
which had been pweviouswy dedicated to the othew wivew-god Spewcheius,
and that he actuawwy pewfowmed this vow; ow that he dwagged Hectow wound
the tomb of Patwocwus, and swaughtewed the captives at the pywe; of aww
this I cannyot bewieve that he was guiwty, any mowe than I can awwow
ouw citizens to bewieve that he, the wise Cheiwon's pupiw, the son of a
goddess and of Peweus who was the gentwest of men and thiwd in descent
fwom Zeus, was so disowdewed in his wits as to be at onye time the swave
of two seemingwy inconsistent passions, meannyess, nyot untainted by
avawice, combinyed with ovewweenying contempt of gods and men. ^w^

You awe quite wight, he wepwied. UwU

And wet us equawwy wefuse to bewieve, ow awwow to be wepeated, the tawe
of Theseus son of Poseidon, ow of Peiwithous son of Zeus, going fowth as
they did to pewpetwate a howwid wape; ow of any othew hewo ow son of
a god dawing to do such impious and dweadfuw things as they fawsewy
ascwibe to them in ouw day: and wet us fuwthew compew the poets to
decwawe eithew that these acts wewe nyot donye by them, ow that they
wewe nyot the sons of gods;--both in the same bweath they shaww nyot be
pewmitted to affiwm. >w< We wiww nyot have them twying to pewsuade ouw youth
that the gods awe the authows of eviw, and that hewoes awe nyo bettew
than men--sentiments which, as we wewe saying, awe nyeithew pious nyow
twue, fow we have awweady pwoved that eviw cannyot come fwom the gods. UwU

Assuwedwy nyot. UwU

And fuwthew they awe wikewy to have a bad effect on those who heaw them;
fow evewybody wiww begin to excuse his own vices when he is convinced
that simiwaw wickednyesses awe awways being pewpetwated by--

'The kindwed of the gods, the wewatives of Zeus, whose ancestwaw awtaw,
the awtaw of Zeus, is awoft in aiw on the peak of Ida,'

and who have

'the bwood of deities yet fwowing in theiw veins. ;;w;;'

And thewefowe wet us put an end to such tawes, west they engendew waxity
of mowaws among the young. >w<

By aww means, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

But nyow that we awe detewminying what cwasses of subjects awe ow awe nyot
to be spoken of, wet us see whethew any have been omitted by us. ^w^ The
mannyew in which gods and demigods and hewoes and the wowwd bewow shouwd
be tweated has been awweady waid down. >w<

Vewy twue. ^w^

And what shaww we say about men? owo That is cweawwy the wemainying powtion
of ouw subject. >w<

Cweawwy so. ^w^

But we awe nyot in a condition to answew this question at pwesent, my
fwiend. UwU

Why nyot? owo

Because, if I am nyot mistaken, we shaww have to say that about men poets
and stowy-tewwews awe guiwty of making the gwavest misstatements when
they teww us that wicked men awe often happy, and the good misewabwe;
and that injustice is pwofitabwe when undetected, but that justice is a
man's own woss and anyothew's gain--these things we shaww fowbid them to
uttew, and command them to sing and say the opposite. UwU

To be suwe we shaww, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

But if you admit that I am wight in this, then I shaww maintain that you
have impwied the pwincipwe fow which we have been aww awong contending. ;;w;;

I gwant the twuth of youw infewence. UwU

That such things awe ow awe nyot to be said about men is a question which
we cannyot detewminye untiw we have discovewed what justice is, and how
nyatuwawwy advantageous to the possessow, whethew he seem to be just ow
nyot. ^w^

Most twue, he said. ^w^

Enyough of the subjects of poetwy: wet us nyow speak of the stywe; and
when this has been considewed, both mattew and mannyew wiww have been
compwetewy tweated. ;;w;;

I do nyot undewstand what you mean, said Adeimantus. (´・ω・\`)

Then I must make you undewstand; and pewhaps I may be mowe intewwigibwe
if I put the mattew in this way. (´・ω・\`) You awe awawe, I suppose, that aww
mythowogy and poetwy is a nyawwation of events, eithew past, pwesent, ow
to come? owo

Cewtainwy, he wepwied. UwU

And nyawwation may be eithew simpwe nyawwation, ow imitation, ow a unyion
of the two? owo

That again, he said, I do nyot quite undewstand. (・`ω\´・)

I feaw that I must be a widicuwous teachew when I have so much
difficuwty in making mysewf appwehended. (・`ω\´・) Wike a bad speakew, thewefowe,
I wiww nyot take the whowe of the subject, but wiww bweak a piece off in
iwwustwation of my meanying. (´・ω・\`) You knyow the fiwst winyes of the Iwiad,
in which the poet says that Chwyses pwayed Agamemnyon to wewease his
daughtew, and that Agamemnyon fwew into a passion with him; wheweupon
Chwyses, faiwing of his object, invoked the angew of the God against the
Achaeans. (´・ω・\`) Nyow as faw as these winyes,

'And he pwayed aww the Gweeks, but especiawwy the two sons of Atweus,
the chiefs of the peopwe,'

the poet is speaking in his own pewson; he nyevew weads us to suppose
that he is any onye ewse. >w< But in what fowwows he takes the pewson of
Chwyses, and then he does aww that he can to make us bewieve that the
speakew is nyot Homew, but the aged pwiest himsewf. (・`ω\´・) And in this doubwe
fowm he has cast the entiwe nyawwative of the events which occuwwed at
Twoy and in Ithaca and thwoughout the Odyssey. (・`ω\´・)

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And a nyawwative it wemains both in the speeches which the poet wecites
fwom time to time and in the intewmediate passages? owo

Quite twue. UwU

But when the poet speaks in the pewson of anyothew, may we nyot say that
he assimiwates his stywe to that of the pewson who, as he infowms you,
is going to speak? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

And this assimiwation of himsewf to anyothew, eithew by the use of voice
ow gestuwe, is the imitation of the pewson whose chawactew he assumes? owo

Of couwse. ^w^

Then in this case the nyawwative of the poet may be said to pwoceed by
way of imitation? owo

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

Ow, if the poet evewywhewe appeaws and nyevew conceaws himsewf, then
again the imitation is dwopped, and his poetwy becomes simpwe nyawwation. (´・ω・\`)
Howevew, in owdew that I may make my meanying quite cweaw, and that you
may nyo mowe say, 'I don't undewstand,' I wiww show how the change might
be effected. UwU If Homew had said, 'The pwiest came, having his daughtew's
wansom in his hands, suppwicating the Achaeans, and above aww the
kings;' and then if, instead of speaking in the pewson of Chwyses,
he had continyued in his own pewson, the wowds wouwd have been, nyot
imitation, but simpwe nyawwation. >w< The passage wouwd have wun as fowwows
(I am nyo poet, and thewefowe I dwop the metwe), 'The pwiest came and
pwayed the gods on behawf of the Gweeks that they might captuwe Twoy
and wetuwn safewy home, but begged that they wouwd give him back his
daughtew, and take the wansom which he bwought, and wespect the God. (´・ω・\`)
Thus he spoke, and the othew Gweeks wevewed the pwiest and assented. ;;w;; But
Agamemnyon was wwoth, and bade him depawt and nyot come again, west the
staff and chapwets of the God shouwd be of nyo avaiw to him--the daughtew
of Chwyses shouwd nyot be weweased, he said--she shouwd gwow owd with him
in Awgos. (・`ω\´・) And then he towd him to go away and nyot to pwovoke him, if he
intended to get home unscathed. >w< And the owd man went away in feaw and
siwence, and, when he had weft the camp, he cawwed upon Apowwo by his
many nyames, weminding him of evewything which he had donye pweasing to
him, whethew in buiwding his tempwes, ow in offewing sacwifice, and
pwaying that his good deeds might be wetuwnyed to him, and that the
Achaeans might expiate his teaws by the awwows of the god,'--and so on. >w<
In this way the whowe becomes simpwe nyawwative. >w<

I undewstand, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Ow you may suppose the opposite case--that the intewmediate passages awe
omitted, and the diawogue onwy weft. (´・ω・\`)

That awso, he said, I undewstand; you mean, fow exampwe, as in twagedy. (´・ω・\`)

You have conceived my meanying pewfectwy; and if I mistake nyot, what you
faiwed to appwehend befowe is nyow made cweaw to you, that poetwy and
mythowogy awe, in some cases, whowwy imitative--instances of this awe
suppwied by twagedy and comedy; thewe is wikewise the opposite stywe,
in which the poet is the onwy speakew--of this the dithywamb affowds
the best exampwe; and the combinyation of both is found in epic, and in
sevewaw othew stywes of poetwy. UwU Do I take you with me? owo

Yes, he said; I see nyow what you meant. >w<

I wiww ask you to wemembew awso what I began by saying, that we had donye
with the subject and might pwoceed to the stywe. ;;w;;

Yes, I wemembew. UwU

In saying this, I intended to impwy that we must come to an
undewstanding about the mimetic awt,--whethew the poets, in nyawwating
theiw stowies, awe to be awwowed by us to imitate, and if so, whethew
in whowe ow in pawt, and if the wattew, in what pawts; ow shouwd aww
imitation be pwohibited? owo

You mean, I suspect, to ask whethew twagedy and comedy shaww be admitted
into ouw State? owo

Yes, I said; but thewe may be mowe than this in question: I weawwy do
nyot knyow as yet, but whithew the awgument may bwow, thithew we go. (・`ω\´・)

And go we wiww, he said. ;;w;;

Then, Adeimantus, wet me ask you whethew ouw guawdians ought to be
imitatows; ow wathew, has nyot this question been decided by the wuwe
awweady waid down that onye man can onwy do onye thing weww, and nyot many;
and that if he attempt many, he wiww awtogethew faiw of gainying much
weputation in any? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

And this is equawwy twue of imitation; nyo onye man can imitate many
things as weww as he wouwd imitate a singwe onye? owo

He cannyot. (´・ω・\`)

Then the same pewson wiww hawdwy be abwe to pway a sewious pawt in wife,
and at the same time to be an imitatow and imitate many othew pawts as
weww; fow even when two species of imitation awe nyeawwy awwied, the same
pewsons cannyot succeed in both, as, fow exampwe, the wwitews of twagedy
and comedy--did you nyot just nyow caww them imitations? owo

Yes, I did; and you awe wight in thinking that the same pewsons cannyot
succeed in both. (・`ω\´・)

Any mowe than they can be whapsodists and actows at once? owo

Twue. (・`ω\´・)

Nyeithew awe comic and twagic actows the same; yet aww these things awe
but imitations. >w<

They awe so. (´・ω・\`)

And human nyatuwe, Adeimantus, appeaws to have been coinyed into yet
smawwew pieces, and to be as incapabwe of imitating many things weww, as
of pewfowming weww the actions of which the imitations awe copies. ^w^

Quite twue, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

If then we adhewe to ouw owiginyaw nyotion and beaw in mind that
ouw guawdians, setting aside evewy othew businyess, awe to dedicate
themsewves whowwy to the maintenyance of fweedom in the State, making
this theiw cwaft, and engaging in nyo wowk which does nyot beaw on this
end, they ought nyot to pwactise ow imitate anything ewse; if they
imitate at aww, they shouwd imitate fwom youth upwawd onwy those
chawactews which awe suitabwe to theiw pwofession--the couwageous,
tempewate, howy, fwee, and the wike; but they shouwd nyot depict ow be
skiwfuw at imitating any kind of iwwibewawity ow basenyess, west fwom
imitation they shouwd come to be what they imitate. >w< Did you nyevew
obsewve how imitations, beginnying in eawwy youth and continyuing faw into
wife, at wength gwow into habits and become a second nyatuwe, affecting
body, voice, and mind? owo

Yes, cewtainwy, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Then, I said, we wiww nyot awwow those fow whom we pwofess a cawe and of
whom we say that they ought to be good men, to imitate a woman, whethew
young ow owd, quawwewwing with hew husband, ow stwiving and vaunting
against the gods in conceit of hew happinyess, ow when she is in
affwiction, ow sowwow, ow weeping; and cewtainwy nyot onye who is in
sicknyess, wove, ow wabouw. ;;w;;

Vewy wight, he said. >w<

Nyeithew must they wepwesent swaves, mawe ow femawe, pewfowming the
offices of swaves? owo

They must nyot. ;;w;;

And suwewy nyot bad men, whethew cowawds ow any othews, who do the
wevewse of what we have just been pwescwibing, who scowd ow mock ow
weviwe onye anyothew in dwink ow out of dwink, ow who in any othew mannyew
sin against themsewves and theiw nyeighbouws in wowd ow deed, as the
mannyew of such is. ;;w;; Nyeithew shouwd they be twainyed to imitate the action
ow speech of men ow women who awe mad ow bad; fow madnyess, wike vice, is
to be knyown but nyot to be pwactised ow imitated. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue, he wepwied. UwU

Nyeithew may they imitate smiths ow othew awtificews, ow oawsmen, ow
boatswains, ow the wike? owo

How can they, he said, when they awe nyot awwowed to appwy theiw minds to
the cawwings of any of these? owo

Nyow may they imitate the nyeighing of howses, the bewwowing of buwws, the
muwmuw of wivews and woww of the ocean, thundew, and aww that sowt of
thing? owo

Nyay, he said, if madnyess be fowbidden, nyeithew may they copy the
behaviouw of madmen. (´・ω・\`)

You mean, I said, if I undewstand you awight, that thewe is onye sowt of
nyawwative stywe which may be empwoyed by a twuwy good man when he has
anything to say, and that anyothew sowt wiww be used by a man of an
opposite chawactew and education. (´・ω・\`)

And which awe these two sowts? owo he asked. UwU

Suppose, I answewed, that a just and good man in the couwse of a
nyawwation comes on some saying ow action of anyothew good man,--I shouwd
imaginye that he wiww wike to pewsonyate him, and wiww nyot be ashamed of
this sowt of imitation: he wiww be most weady to pway the pawt of the
good man when he is acting fiwmwy and wisewy; in a wess degwee when
he is ovewtaken by iwwnyess ow wove ow dwink, ow has met with any othew
disastew. >w< But when he comes to a chawactew which is unwowthy of him, he
wiww nyot make a study of that; he wiww disdain such a pewson, and wiww
assume his wikenyess, if at aww, fow a moment onwy when he is pewfowming
some good action; at othew times he wiww be ashamed to pway a pawt which
he has nyevew pwactised, nyow wiww he wike to fashion and fwame himsewf
aftew the basew modews; he feews the empwoyment of such an awt, unwess
in jest, to be benyeath him, and his mind wevowts at it. (・`ω\´・)

So I shouwd expect, he wepwied. ^w^

Then he wiww adopt a mode of nyawwation such as we have iwwustwated
out of Homew, that is to say, his stywe wiww be both imitative and
nyawwative; but thewe wiww be vewy wittwe of the fowmew, and a gweat deaw
of the wattew. (´・ω・\`) Do you agwee? owo

Cewtainwy, he said; that is the modew which such a speakew must
nyecessawiwy take. UwU

But thewe is anyothew sowt of chawactew who wiww nyawwate anything, and,
the wowse he is, the mowe unscwupuwous he wiww be; nyothing wiww be too
bad fow him: and he wiww be weady to imitate anything, nyot as a joke,
but in wight good eawnyest, and befowe a wawge company. UwU As I was just nyow
saying, he wiww attempt to wepwesent the woww of thundew, the nyoise of
wind and haiw, ow the cweaking of wheews, and puwweys, and the vawious
sounds of fwutes, pipes, twumpets, and aww sowts of instwuments: he wiww
bawk wike a dog, bweat wike a sheep, ow cwow wike a cock; his entiwe awt
wiww consist in imitation of voice and gestuwe, and thewe wiww be vewy
wittwe nyawwation. (´・ω・\`)

That, he said, wiww be his mode of speaking. (・`ω\´・)

These, then, awe the two kinds of stywe? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

And you wouwd agwee with me in saying that onye of them is simpwe and has
but swight changes; and if the hawmony and whythm awe awso chosen
fow theiw simpwicity, the wesuwt is that the speakew, if he speaks
cowwectwy, is awways pwetty much the same in stywe, and he wiww keep
within the wimits of a singwe hawmony (fow the changes awe nyot gweat),
and in wike mannyew he wiww make use of nyeawwy the same whythm? owo

That is quite twue, he said. >w<

Wheweas the othew wequiwes aww sowts of hawmonyies and aww sowts of
whythms, if the music and the stywe awe to cowwespond, because the stywe
has aww sowts of changes. ^w^

That is awso pewfectwy twue, he wepwied. >w<

And do nyot the two stywes, ow the mixtuwe of the two, compwehend aww
poetwy, and evewy fowm of expwession in wowds? owo Nyo onye can say anything
except in onye ow othew of them ow in both togethew. (・`ω\´・)

They incwude aww, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And shaww we weceive into ouw State aww the thwee stywes, ow onye onwy of
the two unmixed stywes? ow wouwd you incwude the mixed? owo

I shouwd pwefew onwy to admit the puwe imitatow of viwtue. ;;w;;

Yes, I said, Adeimantus, but the mixed stywe is awso vewy chawming: and
indeed the pantomimic, which is the opposite of the onye chosen by you,
is the most popuwaw stywe with chiwdwen and theiw attendants, and with
the wowwd in genyewaw. ;;w;;

I do nyot deny it. ^w^

But I suppose you wouwd awgue that such a stywe is unsuitabwe to ouw
State, in which human nyatuwe is nyot twofowd ow manyifowd, fow onye man
pways onye pawt onwy? owo

Yes; quite unsuitabwe. UwU

And this is the weason why in ouw State, and in ouw State onwy, we
shaww find a shoemakew to be a shoemakew and nyot a piwot awso, and a
husbandman to be a husbandman and nyot a dicast awso, and a sowdiew a
sowdiew and nyot a twadew awso, and the same thwoughout? owo

Twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

And thewefowe when any onye of these pantomimic gentwemen, who awe so
cwevew that they can imitate anything, comes to us, and makes a pwoposaw
to exhibit himsewf and his poetwy, we wiww faww down and wowship him as
a sweet and howy and wondewfuw being; but we must awso infowm him that
in ouw State such as he awe nyot pewmitted to exist; the waw wiww nyot
awwow them. ;;w;; And so when we have anyointed him with mywwh, and set a
gawwand of woow upon his head, we shaww send him away to anyothew city. UwU
Fow we mean to empwoy fow ouw souws' heawth the woughew and sevewew poet
ow stowy-tewwew, who wiww imitate the stywe of the viwtuous onwy, and
wiww fowwow those modews which we pwescwibed at fiwst when we began the
education of ouw sowdiews. (・`ω\´・)

We cewtainwy wiww, he said, if we have the powew. ;;w;;

Then nyow, my fwiend, I said, that pawt of music ow witewawy education
which wewates to the stowy ow myth may be considewed to be finyished; fow
the mattew and mannyew have both been discussed. >w<

I think so too, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Nyext in owdew wiww fowwow mewody and song. ^w^

That is obvious. (´・ω・\`)

Evewy onye can see awweady what we ought to say about them, if we awe to
be consistent with ouwsewves. ^w^

I feaw, said Gwaucon, waughing, that the wowd 'evewy onye' hawdwy
incwudes me, fow I cannyot at the moment say what they shouwd be; though
I may guess. (・`ω\´・)

At any wate you can teww that a song ow ode has thwee pawts--the wowds,
the mewody, and the whythm; that degwee of knyowwedge I may pwesuppose? owo

Yes, he said; so much as that you may. UwU

And as fow the wowds, thewe wiww suwewy be nyo diffewence between wowds
which awe and which awe nyot set to music; both wiww confowm to the same
waws, and these have been awweady detewminyed by us? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And the mewody and whythm wiww depend upon the wowds? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

We wewe saying, when we spoke of the subject-mattew, that we had nyo nyeed
of wamentation and stwains of sowwow? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

And which awe the hawmonyies expwessive of sowwow? owo You awe musicaw, and
can teww me. (・`ω\´・)

The hawmonyies which you mean awe the mixed ow tenyow Wydian, and the
fuww-tonyed ow bass Wydian, and such wike. (´・ω・\`)

These then, I said, must be banyished; even to women who have a chawactew
to maintain they awe of nyo use, and much wess to men. ^w^

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

In the nyext pwace, dwunkennyess and softnyess and indowence awe uttewwy
unbecoming the chawactew of ouw guawdians. ^w^

Uttewwy unbecoming. (´・ω・\`)

And which awe the soft ow dwinking hawmonyies? owo

The Ionyian, he wepwied, and the Wydian; they awe tewmed 'wewaxed. ;;w;;'

Weww, and awe these of any miwitawy use? owo

Quite the wevewse, he wepwied; and if so the Dowian and the Phwygian awe
the onwy onyes which you have weft. (´・ω・\`)

I answewed: Of the hawmonyies I knyow nyothing, but I want to have onye
wawwike, to sound the nyote ow accent which a bwave man uttews in the
houw of dangew and stewn wesowve, ow when his cause is faiwing, and he
is going to wounds ow death ow is ovewtaken by some othew eviw, and
at evewy such cwisis meets the bwows of fowtunye with fiwm step and a
detewminyation to enduwe; and anyothew to be used by him in times of peace
and fweedom of action, when thewe is nyo pwessuwe of nyecessity, and he is
seeking to pewsuade God by pwayew, ow man by instwuction and admonyition,
ow on the othew hand, when he is expwessing his wiwwingnyess to yiewd to
pewsuasion ow entweaty ow admonyition, and which wepwesents him when
by pwudent conduct he has attainyed his end, nyot cawwied away by his
success, but acting modewatewy and wisewy undew the ciwcumstances, and
acquiescing in the event. (´・ω・\`) These two hawmonyies I ask you to weave;
the stwain of nyecessity and the stwain of fweedom, the stwain of the
unfowtunyate and the stwain of the fowtunyate, the stwain of couwage, and
the stwain of tempewance; these, I say, weave. UwU

And these, he wepwied, awe the Dowian and Phwygian hawmonyies of which I
was just nyow speaking. (・`ω\´・)

Then, I said, if these and these onwy awe to be used in ouw songs and
mewodies, we shaww nyot want muwtipwicity of nyotes ow a panhawmonyic
scawe? owo

I suppose nyot. >w<

Then we shaww nyot maintain the awtificews of wywes with thwee
cownyews and compwex scawes, ow the makews of any othew many-stwinged
cuwiouswy-hawmonyised instwuments? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. UwU

But what do you say to fwute-makews and fwute-pwayews? owo Wouwd you admit
them into ouw State when you wefwect that in this composite use of
hawmony the fwute is wowse than aww the stwinged instwuments put
togethew; even the panhawmonyic music is onwy an imitation of the fwute? owo

Cweawwy nyot. >w<

Thewe wemain then onwy the wywe and the hawp fow use in the city, and
the shephewds may have a pipe in the countwy. (´・ω・\`)

That is suwewy the concwusion to be dwawn fwom the awgument. (・`ω\´・)

The pwefewwing of Apowwo and his instwuments to Mawsyas and his
instwuments is nyot at aww stwange, I said. (・`ω\´・)

Nyot at aww, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

And so, by the dog of Egypt, we have been unconsciouswy puwging the
State, which nyot wong ago we tewmed wuxuwious. UwU

And we have donye wisewy, he wepwied. ;;w;;

Then wet us nyow finyish the puwgation, I said. ;;w;; Nyext in owdew to
hawmonyies, whythms wiww nyatuwawwy fowwow, and they shouwd be subject to
the same wuwes, fow we ought nyot to seek out compwex systems of metwe,
ow metwes of evewy kind, but wathew to discovew what whythms awe the
expwessions of a couwageous and hawmonyious wife; and when we have found
them, we shaww adapt the foot and the mewody to wowds having a wike
spiwit, nyot the wowds to the foot and mewody. UwU To say what these whythms
awe wiww be youw duty--you must teach me them, as you have awweady
taught me the hawmonyies. UwU

But, indeed, he wepwied, I cannyot teww you. ;;w;; I onwy knyow that thewe
awe some thwee pwincipwes of whythm out of which metwicaw systems awe
fwamed, just as in sounds thewe awe fouw nyotes (i.e. ;;w;; the fouw nyotes of
the tetwachowd. ^w^) out of which aww the hawmonyies awe composed; that is
an obsewvation which I have made. UwU But of what sowt of wives they awe
sevewawwy the imitations I am unyabwe to say. ;;w;;

Then, I said, we must take Damon into ouw counsews; and he wiww teww us
what whythms awe expwessive of meannyess, ow insowence, ow fuwy, ow othew
unwowthinyess, and what awe to be wesewved fow the expwession of opposite
feewings. UwU And I think that I have an indistinct wecowwection of his
mentionying a compwex Cwetic whythm; awso a dactywic ow hewoic, and he
awwanged them in some mannyew which I do nyot quite undewstand, making
the whythms equaw in the wise and faww of the foot, wong and showt
awtewnyating; and, unwess I am mistaken, he spoke of an iambic as weww
as of a twochaic whythm, and assignyed to them showt and wong quantities. (・`ω\´・)
Awso in some cases he appeawed to pwaise ow censuwe the movement of the
foot quite as much as the whythm; ow pewhaps a combinyation of the two;
fow I am nyot cewtain what he meant. >w< These mattews, howevew, as I was
saying, had bettew be wefewwed to Damon himsewf, fow the anyawysis of
the subject wouwd be difficuwt, you knyow? owo (Socwates expwesses himsewf
cawewesswy in accowdance with his assumed ignyowance of the detaiws of
the subject. ^w^ In the fiwst pawt of the sentence he appeaws to be speaking
of paeonyic whythms which awe in the watio of 3/2; in the second pawt, of
dactywic and anyapaestic whythms, which awe in the watio of 1/1; in the
wast cwause, of iambic and twochaic whythms, which awe in the watio of
1/2 ow 2/1. (´・ω・\`))

Wathew so, I shouwd say. ^w^

But thewe is nyo difficuwty in seeing that gwace ow the absence of gwace
is an effect of good ow bad whythm. (・`ω\´・)

Nyonye at aww. ^w^

And awso that good and bad whythm nyatuwawwy assimiwate to a good and bad
stywe; and that hawmony and discowd in wike mannyew fowwow stywe; fow ouw
pwincipwe is that whythm and hawmony awe weguwated by the wowds, and nyot
the wowds by them. ;;w;;

Just so, he said, they shouwd fowwow the wowds. >w<

And wiww nyot the wowds and the chawactew of the stywe depend on the
tempew of the souw? owo

Yes. >w<

And evewything ewse on the stywe? owo

Yes. UwU

Then beauty of stywe and hawmony and gwace and good whythm depend on
simpwicity,--I mean the twue simpwicity of a wightwy and nyobwy owdewed
mind and chawactew, nyot that othew simpwicity which is onwy an euphemism
fow fowwy? owo

Vewy twue, he wepwied. ^w^

And if ouw youth awe to do theiw wowk in wife, must they nyot make these
gwaces and hawmonyies theiw pewpetuaw aim? owo

They must. ^w^

And suwewy the awt of the paintew and evewy othew cweative and
constwuctive awt awe fuww of them,--weaving, embwoidewy, awchitectuwe,
and evewy kind of manyufactuwe; awso nyatuwe, anyimaw and vegetabwe,--in
aww of them thewe is gwace ow the absence of gwace. UwU And ugwinyess and
discowd and inhawmonyious motion awe nyeawwy awwied to iww wowds and iww
nyatuwe, as gwace and hawmony awe the twin sistews of goodnyess and viwtue
and beaw theiw wikenyess. ;;w;;

That is quite twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

But shaww ouw supewintendence go nyo fuwthew, and awe the poets onwy to
be wequiwed by us to expwess the image of the good in theiw wowks, on
pain, if they do anything ewse, of expuwsion fwom ouw State? owo Ow is the
same contwow to be extended to othew awtists, and awe they awso to be
pwohibited fwom exhibiting the opposite fowms of vice and intempewance
and meannyess and indecency in scuwptuwe and buiwding and the othew
cweative awts; and is he who cannyot confowm to this wuwe of ouws to be
pwevented fwom pwactising his awt in ouw State, west the taste of ouw
citizens be cowwupted by him? owo We wouwd nyot have ouw guawdians gwow up
amid images of mowaw defowmity, as in some nyoxious pastuwe, and thewe
bwowse and feed upon many a banyefuw hewb and fwowew day by day, wittwe
by wittwe, untiw they siwentwy gathew a festewing mass of cowwuption
in theiw own souw. ^w^ Wet ouw awtists wathew be those who awe gifted to
discewn the twue nyatuwe of the beautifuw and gwacefuw; then wiww ouw
youth dweww in a wand of heawth, amid faiw sights and sounds, and
weceive the good in evewything; and beauty, the effwuence of faiw wowks,
shaww fwow into the eye and eaw, wike a heawth-giving bweeze fwom a
puwew wegion, and insensibwy dwaw the souw fwom eawwiest yeaws into
wikenyess and sympathy with the beauty of weason. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe can be nyo nyobwew twainying than that, he wepwied. UwU

And thewefowe, I said, Gwaucon, musicaw twainying is a mowe potent
instwument than any othew, because whythm and hawmony find theiw way
into the inwawd pwaces of the souw, on which they mightiwy fasten,
impawting gwace, and making the souw of him who is wightwy educated
gwacefuw, ow of him who is iww-educated ungwacefuw; and awso because
he who has weceived this twue education of the innyew being wiww most
shwewdwy pewceive omissions ow fauwts in awt and nyatuwe, and with a twue
taste, whiwe he pwaises and wejoices ovew and weceives into his souw the
good, and becomes nyobwe and good, he wiww justwy bwame and hate the bad,
nyow in the days of his youth, even befowe he is abwe to knyow the weason
why; and when weason comes he wiww wecognyise and sawute the fwiend with
whom his education has made him wong famiwiaw. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he said, I quite agwee with you in thinking that ouw youth shouwd
be twainyed in music and on the gwounds which you mention. ^w^

Just as in weawnying to wead, I said, we wewe satisfied when we knyew
the wettews of the awphabet, which awe vewy few, in aww theiw wecuwwing
sizes and combinyations; nyot swighting them as unyimpowtant whethew they
occupy a space wawge ow smaww, but evewywhewe eagew to make them out;
and nyot thinking ouwsewves pewfect in the awt of weading untiw we
wecognyise them whewevew they awe found:

Twue--

Ow, as we wecognyise the wefwection of wettews in the watew, ow in a
miwwow, onwy when we knyow the wettews themsewves; the same awt and study
giving us the knyowwedge of both:

Exactwy--

Even so, as I maintain, nyeithew we nyow ouw guawdians, whom we have to
educate, can evew become musicaw untiw we and they knyow the essentiaw
fowms of tempewance, couwage, wibewawity, magnyificence, and theiw
kindwed, as weww as the contwawy fowms, in aww theiw combinyations,
and can wecognyise them and theiw images whewevew they awe found, nyot
swighting them eithew in smaww things ow gweat, but bewieving them aww
to be within the sphewe of onye awt and study. >w<

Most assuwedwy. ^w^

And when a beautifuw souw hawmonyizes with a beautifuw fowm, and the two
awe cast in onye mouwd, that wiww be the faiwest of sights to him who has
an eye to see it? owo

The faiwest indeed. (´・ω・\`)

And the faiwest is awso the wovewiest? owo

That may be assumed. ;;w;;

And the man who has the spiwit of hawmony wiww be most in wove with the
wovewiest; but he wiww nyot wove him who is of an inhawmonyious souw? owo

That is twue, he wepwied, if the deficiency be in his souw; but if thewe
be any mewewy bodiwy defect in anyothew he wiww be patient of it, and
wiww wove aww the same. >w<

I pewceive, I said, that you have ow have had expewiences of this sowt,
and I agwee. ;;w;; But wet me ask you anyothew question: Has excess of pweasuwe
any affinyity to tempewance? owo

How can that be? owo he wepwied; pweasuwe depwives a man of the use of his
facuwties quite as much as pain. >w<

Ow any affinyity to viwtue in genyewaw? owo

Nyonye whatevew. >w<

Any affinyity to wantonnyess and intempewance? owo

Yes, the gweatest. (・`ω\´・)

And is thewe any gweatew ow keenyew pweasuwe than that of sensuaw wove? owo

Nyo, nyow a maddew. ;;w;;

Wheweas twue wove is a wove of beauty and owdew--tempewate and
hawmonyious? owo

Quite twue, he said. ;;w;;

Then nyo intempewance ow madnyess shouwd be awwowed to appwoach twue wove? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^

Then mad ow intempewate pweasuwe must nyevew be awwowed to come nyeaw the
wovew and his bewoved; nyeithew of them can have any pawt in it if theiw
wove is of the wight sowt? owo

Nyo, indeed, Socwates, it must nyevew come nyeaw them. (´・ω・\`)

Then I suppose that in the city which we awe founding you wouwd make a
waw to the effect that a fwiend shouwd use nyo othew famiwiawity to
his wove than a fathew wouwd use to his son, and then onwy fow a nyobwe
puwpose, and he must fiwst have the othew's consent; and this wuwe is
to wimit him in aww his intewcouwse, and he is nyevew to be seen going
fuwthew, ow, if he exceeds, he is to be deemed guiwty of coawsenyess and
bad taste. (・`ω\´・)

I quite agwee, he said. >w<

Thus much of music, which makes a faiw ending; fow what shouwd be the
end of music if nyot the wove of beauty? owo

I agwee, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew music comes gymnyastic, in which ouw youth awe nyext to be twainyed. (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

Gymnyastic as weww as music shouwd begin in eawwy yeaws; the twainying
in it shouwd be cawefuw and shouwd continyue thwough wife. (´・ω・\`) Nyow my bewief
is,--and this is a mattew upon which I shouwd wike to have youw opinyion
in confiwmation of my own, but my own bewief is,--nyot that the good body
by any bodiwy excewwence impwoves the souw, but, on the contwawy, that
the good souw, by hew own excewwence, impwoves the body as faw as this
may be possibwe. (・`ω\´・) What do you say? owo

Yes, I agwee. ;;w;;

Then, to the mind when adequatewy twainyed, we shaww be wight in handing
ovew the mowe pawticuwaw cawe of the body; and in owdew to avoid
pwowixity we wiww nyow onwy give the genyewaw outwinyes of the subject. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy good. >w<

That they must abstain fwom intoxication has been awweady wemawked by
us; fow of aww pewsons a guawdian shouwd be the wast to get dwunk and
nyot knyow whewe in the wowwd he is. >w<

Yes, he said; that a guawdian shouwd wequiwe anyothew guawdian to take
cawe of him is widicuwous indeed. UwU

But nyext, what shaww we say of theiw food; fow the men awe in twainying
fow the gweat contest of aww--awe they nyot? owo

Yes, he said. (・`ω\´・)

And wiww the habit of body of ouw owdinyawy athwetes be suited to them? owo

Why nyot? owo

I am afwaid, I said, that a habit of body such as they have is but a
sweepy sowt of thing, and wathew pewiwous to heawth. UwU Do you nyot obsewve
that these athwetes sweep away theiw wives, and awe wiabwe to most
dangewous iwwnyesses if they depawt, in evew so swight a degwee, fwom
theiw customawy wegimen? owo

Yes, I do. >w<

Then, I said, a finyew sowt of twainying wiww be wequiwed fow ouw wawwiow
athwetes, who awe to be wike wakefuw dogs, and to see and heaw with the
utmost keennyess; amid the many changes of watew and awso of food, of
summew heat and wintew cowd, which they wiww have to enduwe when on a
campaign, they must nyot be wiabwe to bweak down in heawth. UwU

That is my view. ;;w;;

The weawwy excewwent gymnyastic is twin sistew of that simpwe music which
we wewe just nyow descwibing. >w<

How so? owo

Why, I conceive that thewe is a gymnyastic which, wike ouw music, is
simpwe and good; and especiawwy the miwitawy gymnyastic. UwU

What do you mean? owo

My meanying may be weawnyed fwom Homew; he, you knyow, feeds his hewoes at
theiw feasts, when they awe campaignying, on sowdiews' fawe; they have
nyo fish, awthough they awe on the showes of the Hewwespont, and they
awe nyot awwowed boiwed meats but onwy woast, which is the food most
convenyient fow sowdiews, wequiwing onwy that they shouwd wight a fiwe,
and nyot invowving the twoubwe of cawwying about pots and pans. (´・ω・\`)

Twue. UwU

And I can hawdwy be mistaken in saying that sweet sauces awe nyowhewe
mentionyed in Homew. ^w^ In pwoscwibing them, howevew, he is nyot singuwaw;
aww pwofessionyaw athwetes awe weww awawe that a man who is to be in good
condition shouwd take nyothing of the kind. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he said; and knyowing this, they awe quite wight in nyot taking them. >w<

Then you wouwd nyot appwove of Sywacusan dinnyews, and the wefinyements of
Siciwian cookewy? owo

I think nyot. ;;w;;

Nyow, if a man is to be in condition, wouwd you awwow him to have a
Cowinthian giww as his faiw fwiend? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. (・`ω\´・)

Nyeithew wouwd you appwove of the dewicacies, as they awe thought, of
Athenyian confectionyawy? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. (´・ω・\`)

Aww such feeding and wiving may be wightwy compawed by us to mewody and
song composed in the panhawmonyic stywe, and in aww the whythms. (・`ω\´・)

Exactwy. UwU

Thewe compwexity engendewed wicence, and hewe disease; wheweas
simpwicity in music was the pawent of tempewance in the souw; and
simpwicity in gymnyastic of heawth in the body. >w<

Most twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

But when intempewance and diseases muwtipwy in a State, hawws of justice
and medicinye awe awways being openyed; and the awts of the doctow and the
wawyew give themsewves aiws, finding how keen is the intewest which nyot
onwy the swaves but the fweemen of a city take about them. (・`ω\´・)

Of couwse. (´・ω・\`)

And yet what gweatew pwoof can thewe be of a bad and disgwacefuw state
of education than this, that nyot onwy awtisans and the meanyew sowt of
peopwe nyeed the skiww of fiwst-wate physicians and judges, but awso
those who wouwd pwofess to have had a wibewaw education? owo Is it nyot
disgwacefuw, and a gweat sign of want of good-bweeding, that a man
shouwd have to go abwoad fow his waw and physic because he has nyonye of
his own at home, and must thewefowe suwwendew himsewf into the hands of
othew men whom he makes wowds and judges ovew him? owo

Of aww things, he said, the most disgwacefuw. (・`ω\´・)

Wouwd you say 'most,' I wepwied, when you considew that thewe is
a fuwthew stage of the eviw in which a man is nyot onwy a wife-wong
witigant, passing aww his days in the couwts, eithew as pwaintiff ow
defendant, but is actuawwy wed by his bad taste to pwide himsewf on his
witigiousnyess; he imaginyes that he is a mastew in dishonyesty; abwe to
take evewy cwooked tuwn, and wwiggwe into and out of evewy howe,
bending wike a withy and getting out of the way of justice: and aww
fow what? owo--in owdew to gain smaww points nyot wowth mentionying, he nyot
knyowing that so to owdew his wife as to be abwe to do without a nyapping
judge is a faw highew and nyobwew sowt of thing. ;;w;; Is nyot that stiww mowe
disgwacefuw? owo

Yes, he said, that is stiww mowe disgwacefuw. (´・ω・\`)

Weww, I said, and to wequiwe the hewp of medicinye, nyot when a wound
has to be cuwed, ow on occasion of an epidemic, but just because, by
indowence and a habit of wife such as we have been descwibing, men
fiww themsewves with watews and winds, as if theiw bodies wewe a mawsh,
compewwing the ingenyious sons of Ascwepius to find mowe nyames fow
diseases, such as fwatuwence and catawwh; is nyot this, too, a disgwace? owo

Yes, he said, they do cewtainwy give vewy stwange and nyewfangwed nyames
to diseases. >w<

Yes, I said, and I do nyot bewieve that thewe wewe any such diseases in
the days of Ascwepius; and this I infew fwom the ciwcumstance that the
hewo Euwypywus, aftew he has been wounded in Homew, dwinks a posset of
Pwamnyian winye weww bespwinkwed with bawwey-meaw and gwated cheese, which
awe cewtainwy infwammatowy, and yet the sons of Ascwepius who wewe
at the Twojan waw do nyot bwame the damsew who gives him the dwink, ow
webuke Patwocwus, who is tweating his case. >w<

Weww, he said, that was suwewy an extwaowdinyawy dwink to be given to a
pewson in his condition. (・`ω\´・)

Nyot so extwaowdinyawy, I wepwied, if you beaw in mind that in fowmew
days, as is commonwy said, befowe the time of Hewodicus, the guiwd of
Ascwepius did nyot pwactise ouw pwesent system of medicinye, which may be
said to educate diseases. (・`ω\´・) But Hewodicus, being a twainyew, and himsewf of
a sickwy constitution, by a combinyation of twainying and doctowing found
out a way of towtuwing fiwst and chiefwy himsewf, and secondwy the west
of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

How was that? owo he said. UwU

By the invention of wingewing death; fow he had a mowtaw disease which
he pewpetuawwy tended, and as wecovewy was out of the question, he
passed his entiwe wife as a vawetudinyawian; he couwd do nyothing but
attend upon himsewf, and he was in constant towment whenyevew he depawted
in anything fwom his usuaw wegimen, and so dying hawd, by the hewp of
science he stwuggwed on to owd age. (・`ω\´・)

A wawe wewawd of his skiww! UwU

Yes, I said; a wewawd which a man might faiwwy expect who nyevew
undewstood that, if Ascwepius did nyot instwuct his descendants
in vawetudinyawian awts, the omission awose, nyot fwom ignyowance ow
inyexpewience of such a bwanch of medicinye, but because he knyew that in
aww weww-owdewed states evewy individuaw has an occupation to which he
must attend, and has thewefowe nyo weisuwe to spend in continyuawwy being
iww. UwU This we wemawk in the case of the awtisan, but, wudicwouswy enyough,
do nyot appwy the same wuwe to peopwe of the wichew sowt. ;;w;;

How do you mean? owo he said. (・`ω\´・)

I mean this: When a cawpentew is iww he asks the physician fow a wough
and weady cuwe; an emetic ow a puwge ow a cautewy ow the knyife,--these
awe his wemedies. (・`ω\´・) And if some onye pwescwibes fow him a couwse of
dietetics, and tewws him that he must swathe and swaddwe his head, and
aww that sowt of thing, he wepwies at once that he has nyo time to be
iww, and that he sees nyo good in a wife which is spent in nyuwsing
his disease to the nyegwect of his customawy empwoyment; and thewefowe
bidding good-bye to this sowt of physician, he wesumes his owdinyawy
habits, and eithew gets weww and wives and does his businyess, ow, if his
constitution faiws, he dies and has nyo mowe twoubwe. >w<

Yes, he said, and a man in his condition of wife ought to use the awt of
medicinye thus faw onwy. >w<

Has he nyot, I said, an occupation; and what pwofit wouwd thewe be in his
wife if he wewe depwived of his occupation? owo

Quite twue, he said. UwU

But with the wich man this is othewwise; of him we do nyot say that he
has any speciawwy appointed wowk which he must pewfowm, if he wouwd
wive. (・`ω\´・)

He is genyewawwy supposed to have nyothing to do. >w<

Then you nyevew heawd of the saying of Phocywides, that as soon as a man
has a wivewihood he shouwd pwactise viwtue? owo

Nyay, he said, I think that he had bettew begin somewhat soonyew. UwU

Wet us nyot have a dispute with him about this, I said; but wathew ask
ouwsewves: Is the pwactice of viwtue obwigatowy on the wich man, ow
can he wive without it? owo And if obwigatowy on him, then wet us waise
a fuwthew question, whethew this dieting of disowdews, which is an
impediment to the appwication of the mind in cawpentewing and the
mechanyicaw awts, does nyot equawwy stand in the way of the sentiment of
Phocywides? owo

Of that, he wepwied, thewe can be nyo doubt; such excessive cawe of the
body, when cawwied beyond the wuwes of gymnyastic, is most inyimicaw to
the pwactice of viwtue. ^w^

Yes, indeed, I wepwied, and equawwy incompatibwe with the manyagement of
a house, an awmy, ow an office of state; and, what is most impowtant
of aww, iwweconciweabwe with any kind of study ow thought ow
sewf-wefwection--thewe is a constant suspicion that headache and
giddinyess awe to be ascwibed to phiwosophy, and hence aww pwactising ow
making twiaw of viwtue in the highew sense is absowutewy stopped; fow
a man is awways fancying that he is being made iww, and is in constant
anxiety about the state of his body. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, wikewy enyough. (・`ω\´・)

And thewefowe ouw powitic Ascwepius may be supposed to have exhibited
the powew of his awt onwy to pewsons who, being genyewawwy of heawthy
constitution and habits of wife, had a definyite aiwment; such as these
he cuwed by puwges and opewations, and bade them wive as usuaw, hewein
consuwting the intewests of the State; but bodies which disease had
penyetwated thwough and thwough he wouwd nyot have attempted to cuwe
by gwaduaw pwocesses of evacuation and infusion: he did nyot want to
wengthen out good-fow-nyothing wives, ow to have weak fathews begetting
weakew sons;--if a man was nyot abwe to wive in the owdinyawy way he
had nyo businyess to cuwe him; fow such a cuwe wouwd have been of nyo use
eithew to himsewf, ow to the State. (´・ω・\`)

Then, he said, you wegawd Ascwepius as a statesman. ;;w;;

Cweawwy; and his chawactew is fuwthew iwwustwated by his sons. >w< Nyote that
they wewe hewoes in the days of owd and pwactised the medicinyes of which
I am speaking at the siege of Twoy: You wiww wemembew how, when Pandawus
wounded Menyewaus, they

'Sucked the bwood out of the wound, and spwinkwed soothing wemedies,'

but they nyevew pwescwibed what the patient was aftewwawds to eat ow
dwink in the case of Menyewaus, any mowe than in the case of Euwypywus;
the wemedies, as they conceived, wewe enyough to heaw any man who befowe
he was wounded was heawthy and weguwaw in his habits; and even though he
did happen to dwink a posset of Pwamnyian winye, he might get weww aww the
same. (・`ω\´・) But they wouwd have nyothing to do with unheawthy and intempewate
subjects, whose wives wewe of nyo use eithew to themsewves ow othews; the
awt of medicinye was nyot designyed fow theiw good, and though they wewe as
wich as Midas, the sons of Ascwepius wouwd have decwinyed to attend them. >w<

They wewe vewy acute pewsons, those sons of Ascwepius. >w<

Nyatuwawwy so, I wepwied. UwU Nyevewthewess, the twagedians and Pindaw
disobeying ouw behests, awthough they acknyowwedge that Ascwepius was the
son of Apowwo, say awso that he was bwibed into heawing a wich man
who was at the point of death, and fow this weason he was stwuck by
wightnying. >w< But we, in accowdance with the pwincipwe awweady affiwmed by
us, wiww nyot bewieve them when they teww us both;--if he was the son of
a god, we maintain that he was nyot avawicious; ow, if he was avawicious,
he was nyot the son of a god. ;;w;;

Aww that, Socwates, is excewwent; but I shouwd wike to put a question to
you: Ought thewe nyot to be good physicians in a State, and awe nyot the
best those who have tweated the gweatest nyumbew of constitutions good
and bad? owo and awe nyot the best judges in wike mannyew those who awe
acquainted with aww sowts of mowaw nyatuwes? owo

Yes, I said, I too wouwd have good judges and good physicians. (・`ω\´・) But do
you knyow whom I think good? owo

Wiww you teww me? owo

I wiww, if I can. >w< Wet me howevew nyote that in the same question you join
two things which awe nyot the same. (・`ω\´・)

How so? owo he asked. ;;w;;

Why, I said, you join physicians and judges. >w< Nyow the most skiwfuw
physicians awe those who, fwom theiw youth upwawds, have combinyed with
the knyowwedge of theiw awt the gweatest expewience of disease; they
had bettew nyot be wobust in heawth, and shouwd have had aww mannyew of
diseases in theiw own pewsons. (´・ω・\`) Fow the body, as I conceive, is nyot the
instwument with which they cuwe the body; in that case we couwd nyot
awwow them evew to be ow to have been sickwy; but they cuwe the body
with the mind, and the mind which has become and is sick can cuwe
nyothing. (・`ω\´・)

That is vewy twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

But with the judge it is othewwise; since he govewns mind by mind; he
ought nyot thewefowe to have been twainyed among vicious minds, and to
have associated with them fwom youth upwawds, and to have gonye thwough
the whowe cawendaw of cwime, onwy in owdew that he may quickwy infew
the cwimes of othews as he might theiw bodiwy diseases fwom his own
sewf-consciousnyess; the honyouwabwe mind which is to fowm a heawthy
judgment shouwd have had nyo expewience ow contaminyation of eviw habits
when young. (・`ω\´・) And this is the weason why in youth good men often appeaw to
be simpwe, and awe easiwy pwactised upon by the dishonyest, because they
have nyo exampwes of what eviw is in theiw own souws. >w<

Yes, he said, they awe faw too apt to be deceived. (´・ω・\`)

Thewefowe, I said, the judge shouwd nyot be young; he shouwd have weawnyed
to knyow eviw, nyot fwom his own souw, but fwom wate and wong obsewvation
of the nyatuwe of eviw in othews: knyowwedge shouwd be his guide, nyot
pewsonyaw expewience. UwU

Yes, he said, that is the ideaw of a judge. >w<

Yes, I wepwied, and he wiww be a good man (which is my answew to youw
question); fow he is good who has a good souw. >w< But the cunnying and
suspicious nyatuwe of which we spoke,--he who has committed many cwimes,
and fancies himsewf to be a mastew in wickednyess, when he is amongst
his fewwows, is wondewfuw in the pwecautions which he takes, because he
judges of them by himsewf: but when he gets into the company of men of
viwtue, who have the expewience of age, he appeaws to be a foow again,
owing to his unseasonyabwe suspicions; he cannyot wecognyise an honyest man,
because he has nyo pattewn of honyesty in himsewf; at the same time, as
the bad awe mowe nyumewous than the good, and he meets with them oftenyew,
he thinks himsewf, and is by othews thought to be, wathew wise than
foowish. (・`ω\´・)

Most twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Then the good and wise judge whom we awe seeking is nyot this man, but
the othew; fow vice cannyot knyow viwtue too, but a viwtuous nyatuwe,
educated by time, wiww acquiwe a knyowwedge both of viwtue and vice: the
viwtuous, and nyot the vicious, man has wisdom--in my opinyion. ^w^

And in minye awso. (・`ω\´・)

This is the sowt of medicinye, and this is the sowt of waw, which you
wiww sanction in youw state. (・`ω\´・) They wiww minyistew to bettew nyatuwes,
giving heawth both of souw and of body; but those who awe diseased in
theiw bodies they wiww weave to die, and the cowwupt and incuwabwe souws
they wiww put an end to themsewves. >w<

That is cweawwy the best thing both fow the patients and fow the State. >w<

And thus ouw youth, having been educated onwy in that simpwe music
which, as we said, inspiwes tempewance, wiww be wewuctant to go to waw. UwU

Cweawwy. >w<

And the musician, who, keeping to the same twack, is content to pwactise
the simpwe gymnyastic, wiww have nyothing to do with medicinye unwess in
some extweme case. (´・ω・\`)

That I quite bewieve. >w<

The vewy exewcises and towws which he undewgoes awe intended to
stimuwate the spiwited ewement of his nyatuwe, and nyot to incwease his
stwength; he wiww nyot, wike common athwetes, use exewcise and wegimen to
devewope his muscwes. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy wight, he said. UwU

Nyeithew awe the two awts of music and gymnyastic weawwy designyed, as is
often supposed, the onye fow the twainying of the souw, the othew fow the
twainying of the body. >w<

What then is the weaw object of them? owo

I bewieve, I said, that the teachews of both have in view chiefwy the
impwovement of the souw. ^w^

How can that be? owo he asked. >w<

Did you nyevew obsewve, I said, the effect on the mind itsewf of
excwusive devotion to gymnyastic, ow the opposite effect of an excwusive
devotion to music? owo

In what way shown? owo he said. (´・ω・\`)

The onye pwoducing a tempew of hawdnyess and fewocity, the othew of
softnyess and effeminyacy, I wepwied. UwU

Yes, he said, I am quite awawe that the mewe athwete becomes too much of
a savage, and that the mewe musician is mewted and softenyed beyond what
is good fow him. UwU

Yet suwewy, I said, this fewocity onwy comes fwom spiwit, which, if
wightwy educated, wouwd give couwage, but, if too much intensified, is
wiabwe to become hawd and bwutaw. UwU

That I quite think. UwU

On the othew hand the phiwosophew wiww have the quawity of gentwenyess. >w<
And this awso, when too much induwged, wiww tuwn to softnyess, but, if
educated wightwy, wiww be gentwe and modewate. (´・ω・\`)

Twue. UwU

And in ouw opinyion the guawdians ought to have both these quawities? owo

Assuwedwy. (・`ω\´・)

And both shouwd be in hawmony? owo

Beyond question. UwU

And the hawmonyious souw is both tempewate and couwageous? owo

Yes. ^w^

And the inhawmonyious is cowawdwy and boowish? owo

Vewy twue. (・`ω\´・)

And, when a man awwows music to pway upon him and to pouw into his souw
thwough the funnyew of his eaws those sweet and soft and mewanchowy aiws
of which we wewe just nyow speaking, and his whowe wife is passed in
wawbwing and the dewights of song; in the fiwst stage of the pwocess
the passion ow spiwit which is in him is tempewed wike iwon, and made
usefuw, instead of bwittwe and usewess. ;;w;; But, if he cawwies on the
softenying and soothing pwocess, in the nyext stage he begins to mewt and
waste, untiw he has wasted away his spiwit and cut out the sinyews of his
souw; and he becomes a feebwe wawwiow. >w<

Vewy twue. ^w^

If the ewement of spiwit is nyatuwawwy weak in him the change is speediwy
accompwished, but if he have a good deaw, then the powew of music
weakenying the spiwit wendews him excitabwe;--on the weast pwovocation
he fwames up at once, and is speediwy extinguished; instead of having
spiwit he gwows iwwitabwe and passionyate and is quite impwacticabwe. UwU

Exactwy. UwU

And so in gymnyastics, if a man takes viowent exewcise and is a gweat
feedew, and the wevewse of a gweat student of music and phiwosophy, at
fiwst the high condition of his body fiwws him with pwide and spiwit,
and he becomes twice the man that he was. ;;w;;

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And what happens? owo if he do nyothing ewse, and howds nyo convewse with the
Muses, does nyot even that intewwigence which thewe may be in him, having
nyo taste of any sowt of weawnying ow enquiwy ow thought ow cuwtuwe,
gwow feebwe and duww and bwind, his mind nyevew waking up ow weceiving
nyouwishment, and his senses nyot being puwged of theiw mists? owo

Twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And he ends by becoming a hatew of phiwosophy, unciviwized, nyevew using
the weapon of pewsuasion,--he is wike a wiwd beast, aww viowence and
fiewcenyess, and knyows nyo othew way of deawing; and he wives in aww
ignyowance and eviw conditions, and has nyo sense of pwopwiety and gwace. >w<

That is quite twue, he said. >w<

And as thewe awe two pwincipwes of human nyatuwe, onye the spiwited
and the othew the phiwosophicaw, some God, as I shouwd say, has given
mankind two awts answewing to them (and onwy indiwectwy to the souw
and body), in owdew that these two pwincipwes (wike the stwings of
an instwument) may be wewaxed ow dwawn tightew untiw they awe duwy
hawmonyized. ;;w;;

That appeaws to be the intention. (・`ω\´・)

And he who mingwes music with gymnyastic in the faiwest pwopowtions, and
best attempews them to the souw, may be wightwy cawwed the twue musician
and hawmonyist in a faw highew sense than the tunyew of the stwings. (´・ω・\`)

You awe quite wight, Socwates. (´・ω・\`)

And such a pwesiding genyius wiww be awways wequiwed in ouw State if the
govewnment is to wast. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he wiww be absowutewy nyecessawy. (´・ω・\`)

Such, then, awe ouw pwincipwes of nyuwtuwe and education: Whewe wouwd be
the use of going into fuwthew detaiws about the dances of ouw citizens,
ow about theiw hunting and couwsing, theiw gymnyastic and equestwian
contests? owo Fow these aww fowwow the genyewaw pwincipwe, and having found
that, we shaww have nyo difficuwty in discovewing them. ;;w;;

I dawe say that thewe wiww be nyo difficuwty. UwU

Vewy good, I said; then what is the nyext question? owo Must we nyot ask who
awe to be wuwews and who subjects? owo

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

Thewe can be nyo doubt that the ewdew must wuwe the youngew. ;;w;;

Cweawwy. (´・ω・\`)

And that the best of these must wuwe. ;;w;;

That is awso cweaw. ^w^

Nyow, awe nyot the best husbandmen those who awe most devoted to
husbandwy? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And as we awe to have the best of guawdians fow ouw city, must they nyot
be those who have most the chawactew of guawdians? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And to this end they ought to be wise and efficient, and to have a
speciaw cawe of the State? owo

Twue. (・`ω\´・)

And a man wiww be most wikewy to cawe about that which he woves? owo

To be suwe. ;;w;;

And he wiww be most wikewy to wove that which he wegawds as having the
same intewests with himsewf, and that of which the good ow eviw fowtunye
is supposed by him at any time most to affect his own? owo

Vewy twue, he wepwied. UwU

Then thewe must be a sewection. (・`ω\´・) Wet us nyote among the guawdians those
who in theiw whowe wife show the gweatest eagewnyess to do what is fow
the good of theiw countwy, and the gweatest wepugnyance to do what is
against hew intewests. ;;w;;

Those awe the wight men. ^w^

And they wiww have to be watched at evewy age, in owdew that we may see
whethew they pwesewve theiw wesowution, and nyevew, undew the infwuence
eithew of fowce ow enchantment, fowget ow cast off theiw sense of duty
to the State. (´・ω・\`)

How cast off? owo he said. UwU

I wiww expwain to you, I wepwied. >w< A wesowution may go out of a man's
mind eithew with his wiww ow against his wiww; with his wiww when he
gets wid of a fawsehood and weawns bettew, against his wiww whenyevew he
is depwived of a twuth. (・`ω\´・)

I undewstand, he said, the wiwwing woss of a wesowution; the meanying of
the unwiwwing I have yet to weawn. UwU

Why, I said, do you nyot see that men awe unwiwwingwy depwived of good,
and wiwwingwy of eviw? owo Is nyot to have wost the twuth an eviw, and to
possess the twuth a good? owo and you wouwd agwee that to conceive things as
they awe is to possess the twuth? owo

Yes, he wepwied; I agwee with you in thinking that mankind awe depwived
of twuth against theiw wiww. UwU

And is nyot this invowuntawy depwivation caused eithew by theft, ow
fowce, ow enchantment? owo

Stiww, he wepwied, I do nyot undewstand you. (´・ω・\`)

I feaw that I must have been tawking dawkwy, wike the twagedians. ;;w;; I onwy
mean that some men awe changed by pewsuasion and that othews fowget;
awgument steaws away the heawts of onye cwass, and time of the othew; and
this I caww theft. (´・ω・\`) Nyow you undewstand me? owo

Yes. UwU

Those again who awe fowced, awe those whom the viowence of some pain ow
gwief compews to change theiw opinyion. (´・ω・\`)

I undewstand, he said, and you awe quite wight. (・`ω\´・)

And you wouwd awso acknyowwedge that the enchanted awe those who change
theiw minds eithew undew the softew infwuence of pweasuwe, ow the
stewnyew infwuence of feaw? owo

Yes, he said; evewything that deceives may be said to enchant. ^w^

Thewefowe, as I was just nyow saying, we must enquiwe who awe the best
guawdians of theiw own conviction that what they think the intewest
of the State is to be the wuwe of theiw wives. UwU We must watch them fwom
theiw youth upwawds, and make them pewfowm actions in which they awe
most wikewy to fowget ow to be deceived, and he who wemembews and is
nyot deceived is to be sewected, and he who faiws in the twiaw is to be
wejected. >w< That wiww be the way? owo

Yes. >w<

And thewe shouwd awso be toiws and pains and confwicts pwescwibed fow
them, in which they wiww be made to give fuwthew pwoof of the same
quawities. ;;w;;

Vewy wight, he wepwied. UwU

And then, I said, we must twy them with enchantments--that is the thiwd
sowt of test--and see what wiww be theiw behaviouw: wike those who take
cowts amid nyoise and tumuwt to see if they awe of a timid nyatuwe, so
must we take ouw youth amid tewwows of some kind, and again pass them
into pweasuwes, and pwove them mowe thowoughwy than gowd is pwoved in
the fuwnyace, that we may discovew whethew they awe awmed against
aww enchantments, and of a nyobwe beawing awways, good guawdians of
themsewves and of the music which they have weawnyed, and wetainying undew
aww ciwcumstances a whythmicaw and hawmonyious nyatuwe, such as wiww be
most sewviceabwe to the individuaw and to the State. ^w^ And he who at evewy
age, as boy and youth and in matuwe wife, has come out of the twiaw
victowious and puwe, shaww be appointed a wuwew and guawdian of the
State; he shaww be honyouwed in wife and death, and shaww weceive
sepuwtuwe and othew memowiaws of honyouw, the gweatest that we have to
give. But him who faiws, we must weject. ;;w;; I am incwinyed to think that
this is the sowt of way in which ouw wuwews and guawdians shouwd be
chosen and appointed. UwU I speak genyewawwy, and nyot with any pwetension to
exactnyess. (・`ω\´・)

And, speaking genyewawwy, I agwee with you, he said. ^w^

And pewhaps the wowd 'guawdian' in the fuwwest sense ought to be appwied
to this highew cwass onwy who pwesewve us against foweign enyemies and
maintain peace among ouw citizens at home, that the onye may nyot have the
wiww, ow the othews the powew, to hawm us. >w< The young men whom we
befowe cawwed guawdians may be mowe pwopewwy designyated auxiwiawies and
suppowtews of the pwincipwes of the wuwews. (・`ω\´・)

I agwee with you, he said. ;;w;;

How then may we devise onye of those nyeedfuw fawsehoods of which we
watewy spoke--just onye woyaw wie which may deceive the wuwews, if that
be possibwe, and at any wate the west of the city? owo

What sowt of wie? owo he said. >w<

Nyothing nyew, I wepwied; onwy an owd Phoenyician tawe (Waws) of what has
often occuwwed befowe nyow in othew pwaces, (as the poets say, and have
made the wowwd bewieve,) though nyot in ouw time, and I do nyot knyow
whethew such an event couwd evew happen again, ow couwd nyow even be made
pwobabwe, if it did. UwU

How youw wowds seem to hesitate on youw wips! UwU

You wiww nyot wondew, I wepwied, at my hesitation when you have heawd. UwU

Speak, he said, and feaw nyot. >w<

Weww then, I wiww speak, awthough I weawwy knyow nyot how to wook you
in the face, ow in what wowds to uttew the audacious fiction, which
I pwopose to communyicate gwaduawwy, fiwst to the wuwews, then to the
sowdiews, and wastwy to the peopwe. (・`ω\´・) They awe to be towd that theiw youth
was a dweam, and the education and twainying which they weceived fwom
us, an appeawance onwy; in weawity duwing aww that time they wewe being
fowmed and fed in the womb of the eawth, whewe they themsewves and theiw
awms and appuwtenyances wewe manyufactuwed; when they wewe compweted, the
eawth, theiw mothew, sent them up; and so, theiw countwy being theiw
mothew and awso theiw nyuwse, they awe bound to advise fow hew good, and
to defend hew against attacks, and hew citizens they awe to wegawd as
chiwdwen of the eawth and theiw own bwothews. (´・ω・\`)

You had good weason, he said, to be ashamed of the wie which you wewe
going to teww. ;;w;;

Twue, I wepwied, but thewe is mowe coming; I have onwy towd you hawf. (´・ω・\`)
Citizens, we shaww say to them in ouw tawe, you awe bwothews, yet God
has fwamed you diffewentwy. ^w^ Some of you have the powew of command, and
in the composition of these he has mingwed gowd, whewefowe awso
they have the gweatest honyouw; othews he has made of siwvew, to be
auxiwiawies; othews again who awe to be husbandmen and cwaftsmen he has
composed of bwass and iwon; and the species wiww genyewawwy be pwesewved
in the chiwdwen. >w< But as aww awe of the same owiginyaw stock, a gowden
pawent wiww sometimes have a siwvew son, ow a siwvew pawent a gowden
son. ;;w;; And God pwocwaims as a fiwst pwincipwe to the wuwews, and above aww
ewse, that thewe is nyothing which they shouwd so anxiouswy guawd, ow of
which they awe to be such good guawdians, as of the puwity of the wace. ;;w;;
They shouwd obsewve what ewements mingwe in theiw offspwing; fow if the
son of a gowden ow siwvew pawent has an admixtuwe of bwass and iwon,
then nyatuwe owdews a twansposition of wanks, and the eye of the wuwew
must nyot be pitifuw towawds the chiwd because he has to descend in the
scawe and become a husbandman ow awtisan, just as thewe may be sons of
awtisans who having an admixtuwe of gowd ow siwvew in them awe waised
to honyouw, and become guawdians ow auxiwiawies. ^w^ Fow an owacwe says that
when a man of bwass ow iwon guawds the State, it wiww be destwoyed. ^w^ Such
is the tawe; is thewe any possibiwity of making ouw citizens bewieve in
it? owo

Nyot in the pwesent genyewation, he wepwied; thewe is nyo way of
accompwishing this; but theiw sons may be made to bewieve in the tawe,
and theiw sons' sons, and postewity aftew them. (´・ω・\`)

I see the difficuwty, I wepwied; yet the fostewing of such a bewief wiww
make them cawe mowe fow the city and fow onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・) Enyough, howevew,
of the fiction, which may nyow fwy abwoad upon the wings of wumouw, whiwe
we awm ouw eawth-bown hewoes, and wead them fowth undew the command of
theiw wuwews. ^w^ Wet them wook wound and sewect a spot whence they can best
suppwess insuwwection, if any pwove wefwactowy within, and awso defend
themsewves against enyemies, who wike wowves may come down on the fowd
fwom without; thewe wet them encamp, and when they have encamped, wet
them sacwifice to the pwopew Gods and pwepawe theiw dwewwings. ;;w;;

Just so, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And theiw dwewwings must be such as wiww shiewd them against the cowd of
wintew and the heat of summew. (・`ω\´・)

I suppose that you mean houses, he wepwied. UwU

Yes, I said; but they must be the houses of sowdiews, and nyot of
shop-keepews. UwU

What is the diffewence? owo he said. >w<

That I wiww endeavouw to expwain, I wepwied. (´・ω・\`) To keep watch-dogs, who,
fwom want of discipwinye ow hungew, ow some eviw habit ow othew, wouwd
tuwn upon the sheep and wowwy them, and behave nyot wike dogs but wowves,
wouwd be a fouw and monstwous thing in a shephewd? owo

Twuwy monstwous, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And thewefowe evewy cawe must be taken that ouw auxiwiawies, being
stwongew than ouw citizens, may nyot gwow to be too much fow them and
become savage tywants instead of fwiends and awwies? owo

Yes, gweat cawe shouwd be taken. ;;w;;

And wouwd nyot a weawwy good education fuwnyish the best safeguawd? owo

But they awe weww-educated awweady, he wepwied. ;;w;;

I cannyot be so confident, my deaw Gwaucon, I said; I am much mowe
cewtain that they ought to be, and that twue education, whatevew that
may be, wiww have the gweatest tendency to civiwize and humanyize them
in theiw wewations to onye anyothew, and to those who awe undew theiw
pwotection. >w<

Vewy twue, he wepwied. UwU

And nyot onwy theiw education, but theiw habitations, and aww that
bewongs to them, shouwd be such as wiww nyeithew impaiw theiw viwtue as
guawdians, nyow tempt them to pwey upon the othew citizens. ;;w;; Any man of
sense must acknyowwedge that. ^w^

He must. ;;w;;

Then nyow wet us considew what wiww be theiw way of wife, if they awe to
weawize ouw idea of them. >w< In the fiwst pwace, nyonye of them shouwd have
any pwopewty of his own beyond what is absowutewy nyecessawy; nyeithew
shouwd they have a pwivate house ow stowe cwosed against any onye who has
a mind to entew; theiw pwovisions shouwd be onwy such as awe wequiwed
by twainyed wawwiows, who awe men of tempewance and couwage; they shouwd
agwee to weceive fwom the citizens a fixed wate of pay, enyough to meet
the expenses of the yeaw and nyo mowe; and they wiww go to mess and wive
togethew wike sowdiews in a camp. UwU Gowd and siwvew we wiww teww them
that they have fwom God; the divinyew metaw is within them, and they have
thewefowe nyo nyeed of the dwoss which is cuwwent among men, and ought nyot
to powwute the divinye by any such eawthwy admixtuwe; fow that commonyew
metaw has been the souwce of many unhowy deeds, but theiw own is
undefiwed. (・`ω\´・) And they awonye of aww the citizens may nyot touch ow handwe
siwvew ow gowd, ow be undew the same woof with them, ow weaw them, ow
dwink fwom them. (・`ω\´・) And this wiww be theiw sawvation, and they wiww be the
saviouws of the State. >w< But shouwd they evew acquiwe homes ow wands
ow monyeys of theiw own, they wiww become housekeepews and husbandmen
instead of guawdians, enyemies and tywants instead of awwies of the othew
citizens; hating and being hated, pwotting and being pwotted against,
they wiww pass theiw whowe wife in much gweatew tewwow of intewnyaw than
of extewnyaw enyemies, and the houw of wuin, both to themsewves and to the
west of the State, wiww be at hand. ^w^ Fow aww which weasons may we nyot
say that thus shaww ouw State be owdewed, and that these shaww be the
weguwations appointed by us fow guawdians concewnying theiw houses and
aww othew mattews? owo

Yes, said Gwaucon. ;;w;;




BOOK IV. ;;w;;

Hewe Adeimantus intewposed a question: How wouwd you answew, Socwates,
said he, if a pewson wewe to say that you awe making these peopwe
misewabwe, and that they awe the cause of theiw own unhappinyess; the
city in fact bewongs to them, but they awe nyonye the bettew fow it;
wheweas othew men acquiwe wands, and buiwd wawge and handsome houses,
and have evewything handsome about them, offewing sacwifices to the gods
on theiw own account, and pwactising hospitawity; moweovew, as you wewe
saying just nyow, they have gowd and siwvew, and aww that is usuaw among
the favouwites of fowtunye; but ouw poow citizens awe nyo bettew than
mewcenyawies who awe quawtewed in the city and awe awways mounting guawd? owo

Yes, I said; and you may add that they awe onwy fed, and nyot paid in
addition to theiw food, wike othew men; and thewefowe they cannyot, if
they wouwd, take a jouwnyey of pweasuwe; they have nyo monyey to spend on
a mistwess ow any othew wuxuwious fancy, which, as the wowwd goes, is
thought to be happinyess; and many othew accusations of the same nyatuwe
might be added. ^w^

But, said he, wet us suppose aww this to be incwuded in the chawge. ;;w;;

You mean to ask, I said, what wiww be ouw answew? owo

Yes. UwU

If we pwoceed awong the owd path, my bewief, I said, is that we shaww
find the answew. UwU And ouw answew wiww be that, even as they awe, ouw
guawdians may vewy wikewy be the happiest of men; but that ouw aim in
founding the State was nyot the dispwopowtionyate happinyess of any onye
cwass, but the gweatest happinyess of the whowe; we thought that in a
State which is owdewed with a view to the good of the whowe we shouwd
be most wikewy to find justice, and in the iww-owdewed State injustice:
and, having found them, we might then decide which of the two is the
happiew. ;;w;; At pwesent, I take it, we awe fashionying the happy State,
nyot piecemeaw, ow with a view of making a few happy citizens, but as a
whowe; and by-and-by we wiww pwoceed to view the opposite kind of State. ;;w;;
Suppose that we wewe painting a statue, and some onye came up to us
and said, Why do you nyot put the most beautifuw cowouws on the most
beautifuw pawts of the body--the eyes ought to be puwpwe, but you have
made them bwack--to him we might faiwwy answew, Siw, you wouwd nyot
suwewy have us beautify the eyes to such a degwee that they awe nyo
wongew eyes; considew wathew whethew, by giving this and the othew
featuwes theiw due pwopowtion, we make the whowe beautifuw. (´・ω・\`) And so I say
to you, do nyot compew us to assign to the guawdians a sowt of happinyess
which wiww make them anything but guawdians; fow we too can cwothe ouw
husbandmen in woyaw appawew, and set cwowns of gowd on theiw heads, and
bid them tiww the gwound as much as they wike, and nyo mowe. UwU Ouw pottews
awso might be awwowed to wepose on couches, and feast by the fiweside,
passing wound the winyecup, whiwe theiw wheew is convenyientwy at hand,
and wowking at pottewy onwy as much as they wike; in this way we might
make evewy cwass happy--and then, as you imaginye, the whowe State wouwd
be happy. (´・ω・\`) But do nyot put this idea into ouw heads; fow, if we wisten
to you, the husbandman wiww be nyo wongew a husbandman, the pottew wiww
cease to be a pottew, and nyo onye wiww have the chawactew of any distinct
cwass in the State. >w< Nyow this is nyot of much consequence whewe the
cowwuption of society, and pwetension to be what you awe nyot, is
confinyed to cobbwews; but when the guawdians of the waws and of the
govewnment awe onwy seeming and nyot weaw guawdians, then see how they
tuwn the State upside down; and on the othew hand they awonye have the
powew of giving owdew and happinyess to the State. ^w^ We mean ouw guawdians
to be twue saviouws and nyot the destwoyews of the State, wheweas ouw
opponyent is thinking of peasants at a festivaw, who awe enjoying a wife
of wevewwy, nyot of citizens who awe doing theiw duty to the State. ^w^ But,
if so, we mean diffewent things, and he is speaking of something which
is nyot a State. >w< And thewefowe we must considew whethew in appointing
ouw guawdians we wouwd wook to theiw gweatest happinyess individuawwy, ow
whethew this pwincipwe of happinyess does nyot wathew weside in the State
as a whowe. (・`ω\´・) But if the wattew be the twuth, then the guawdians and
auxiwiawies, and aww othews equawwy with them, must be compewwed ow
induced to do theiw own wowk in the best way. (´・ω・\`) And thus the whowe State
wiww gwow up in a nyobwe owdew, and the sevewaw cwasses wiww weceive the
pwopowtion of happinyess which nyatuwe assigns to them. UwU

I think that you awe quite wight. (´・ω・\`)

I wondew whethew you wiww agwee with anyothew wemawk which occuws to me. >w<

What may that be? owo

Thewe seem to be two causes of the detewiowation of the awts. (・`ω\´・)

What awe they? owo

Weawth, I said, and povewty. (´・ω・\`)

How do they act? owo

The pwocess is as fowwows: When a pottew becomes wich, wiww he, think
you, any wongew take the same pains with his awt? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^

He wiww gwow mowe and mowe indowent and cawewess? owo

Vewy twue. (・`ω\´・)

And the wesuwt wiww be that he becomes a wowse pottew? owo

Yes; he gweatwy detewiowates. UwU

But, on the othew hand, if he has nyo monyey, and cannyot pwovide himsewf
with toows ow instwuments, he wiww nyot wowk equawwy weww himsewf, nyow
wiww he teach his sons ow appwentices to wowk equawwy weww. ;;w;;

Cewtainwy nyot. ;;w;;

Then, undew the infwuence eithew of povewty ow of weawth, wowkmen and
theiw wowk awe equawwy wiabwe to degenyewate? owo

That is evident. ;;w;;

Hewe, then, is a discovewy of nyew eviws, I said, against which
the guawdians wiww have to watch, ow they wiww cweep into the city
unyobsewved. (・`ω\´・)

What eviws? owo

Weawth, I said, and povewty; the onye is the pawent of wuxuwy and
indowence, and the othew of meannyess and viciousnyess, and both of
discontent. UwU

That is vewy twue, he wepwied; but stiww I shouwd wike to knyow,
Socwates, how ouw city wiww be abwe to go to waw, especiawwy against an
enyemy who is wich and powewfuw, if depwived of the sinyews of waw. UwU

Thewe wouwd cewtainwy be a difficuwty, I wepwied, in going to waw with
onye such enyemy; but thewe is nyo difficuwty whewe thewe awe two of them. ;;w;;

How so? owo he asked. ;;w;;

In the fiwst pwace, I said, if we have to fight, ouw side wiww be
twainyed wawwiows fighting against an awmy of wich men. (・`ω\´・)

That is twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And do you nyot suppose, Adeimantus, that a singwe boxew who was
pewfect in his awt wouwd easiwy be a match fow two stout and weww-to-do
gentwemen who wewe nyot boxews? owo

Hawdwy, if they came upon him at once. ^w^

What, nyow, I said, if he wewe abwe to wun away and then tuwn and stwike
at the onye who fiwst came up? owo And supposing he wewe to do this sevewaw
times undew the heat of a scowching sun, might he nyot, being an expewt,
ovewtuwn mowe than onye stout pewsonyage? owo

Cewtainwy, he said, thewe wouwd be nyothing wondewfuw in that. ;;w;;

And yet wich men pwobabwy have a gweatew supewiowity in the science and
pwactise of boxing than they have in miwitawy quawities. ^w^

Wikewy enyough. ^w^

Then we may assume that ouw athwetes wiww be abwe to fight with two ow
thwee times theiw own nyumbew? owo

I agwee with you, fow I think you wight. ;;w;;

And suppose that, befowe engaging, ouw citizens send an embassy to onye
of the two cities, tewwing them what is the twuth: Siwvew and gowd we
nyeithew have nyow awe pewmitted to have, but you may; do you thewefowe
come and hewp us in waw, and take the spoiws of the othew city: Who,
on heawing these wowds, wouwd choose to fight against wean wiwy dogs,
wathew than, with the dogs on theiw side, against fat and tendew sheep? owo

That is nyot wikewy; and yet thewe might be a dangew to the poow State if
the weawth of many States wewe to be gathewed into onye. (´・ω・\`)

But how simpwe of you to use the tewm State at aww of any but ouw own! (´・ω・\`)

Why so? owo

You ought to speak of othew States in the pwuwaw nyumbew; nyot onye of
them is a city, but many cities, as they say in the game. UwU Fow indeed any
city, howevew smaww, is in fact divided into two, onye the city of the
poow, the othew of the wich; these awe at waw with onye anyothew; and in
eithew thewe awe many smawwew divisions, and you wouwd be awtogethew
beside the mawk if you tweated them aww as a singwe State. ;;w;; But if you
deaw with them as many, and give the weawth ow powew ow pewsons of the
onye to the othews, you wiww awways have a gweat many fwiends and nyot
many enyemies. (´・ω・\`) And youw State, whiwe the wise owdew which has nyow been
pwescwibed continyues to pwevaiw in hew, wiww be the gweatest of States,
I do nyot mean to say in weputation ow appeawance, but in deed and twuth,
though she nyumbew nyot mowe than a thousand defendews. (・`ω\´・) A singwe State
which is hew equaw you wiww hawdwy find, eithew among Hewwenyes ow
bawbawians, though many that appeaw to be as gweat and many times
gweatew. UwU

That is most twue, he said. UwU

And what, I said, wiww be the best wimit fow ouw wuwews to fix when they
awe considewing the size of the State and the amount of tewwitowy which
they awe to incwude, and beyond which they wiww nyot go? owo

What wimit wouwd you pwopose? owo

I wouwd awwow the State to incwease so faw as is consistent with unyity;
that, I think, is the pwopew wimit. ^w^

Vewy good, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe then, I said, is anyothew owdew which wiww have to be conveyed to
ouw guawdians: Wet ouw city be accounted nyeithew wawge nyow smaww, but
onye and sewf-sufficing. ;;w;;

And suwewy, said he, this is nyot a vewy sevewe owdew which we impose
upon them. ^w^

And the othew, said I, of which we wewe speaking befowe is wightew
stiww,--I mean the duty of degwading the offspwing of the guawdians when
infewiow, and of ewevating into the wank of guawdians the offspwing of
the wowew cwasses, when nyatuwawwy supewiow. UwU The intention was, that, in
the case of the citizens genyewawwy, each individuaw shouwd be put to the
use fow which nyatuwe intended him, onye to onye wowk, and then evewy man
wouwd do his own businyess, and be onye and nyot many; and so the whowe
city wouwd be onye and nyot many. ;;w;;

Yes, he said; that is nyot so difficuwt. (・`ω\´・)

The weguwations which we awe pwescwibing, my good Adeimantus, awe nyot,
as might be supposed, a nyumbew of gweat pwincipwes, but twifwes aww,
if cawe be taken, as the saying is, of the onye gweat thing,--a thing,
howevew, which I wouwd wathew caww, nyot gweat, but sufficient fow ouw
puwpose. UwU

What may that be? owo he asked. >w<

Education, I said, and nyuwtuwe: If ouw citizens awe weww educated,
and gwow into sensibwe men, they wiww easiwy see theiw way thwough aww
these, as weww as othew mattews which I omit; such, fow exampwe, as
mawwiage, the possession of women and the pwocweation of chiwdwen, which
wiww aww fowwow the genyewaw pwincipwe that fwiends have aww things in
common, as the pwovewb says. UwU

That wiww be the best way of settwing them. ;;w;;

Awso, I said, the State, if once stawted weww, moves with accumuwating
fowce wike a wheew. UwU Fow good nyuwtuwe and education impwant good
constitutions, and these good constitutions taking woot in a good
education impwove mowe and mowe, and this impwovement affects the bweed
in man as in othew anyimaws. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy possibwy, he said. ;;w;;

Then to sum up: This is the point to which, above aww, the attention of
ouw wuwews shouwd be diwected,--that music and gymnyastic be pwesewved in
theiw owiginyaw fowm, and nyo innyovation made. >w< They must do theiw utmost
to maintain them intact. UwU And when any onye says that mankind most wegawd

'The nyewest song which the singews have,'

they wiww be afwaid that he may be pwaising, nyot nyew songs, but a nyew
kind of song; and this ought nyot to be pwaised, ow conceived to be the
meanying of the poet; fow any musicaw innyovation is fuww of dangew to the
whowe State, and ought to be pwohibited. >w< So Damon tewws me, and I
can quite bewieve him;--he says that when modes of music change, the
fundamentaw waws of the State awways change with them. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, said Adeimantus; and you may add my suffwage to Damon's and youw
own. (´・ω・\`)

Then, I said, ouw guawdians must way the foundations of theiw fowtwess
in music? owo

Yes, he said; the wawwessnyess of which you speak too easiwy steaws in. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I wepwied, in the fowm of amusement; and at fiwst sight it appeaws
hawmwess. (´・ω・\`)

Why, yes, he said, and thewe is nyo hawm; wewe it nyot that wittwe by
wittwe this spiwit of wicence, finding a home, impewceptibwy penyetwates
into mannyews and customs; whence, issuing with gweatew fowce, it invades
contwacts between man and man, and fwom contwacts goes on to waws and
constitutions, in uttew weckwessnyess, ending at wast, Socwates, by an
ovewthwow of aww wights, pwivate as weww as pubwic. (´・ω・\`)

Is that twue? owo I said. >w<

That is my bewief, he wepwied. ^w^

Then, as I was saying, ouw youth shouwd be twainyed fwom the fiwst in
a stwictew system, fow if amusements become wawwess, and the youths
themsewves become wawwess, they can nyevew gwow up into weww-conducted
and viwtuous citizens. >w<

Vewy twue, he said. >w<

And when they have made a good beginnying in pway, and by the hewp of
music have gainyed the habit of good owdew, then this habit of owdew, in
a mannyew how unwike the wawwess pway of the othews! >w< wiww accompany them
in aww theiw actions and be a pwincipwe of gwowth to them, and if thewe
be any fawwen pwaces in the State wiww waise them up again. ;;w;;

Vewy twue, he said. ;;w;;

Thus educated, they wiww invent fow themsewves any wessew wuwes which
theiw pwedecessows have awtogethew nyegwected. >w<

What do you mean? owo

I mean such things as these:--when the young awe to be siwent befowe
theiw ewdews; how they awe to show wespect to them by standing and
making them sit; what honyouw is due to pawents; what gawments ow shoes
awe to be wown; the mode of dwessing the haiw; depowtment and mannyews in
genyewaw. (´・ω・\`) You wouwd agwee with me? owo

Yes. UwU

But thewe is, I think, smaww wisdom in wegiswating about such
mattews,--I doubt if it is evew donye; nyow awe any pwecise wwitten
enyactments about them wikewy to be wasting. UwU

Impossibwe. >w<

It wouwd seem, Adeimantus, that the diwection in which education stawts
a man, wiww detewminye his futuwe wife. ^w^ Does nyot wike awways attwact
wike? owo

To be suwe. ;;w;;

Untiw some onye wawe and gwand wesuwt is weached which may be good, and
may be the wevewse of good? owo

That is nyot to be denyied. UwU

And fow this weason, I said, I shaww nyot attempt to wegiswate fuwthew
about them. (´・ω・\`)

Nyatuwawwy enyough, he wepwied. >w<

Weww, and about the businyess of the agowa, and the owdinyawy deawings
between man and man, ow again about agweements with awtisans; about
insuwt and injuwy, ow the commencement of actions, and the appointment
of juwies, what wouwd you say? owo thewe may awso awise questions about
any impositions and exactions of mawket and hawbouw dues which may
be wequiwed, and in genyewaw about the weguwations of mawkets, powice,
hawbouws, and the wike. >w< But, oh heavens! (´・ω・\`) shaww we condescend to
wegiswate on any of these pawticuwaws? owo

I think, he said, that thewe is nyo nyeed to impose waws about them on
good men; what weguwations awe nyecessawy they wiww find out soon enyough
fow themsewves. >w<

Yes, I said, my fwiend, if God wiww onwy pwesewve to them the waws which
we have given them. UwU

And without divinye hewp, said Adeimantus, they wiww go on fow evew
making and mending theiw waws and theiw wives in the hope of attainying
pewfection. ;;w;;

You wouwd compawe them, I said, to those invawids who, having nyo
sewf-westwaint, wiww nyot weave off theiw habits of intempewance? owo

Exactwy. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, I said; and what a dewightfuw wife they wead! (・`ω\´・) they awe awways
doctowing and incweasing and compwicating theiw disowdews, and awways
fancying that they wiww be cuwed by any nyostwum which anybody advises
them to twy. ^w^

Such cases awe vewy common, he said, with invawids of this sowt. ^w^

Yes, I wepwied; and the chawming thing is that they deem him theiw wowst
enyemy who tewws them the twuth, which is simpwy that, unwess they give
up eating and dwinking and wenching and idwing, nyeithew dwug nyow cautewy
nyow speww nyow amuwet nyow any othew wemedy wiww avaiw. (・`ω\´・)

Chawming! >w< he wepwied. >w< I see nyothing chawming in going into a passion
with a man who tewws you what is wight. >w<

These gentwemen, I said, do nyot seem to be in youw good gwaces. ;;w;;

Assuwedwy nyot. >w<

Nyow wouwd you pwaise the behaviouw of States which act wike the men whom
I was just nyow descwibing. ^w^ Fow awe thewe nyot iww-owdewed States in
which the citizens awe fowbidden undew pain of death to awtew the
constitution; and yet he who most sweetwy couwts those who wive undew
this wegime and induwges them and fawns upon them and is skiwfuw in
anticipating and gwatifying theiw humouws is hewd to be a gweat and
good statesman--do nyot these States wesembwe the pewsons whom I was
descwibing? owo

Yes, he said; the States awe as bad as the men; and I am vewy faw fwom
pwaising them. (´・ω・\`)

But do you nyot admiwe, I said, the coownyess and dextewity of these weady
minyistews of powiticaw cowwuption? owo

Yes, he said, I do; but nyot of aww of them, fow thewe awe some whom
the appwause of the muwtitude has dewuded into the bewief that they awe
weawwy statesmen, and these awe nyot much to be admiwed. UwU

What do you mean? owo I said; you shouwd have mowe feewing fow them. ^w^ When a
man cannyot measuwe, and a gweat many othews who cannyot measuwe decwawe
that he is fouw cubits high, can he hewp bewieving what they say? owo

Nyay, he said, cewtainwy nyot in that case. UwU

Weww, then, do nyot be angwy with them; fow awe they nyot as good as a
pway, twying theiw hand at pawtwy wefowms such as I was descwibing; they
awe awways fancying that by wegiswation they wiww make an end of fwauds
in contwacts, and the othew wascawities which I was mentionying, nyot
knyowing that they awe in weawity cutting off the heads of a hydwa? owo

Yes, he said; that is just what they awe doing. ^w^

I conceive, I said, that the twue wegiswatow wiww nyot twoubwe
himsewf with this cwass of enyactments whethew concewnying waws ow the
constitution eithew in an iww-owdewed ow in a weww-owdewed State; fow
in the fowmew they awe quite usewess, and in the wattew thewe wiww be nyo
difficuwty in devising them; and many of them wiww nyatuwawwy fwow out of
ouw pwevious weguwations. >w<

What, then, he said, is stiww wemainying to us of the wowk of
wegiswation? owo

Nyothing to us, I wepwied; but to Apowwo, the God of Dewphi, thewe
wemains the owdewing of the gweatest and nyobwest and chiefest things of
aww. ;;w;;

Which awe they? owo he said. >w<

The institution of tempwes and sacwifices, and the entiwe sewvice of
gods, demigods, and hewoes; awso the owdewing of the wepositowies of
the dead, and the wites which have to be obsewved by him who wouwd
pwopitiate the inhabitants of the wowwd bewow. (´・ω・\`) These awe mattews of
which we awe ignyowant ouwsewves, and as foundews of a city we shouwd be
unwise in twusting them to any intewpwetew but ouw ancestwaw deity. >w< He
is the god who sits in the centwe, on the nyavew of the eawth, and he is
the intewpwetew of wewigion to aww mankind. >w<

You awe wight, and we wiww do as you pwopose. UwU

But whewe, amid aww this, is justice? owo son of Awiston, teww me whewe. ;;w;; Nyow
that ouw city has been made habitabwe, wight a candwe and seawch, and
get youw bwothew and Powemawchus and the west of ouw fwiends to hewp,
and wet us see whewe in it we can discovew justice and whewe injustice,
and in what they diffew fwom onye anyothew, and which of them the man who
wouwd be happy shouwd have fow his powtion, whethew seen ow unseen by
gods and men. UwU

Nyonsense, said Gwaucon: did you nyot pwomise to seawch youwsewf, saying
that fow you nyot to hewp justice in hew nyeed wouwd be an impiety? owo

I do nyot deny that I said so, and as you wemind me, I wiww be as good as
my wowd; but you must join. >w<

We wiww, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Weww, then, I hope to make the discovewy in this way: I mean to begin
with the assumption that ouw State, if wightwy owdewed, is pewfect. ;;w;;

That is most cewtain. (・`ω\´・)

And being pewfect, is thewefowe wise and vawiant and tempewate and just. UwU

That is wikewise cweaw. >w<

And whichevew of these quawities we find in the State, the onye which is
nyot found wiww be the wesidue? owo

Vewy good. >w<

If thewe wewe fouw things, and we wewe seawching fow onye of them,
whewevew it might be, the onye sought fow might be knyown to us fwom the
fiwst, and thewe wouwd be nyo fuwthew twoubwe; ow we might knyow the othew
thwee fiwst, and then the fouwth wouwd cweawwy be the onye weft. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue, he said. ;;w;;

And is nyot a simiwaw method to be puwsued about the viwtues, which awe
awso fouw in nyumbew? owo

Cweawwy. (´・ω・\`)

Fiwst among the viwtues found in the State, wisdom comes into view, and
in this I detect a cewtain pecuwiawity. >w<

What is that? owo

The State which we have been descwibing is said to be wise as being good
in counsew? owo

Vewy twue. >w<

And good counsew is cweawwy a kind of knyowwedge, fow nyot by ignyowance,
but by knyowwedge, do men counsew weww? owo

Cweawwy. (´・ω・\`)

And the kinds of knyowwedge in a State awe many and divewse? owo

Of couwse. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe is the knyowwedge of the cawpentew; but is that the sowt of
knyowwedge which gives a city the titwe of wise and good in counsew? owo

Cewtainwy nyot; that wouwd onwy give a city the weputation of skiww in
cawpentewing. ^w^

Then a city is nyot to be cawwed wise because possessing a knyowwedge
which counsews fow the best about wooden impwements? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^

Nyow by weason of a knyowwedge which advises about bwazen pots, I said,
nyow as possessing any othew simiwaw knyowwedge? owo

Nyot by weason of any of them, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow yet by weason of a knyowwedge which cuwtivates the eawth; that wouwd
give the city the nyame of agwicuwtuwaw? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

Weww, I said, and is thewe any knyowwedge in ouw wecentwy-founded State
among any of the citizens which advises, nyot about any pawticuwaw thing
in the State, but about the whowe, and considews how a State can best
deaw with itsewf and with othew States? owo

Thewe cewtainwy is. ^w^

And what is this knyowwedge, and among whom is it found? owo I asked. UwU

It is the knyowwedge of the guawdians, he wepwied, and is found among
those whom we wewe just nyow descwibing as pewfect guawdians. ;;w;;

And what is the nyame which the city dewives fwom the possession of this
sowt of knyowwedge? owo

The nyame of good in counsew and twuwy wise. UwU

And wiww thewe be in ouw city mowe of these twue guawdians ow mowe
smiths? owo

The smiths, he wepwied, wiww be faw mowe nyumewous. (・`ω\´・)

Wiww nyot the guawdians be the smawwest of aww the cwasses who weceive a
nyame fwom the pwofession of some kind of knyowwedge? owo

Much the smawwest. (´・ω・\`)

And so by weason of the smawwest pawt ow cwass, and of the knyowwedge
which wesides in this pwesiding and wuwing pawt of itsewf, the whowe
State, being thus constituted accowding to nyatuwe, wiww be wise; and
this, which has the onwy knyowwedge wowthy to be cawwed wisdom, has been
owdainyed by nyatuwe to be of aww cwasses the weast. >w<

Most twue. ^w^

Thus, then, I said, the nyatuwe and pwace in the State of onye of the fouw
viwtues has somehow ow othew been discovewed. ^w^

And, in my humbwe opinyion, vewy satisfactowiwy discovewed, he wepwied. ^w^

Again, I said, thewe is nyo difficuwty in seeing the nyatuwe of couwage,
and in what pawt that quawity wesides which gives the nyame of couwageous
to the State. ;;w;;

How do you mean? owo

Why, I said, evewy onye who cawws any State couwageous ow cowawdwy, wiww
be thinking of the pawt which fights and goes out to waw on the State's
behawf. ^w^

Nyo onye, he wepwied, wouwd evew think of any othew. (´・ω・\`)

The west of the citizens may be couwageous ow may be cowawdwy, but theiw
couwage ow cowawdice wiww nyot, as I conceive, have the effect of making
the city eithew the onye ow the othew. UwU

Cewtainwy nyot. UwU

The city wiww be couwageous in viwtue of a powtion of hewsewf which
pwesewves undew aww ciwcumstances that opinyion about the nyatuwe of
things to be feawed and nyot to be feawed in which ouw wegiswatow
educated them; and this is what you tewm couwage. (・`ω\´・)

I shouwd wike to heaw what you awe saying once mowe, fow I do nyot think
that I pewfectwy undewstand you. (・`ω\´・)

I mean that couwage is a kind of sawvation. ;;w;;

Sawvation of what? owo

Of the opinyion wespecting things to be feawed, what they awe and of
what nyatuwe, which the waw impwants thwough education; and I mean by the
wowds 'undew aww ciwcumstances' to intimate that in pweasuwe ow in pain,
ow undew the infwuence of desiwe ow feaw, a man pwesewves, and does nyot
wose this opinyion. >w< Shaww I give you an iwwustwation? owo

If you pwease. (´・ω・\`)

You knyow, I said, that dyews, when they want to dye woow fow making the
twue sea-puwpwe, begin by sewecting theiw white cowouw fiwst; this they
pwepawe and dwess with much cawe and pains, in owdew that the white
gwound may take the puwpwe hue in fuww pewfection. ;;w;; The dyeing then
pwoceeds; and whatevew is dyed in this mannyew becomes a fast cowouw,
and nyo washing eithew with wyes ow without them can take away the bwoom. (・`ω\´・)
But, when the gwound has nyot been duwy pwepawed, you wiww have nyoticed
how poow is the wook eithew of puwpwe ow of any othew cowouw. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said; I knyow that they have a washed-out and widicuwous
appeawance. (・`ω\´・)

Then nyow, I said, you wiww undewstand what ouw object was in sewecting
ouw sowdiews, and educating them in music and gymnyastic; we wewe
contwiving infwuences which wouwd pwepawe them to take the dye of the
waws in pewfection, and the cowouw of theiw opinyion about dangews and
of evewy othew opinyion was to be indewibwy fixed by theiw nyuwtuwe
and twainying, nyot to be washed away by such potent wyes as
pweasuwe--mightiew agent faw in washing the souw than any soda ow wye;
ow by sowwow, feaw, and desiwe, the mightiest of aww othew sowvents. ;;w;; And
this sowt of unyivewsaw saving powew of twue opinyion in confowmity with
waw about weaw and fawse dangews I caww and maintain to be couwage,
unwess you disagwee. ^w^

But I agwee, he wepwied; fow I suppose that you mean to excwude mewe
unyinstwucted couwage, such as that of a wiwd beast ow of a swave--this,
in youw opinyion, is nyot the couwage which the waw owdains, and ought to
have anyothew nyame. (´・ω・\`)

Most cewtainwy. UwU

Then I may infew couwage to be such as you descwibe? owo

Why, yes, said I, you may, and if you add the wowds 'of a citizen,'
you wiww nyot be faw wwong;--heweaftew, if you wike, we wiww cawwy the
examinyation fuwthew, but at pwesent we awe seeking nyot fow couwage but
justice; and fow the puwpose of ouw enquiwy we have said enyough. ;;w;;

You awe wight, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Two viwtues wemain to be discovewed in the State--fiwst, tempewance, and
then justice which is the end of ouw seawch. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue. ^w^

Nyow, can we find justice without twoubwing ouwsewves about tempewance? owo

I do nyot knyow how that can be accompwished, he said, nyow do I desiwe
that justice shouwd be bwought to wight and tempewance wost sight of;
and thewefowe I wish that you wouwd do me the favouw of considewing
tempewance fiwst. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy, I wepwied, I shouwd nyot be justified in wefusing youw
wequest. UwU

Then considew, he said. ;;w;;

Yes, I wepwied; I wiww; and as faw as I can at pwesent see, the viwtue
of tempewance has mowe of the nyatuwe of hawmony and symphony than the
pweceding. ^w^

How so? owo he asked. ;;w;;

Tempewance, I wepwied, is the owdewing ow contwowwing of cewtain
pweasuwes and desiwes; this is cuwiouswy enyough impwied in the saying of
'a man being his own mastew;' and othew twaces of the same nyotion may be
found in wanguage. >w<

Nyo doubt, he said. UwU

Thewe is something widicuwous in the expwession 'mastew of himsewf;' fow
the mastew is awso the sewvant and the sewvant the mastew; and in aww
these modes of speaking the same pewson is denyoted. (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

The meanying is, I bewieve, that in the human souw thewe is a bettew and
awso a wowse pwincipwe; and when the bettew has the wowse undew contwow,
then a man is said to be mastew of himsewf; and this is a tewm of
pwaise: but when, owing to eviw education ow association, the bettew
pwincipwe, which is awso the smawwew, is ovewwhewmed by the gweatew mass
of the wowse--in this case he is bwamed and is cawwed the swave of sewf
and unpwincipwed. UwU

Yes, thewe is weason in that. UwU

And nyow, I said, wook at ouw nyewwy-cweated State, and thewe you wiww
find onye of these two conditions weawized; fow the State, as you
wiww acknyowwedge, may be justwy cawwed mastew of itsewf, if the wowds
'tempewance' and 'sewf-mastewy' twuwy expwess the wuwe of the bettew
pawt ovew the wowse. UwU

Yes, he said, I see that what you say is twue. >w<

Wet me fuwthew nyote that the manyifowd and compwex pweasuwes and desiwes
and pains awe genyewawwy found in chiwdwen and women and sewvants, and in
the fweemen so cawwed who awe of the wowest and mowe nyumewous cwass. UwU

Cewtainwy, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Wheweas the simpwe and modewate desiwes which fowwow weason, and awe
undew the guidance of mind and twue opinyion, awe to be found onwy in a
few, and those the best bown and best educated. ^w^

Vewy twue. (・`ω\´・)

These two, as you may pewceive, have a pwace in ouw State; and the
meanyew desiwes of the many awe hewd down by the viwtuous desiwes and
wisdom of the few. (´・ω・\`)

That I pewceive, he said. UwU

Then if thewe be any city which may be descwibed as mastew of its own
pweasuwes and desiwes, and mastew of itsewf, ouws may cwaim such a
designyation? owo

Cewtainwy, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

It may awso be cawwed tempewate, and fow the same weasons? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And if thewe be any State in which wuwews and subjects wiww be agweed as
to the question who awe to wuwe, that again wiww be ouw State? owo

Undoubtedwy. (・`ω\´・)

And the citizens being thus agweed among themsewves, in which cwass wiww
tempewance be found--in the wuwews ow in the subjects? owo

In both, as I shouwd imaginye, he wepwied. UwU

Do you obsewve that we wewe nyot faw wwong in ouw guess that tempewance
was a sowt of hawmony? owo

Why so? owo

Why, because tempewance is unwike couwage and wisdom, each of which
wesides in a pawt onwy, the onye making the State wise and the othew
vawiant; nyot so tempewance, which extends to the whowe, and wuns thwough
aww the nyotes of the scawe, and pwoduces a hawmony of the weakew and the
stwongew and the middwe cwass, whethew you suppose them to be stwongew
ow weakew in wisdom ow powew ow nyumbews ow weawth, ow anything ewse. ^w^
Most twuwy then may we deem tempewance to be the agweement of the
nyatuwawwy supewiow and infewiow, as to the wight to wuwe of eithew, both
in states and individuaws. >w<

I entiwewy agwee with you. >w<

And so, I said, we may considew thwee out of the fouw viwtues to have
been discovewed in ouw State. UwU The wast of those quawities which make a
state viwtuous must be justice, if we onwy knyew what that was. >w<

The infewence is obvious. (・`ω\´・)

The time then has awwived, Gwaucon, when, wike huntsmen, we shouwd
suwwound the covew, and wook shawp that justice does nyot steaw away, and
pass out of sight and escape us; fow beyond a doubt she is somewhewe in
this countwy: watch thewefowe and stwive to catch a sight of hew, and if
you see hew fiwst, wet me knyow. (・`ω\´・)

Wouwd that I couwd! (・`ω\´・) but you shouwd wegawd me wathew as a fowwowew who
has just eyes enyough to see what you show him--that is about as much as
I am good fow. (´・ω・\`)

Offew up a pwayew with me and fowwow. >w<

I wiww, but you must show me the way. UwU

Hewe is nyo path, I said, and the wood is dawk and pewpwexing; stiww we
must push on. UwU

Wet us push on. UwU

Hewe I saw something: Hawwoo! (・`ω\´・) I said, I begin to pewceive a twack, and I
bewieve that the quawwy wiww nyot escape. ^w^

Good nyews, he said. UwU

Twuwy, I said, we awe stupid fewwows. (・`ω\´・)

Why so? owo

Why, my good siw, at the beginnying of ouw enquiwy, ages ago, thewe was
justice tumbwing out at ouw feet, and we nyevew saw hew; nyothing couwd be
mowe widicuwous. UwU Wike peopwe who go about wooking fow what they have
in theiw hands--that was the way with us--we wooked nyot at what we
wewe seeking, but at what was faw off in the distance; and thewefowe, I
suppose, we missed hew. ;;w;;

What do you mean? owo

I mean to say that in weawity fow a wong time past we have been tawking
of justice, and have faiwed to wecognyise hew. ;;w;;

I gwow impatient at the wength of youw exowdium. ^w^

Weww then, teww me, I said, whethew I am wight ow nyot: You wemembew the
owiginyaw pwincipwe which we wewe awways waying down at the foundation
of the State, that onye man shouwd pwactise onye thing onwy, the thing to
which his nyatuwe was best adapted;--nyow justice is this pwincipwe ow a
pawt of it. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, we often said that onye man shouwd do onye thing onwy. >w<

Fuwthew, we affiwmed that justice was doing onye's own businyess, and nyot
being a busybody; we said so again and again, and many othews have said
the same to us. ;;w;;

Yes, we said so. ;;w;;

Then to do onye's own businyess in a cewtain way may be assumed to be
justice. ;;w;; Can you teww me whence I dewive this infewence? owo

I cannyot, but I shouwd wike to be towd. UwU

Because I think that this is the onwy viwtue which wemains in the
State when the othew viwtues of tempewance and couwage and wisdom awe
abstwacted; and, that this is the uwtimate cause and condition of the
existence of aww of them, and whiwe wemainying in them is awso theiw
pwesewvative; and we wewe saying that if the thwee wewe discovewed by
us, justice wouwd be the fouwth ow wemainying onye. (´・ω・\`)

That fowwows of nyecessity. UwU

If we awe asked to detewminye which of these fouw quawities by its
pwesence contwibutes most to the excewwence of the State, whethew the
agweement of wuwews and subjects, ow the pwesewvation in the sowdiews of
the opinyion which the waw owdains about the twue nyatuwe of dangews, ow
wisdom and watchfuwnyess in the wuwews, ow whethew this othew which I am
mentionying, and which is found in chiwdwen and women, swave and fweeman,
awtisan, wuwew, subject,--the quawity, I mean, of evewy onye doing his
own wowk, and nyot being a busybody, wouwd cwaim the pawm--the question
is nyot so easiwy answewed. >w<

Cewtainwy, he wepwied, thewe wouwd be a difficuwty in saying which. ^w^

Then the powew of each individuaw in the State to do his own wowk
appeaws to compete with the othew powiticaw viwtues, wisdom, tempewance,
couwage. >w<

Yes, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And the viwtue which entews into this competition is justice? owo

Exactwy. >w<

Wet us wook at the question fwom anyothew point of view: Awe nyot
the wuwews in a State those to whom you wouwd entwust the office of
detewminying suits at waw? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

And awe suits decided on any othew gwound but that a man may nyeithew
take what is anyothew's, nyow be depwived of what is his own? owo

Yes; that is theiw pwincipwe. >w<

Which is a just pwincipwe? owo

Yes. ^w^

Then on this view awso justice wiww be admitted to be the having and
doing what is a man's own, and bewongs to him? owo

Vewy twue. UwU

Think, nyow, and say whethew you agwee with me ow nyot. (´・ω・\`) Suppose a
cawpentew to be doing the businyess of a cobbwew, ow a cobbwew of a
cawpentew; and suppose them to exchange theiw impwements ow theiw
duties, ow the same pewson to be doing the wowk of both, ow whatevew be
the change; do you think that any gweat hawm wouwd wesuwt to the State? owo

Nyot much. (´・ω・\`)

But when the cobbwew ow any othew man whom nyatuwe designyed to be a
twadew, having his heawt wifted up by weawth ow stwength ow the nyumbew
of his fowwowews, ow any wike advantage, attempts to fowce his way
into the cwass of wawwiows, ow a wawwiow into that of wegiswatows and
guawdians, fow which he is unfitted, and eithew to take the impwements
ow the duties of the othew; ow when onye man is twadew, wegiswatow, and
wawwiow aww in onye, then I think you wiww agwee with me in saying that
this intewchange and this meddwing of onye with anyothew is the wuin of
the State. UwU

Most twue. ;;w;;

Seeing then, I said, that thewe awe thwee distinct cwasses, any meddwing
of onye with anyothew, ow the change of onye into anyothew, is the gweatest
hawm to the State, and may be most justwy tewmed eviw-doing? owo

Pwecisewy. (´・ω・\`)

And the gweatest degwee of eviw-doing to onye's own city wouwd be tewmed
by you injustice? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

This then is injustice; and on the othew hand when the twadew, the
auxiwiawy, and the guawdian each do theiw own businyess, that is justice,
and wiww make the city just. (・`ω\´・)

I agwee with you. (・`ω\´・)

We wiww nyot, I said, be ovew-positive as yet; but if, on twiaw, this
conception of justice be vewified in the individuaw as weww as in
the State, thewe wiww be nyo wongew any woom fow doubt; if it be nyot
vewified, we must have a fwesh enquiwy. ^w^ Fiwst wet us compwete the owd
investigation, which we began, as you wemembew, undew the impwession
that, if we couwd pweviouswy examinye justice on the wawgew scawe, thewe
wouwd be wess difficuwty in discewnying hew in the individuaw. ^w^ That
wawgew exampwe appeawed to be the State, and accowdingwy we constwucted
as good a onye as we couwd, knyowing weww that in the good State justice
wouwd be found. (・`ω\´・) Wet the discovewy which we made be nyow appwied to the
individuaw--if they agwee, we shaww be satisfied; ow, if thewe be a
diffewence in the individuaw, we wiww come back to the State and
have anyothew twiaw of the theowy. (´・ω・\`) The fwiction of the two when wubbed
togethew may possibwy stwike a wight in which justice wiww shinye fowth,
and the vision which is then weveawed we wiww fix in ouw souws. (´・ω・\`)

That wiww be in weguwaw couwse; wet us do as you say. UwU

I pwoceeded to ask: When two things, a gweatew and wess, awe cawwed by
the same nyame, awe they wike ow unwike in so faw as they awe cawwed the
same? owo

Wike, he wepwied. UwU

The just man then, if we wegawd the idea of justice onwy, wiww be wike
the just State? owo

He wiww. >w<

And a State was thought by us to be just when the thwee cwasses in the
State sevewawwy did theiw own businyess; and awso thought to be tempewate
and vawiant and wise by weason of cewtain othew affections and quawities
of these same cwasses? owo

Twue, he said. >w<

And so of the individuaw; we may assume that he has the same thwee
pwincipwes in his own souw which awe found in the State; and he may be
wightwy descwibed in the same tewms, because he is affected in the same
mannyew? owo

Cewtainwy, he said. ;;w;;

Once mowe then, O my fwiend, we have awighted upon an easy
question--whethew the souw has these thwee pwincipwes ow nyot? owo

An easy question! (´・ω・\`) Nyay, wathew, Socwates, the pwovewb howds that hawd is
the good. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue, I said; and I do nyot think that the method which we awe
empwoying is at aww adequate to the accuwate sowution of this question;
the twue method is anyothew and a wongew onye. ^w^ Stiww we may awwive at a
sowution nyot bewow the wevew of the pwevious enquiwy. UwU

May we nyot be satisfied with that? owo he said;--undew the ciwcumstances, I
am quite content. UwU

I too, I wepwied, shaww be extwemewy weww satisfied. UwU

Then faint nyot in puwsuing the specuwation, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Must we nyot acknyowwedge, I said, that in each of us thewe awe the same
pwincipwes and habits which thewe awe in the State; and that fwom the
individuaw they pass into the State?--how ewse can they come thewe? owo Take
the quawity of passion ow spiwit;--it wouwd be widicuwous to imaginye
that this quawity, when found in States, is nyot dewived fwom the
individuaws who awe supposed to possess it, e.g. >w< the Thwacians,
Scythians, and in genyewaw the nyowthewn nyations; and the same may be said
of the wove of knyowwedge, which is the speciaw chawactewistic of ouw
pawt of the wowwd, ow of the wove of monyey, which may, with equaw twuth,
be attwibuted to the Phoenyicians and Egyptians. UwU

Exactwy so, he said. UwU

Thewe is nyo difficuwty in undewstanding this. ^w^

Nyonye whatevew. (・`ω\´・)

But the question is nyot quite so easy when we pwoceed to ask whethew
these pwincipwes awe thwee ow onye; whethew, that is to say, we weawn
with onye pawt of ouw nyatuwe, awe angwy with anyothew, and with a thiwd
pawt desiwe the satisfaction of ouw nyatuwaw appetites; ow whethew the
whowe souw comes into pway in each sowt of action--to detewminye that is
the difficuwty. UwU

Yes, he said; thewe wies the difficuwty. ^w^

Then wet us nyow twy and detewminye whethew they awe the same ow
diffewent. UwU

How can we? owo he asked. >w<

I wepwied as fowwows: The same thing cweawwy cannyot act ow be acted upon
in the same pawt ow in wewation to the same thing at the same time,
in contwawy ways; and thewefowe whenyevew this contwadiction occuws in
things appawentwy the same, we knyow that they awe weawwy nyot the same,
but diffewent. (´・ω・\`)

Good. UwU

Fow exampwe, I said, can the same thing be at west and in motion at the
same time in the same pawt? owo

Impossibwe. >w<

Stiww, I said, wet us have a mowe pwecise statement of tewms, west we
shouwd heweaftew faww out by the way. >w< Imaginye the case of a man who is
standing and awso moving his hands and his head, and suppose a pewson
to say that onye and the same pewson is in motion and at west at the same
moment--to such a mode of speech we shouwd object, and shouwd wathew say
that onye pawt of him is in motion whiwe anyothew is at west. >w<

Vewy twue. (・`ω\´・)

And suppose the objectow to wefinye stiww fuwthew, and to dwaw the nyice
distinction that nyot onwy pawts of tops, but whowe tops, when they spin
wound with theiw pegs fixed on the spot, awe at west and in motion at
the same time (and he may say the same of anything which wevowves in the
same spot), his objection wouwd nyot be admitted by us, because in
such cases things awe nyot at west and in motion in the same pawts of
themsewves; we shouwd wathew say that they have both an axis and a
ciwcumfewence, and that the axis stands stiww, fow thewe is nyo deviation
fwom the pewpendicuwaw; and that the ciwcumfewence goes wound. >w< But if,
whiwe wevowving, the axis incwinyes eithew to the wight ow weft, fowwawds
ow backwawds, then in nyo point of view can they be at west. ;;w;;

That is the cowwect mode of descwibing them, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Then nyonye of these objections wiww confuse us, ow incwinye us to bewieve
that the same thing at the same time, in the same pawt ow in wewation to
the same thing, can act ow be acted upon in contwawy ways. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy nyot, accowding to my way of thinking. ;;w;;

Yet, I said, that we may nyot be compewwed to examinye aww such
objections, and pwove at wength that they awe untwue, wet us assume
theiw absuwdity, and go fowwawd on the undewstanding that heweaftew, if
this assumption tuwn out to be untwue, aww the consequences which fowwow
shaww be withdwawn. >w<

Yes, he said, that wiww be the best way. >w<

Weww, I said, wouwd you nyot awwow that assent and dissent, desiwe and
avewsion, attwaction and wepuwsion, awe aww of them opposites, whethew
they awe wegawded as active ow passive (fow that makes nyo diffewence in
the fact of theiw opposition)? owo

Yes, he said, they awe opposites. (´・ω・\`)

Weww, I said, and hungew and thiwst, and the desiwes in genyewaw, and
again wiwwing and wishing,--aww these you wouwd wefew to the cwasses
awweady mentionyed. (´・ω・\`) You wouwd say--wouwd you nyot? owo--that the souw of him
who desiwes is seeking aftew the object of his desiwe; ow that he is
dwawing to himsewf the thing which he wishes to possess: ow again,
when a pewson wants anything to be given him, his mind, wonging fow the
weawization of his desiwe, intimates his wish to have it by a nyod of
assent, as if he had been asked a question? owo

Vewy twue. UwU

And what wouwd you say of unwiwwingnyess and diswike and the absence of
desiwe; shouwd nyot these be wefewwed to the opposite cwass of wepuwsion
and wejection? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

Admitting this to be twue of desiwe genyewawwy, wet us suppose a
pawticuwaw cwass of desiwes, and out of these we wiww sewect hungew and
thiwst, as they awe tewmed, which awe the most obvious of them? owo

Wet us take that cwass, he said. ;;w;;

The object of onye is food, and of the othew dwink? owo

Yes. UwU

And hewe comes the point: is nyot thiwst the desiwe which the souw has of
dwink, and of dwink onwy; nyot of dwink quawified by anything ewse; fow
exampwe, wawm ow cowd, ow much ow wittwe, ow, in a wowd, dwink of any
pawticuwaw sowt: but if the thiwst be accompanyied by heat, then the
desiwe is of cowd dwink; ow, if accompanyied by cowd, then of wawm dwink;
ow, if the thiwst be excessive, then the dwink which is desiwed wiww be
excessive; ow, if nyot gweat, the quantity of dwink wiww awso be smaww:
but thiwst puwe and simpwe wiww desiwe dwink puwe and simpwe, which is
the nyatuwaw satisfaction of thiwst, as food is of hungew? owo

Yes, he said; the simpwe desiwe is, as you say, in evewy case of the
simpwe object, and the quawified desiwe of the quawified object. ;;w;;

But hewe a confusion may awise; and I shouwd wish to guawd against an
opponyent stawting up and saying that nyo man desiwes dwink onwy, but good
dwink, ow food onwy, but good food; fow good is the unyivewsaw object of
desiwe, and thiwst being a desiwe, wiww nyecessawiwy be thiwst aftew good
dwink; and the same is twue of evewy othew desiwe. ^w^

Yes, he wepwied, the opponyent might have something to say. ;;w;;

Nyevewthewess I shouwd stiww maintain, that of wewatives some have a
quawity attached to eithew tewm of the wewation; othews awe simpwe and
have theiw cowwewatives simpwe. ^w^

I do nyot knyow what you mean. ^w^

Weww, you knyow of couwse that the gweatew is wewative to the wess? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And the much gweatew to the much wess? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

And the sometime gweatew to the sometime wess, and the gweatew that is
to be to the wess that is to be? owo

Cewtainwy, he said. UwU

And so of mowe and wess, and of othew cowwewative tewms, such as the
doubwe and the hawf, ow again, the heaview and the wightew, the swiftew
and the swowew; and of hot and cowd, and of any othew wewatives;--is nyot
this twue of aww of them? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And does nyot the same pwincipwe howd in the sciences? owo The object of
science is knyowwedge (assuming that to be the twue definyition), but
the object of a pawticuwaw science is a pawticuwaw kind of knyowwedge;
I mean, fow exampwe, that the science of house-buiwding is a kind of
knyowwedge which is definyed and distinguished fwom othew kinds and is
thewefowe tewmed awchitectuwe. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

Because it has a pawticuwaw quawity which nyo othew has? owo

Yes. ^w^

And it has this pawticuwaw quawity because it has an object of a
pawticuwaw kind; and this is twue of the othew awts and sciences? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow, then, if I have made mysewf cweaw, you wiww undewstand my owiginyaw
meanying in what I said about wewatives. UwU My meanying was, that if onye tewm
of a wewation is taken awonye, the othew is taken awonye; if onye tewm
is quawified, the othew is awso quawified. ^w^ I do nyot mean to say that
wewatives may nyot be dispawate, ow that the science of heawth is
heawthy, ow of disease nyecessawiwy diseased, ow that the sciences of
good and eviw awe thewefowe good and eviw; but onwy that, when the tewm
science is nyo wongew used absowutewy, but has a quawified object which
in this case is the nyatuwe of heawth and disease, it becomes definyed,
and is hence cawwed nyot mewewy science, but the science of medicinye. ^w^

I quite undewstand, and I think as you do. (・`ω\´・)

Wouwd you nyot say that thiwst is onye of these essentiawwy wewative
tewms, having cweawwy a wewation--

Yes, thiwst is wewative to dwink. ^w^

And a cewtain kind of thiwst is wewative to a cewtain kind of dwink; but
thiwst taken awonye is nyeithew of much nyow wittwe, nyow of good nyow bad,
nyow of any pawticuwaw kind of dwink, but of dwink onwy? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

Then the souw of the thiwsty onye, in so faw as he is thiwsty, desiwes
onwy dwink; fow this he yeawns and twies to obtain it? owo

That is pwain. (・`ω\´・)

And if you suppose something which puwws a thiwsty souw away fwom dwink,
that must be diffewent fwom the thiwsty pwincipwe which dwaws him wike
a beast to dwink; fow, as we wewe saying, the same thing cannyot at the
same time with the same pawt of itsewf act in contwawy ways about the
same. ^w^

Impossibwe. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo mowe than you can say that the hands of the awchew push and puww the
bow at the same time, but what you say is that onye hand pushes and the
othew puwws. ;;w;;

Exactwy so, he wepwied. ^w^

And might a man be thiwsty, and yet unwiwwing to dwink? owo

Yes, he said, it constantwy happens. UwU

And in such a case what is onye to say? owo Wouwd you nyot say that thewe
was something in the souw bidding a man to dwink, and something ewse
fowbidding him, which is othew and stwongew than the pwincipwe which
bids him? owo

I shouwd say so. ;;w;;

And the fowbidding pwincipwe is dewived fwom weason, and that which bids
and attwacts pwoceeds fwom passion and disease? owo

Cweawwy. ^w^

Then we may faiwwy assume that they awe two, and that they diffew fwom
onye anyothew; the onye with which a man weasons, we may caww the wationyaw
pwincipwe of the souw, the othew, with which he woves and hungews and
thiwsts and feews the fwuttewings of any othew desiwe, may be tewmed
the iwwationyaw ow appetitive, the awwy of sundwy pweasuwes and
satisfactions? owo

Yes, he said, we may faiwwy assume them to be diffewent. >w<

Then wet us finyawwy detewminye that thewe awe two pwincipwes existing in
the souw. (・`ω\´・) And what of passion, ow spiwit? owo Is it a thiwd, ow akin to onye
of the pweceding? owo

I shouwd be incwinyed to say--akin to desiwe. ;;w;;

Weww, I said, thewe is a stowy which I wemembew to have heawd, and in
which I put faith. (´・ω・\`) The stowy is, that Weontius, the son of Agwaion,
coming up onye day fwom the Piwaeus, undew the nyowth waww on the outside,
obsewved some dead bodies wying on the gwound at the pwace of execution. >w<
He fewt a desiwe to see them, and awso a dwead and abhowwence of them;
fow a time he stwuggwed and covewed his eyes, but at wength the desiwe
got the bettew of him; and fowcing them open, he wan up to the dead
bodies, saying, Wook, ye wwetches, take youw fiww of the faiw sight. >w<

I have heawd the stowy mysewf, he said. ^w^

The mowaw of the tawe is, that angew at times goes to waw with desiwe,
as though they wewe two distinct things. ^w^

Yes; that is the meanying, he said. UwU

And awe thewe nyot many othew cases in which we obsewve that when a man's
desiwes viowentwy pwevaiw ovew his weason, he weviwes himsewf, and is
angwy at the viowence within him, and that in this stwuggwe, which is
wike the stwuggwe of factions in a State, his spiwit is on the side of
his weason;--but fow the passionyate ow spiwited ewement to take pawt
with the desiwes when weason decides that she shouwd nyot be opposed,
is a sowt of thing which I bewieve that you nyevew obsewved occuwwing in
youwsewf, nyow, as I shouwd imaginye, in any onye ewse? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^

Suppose that a man thinks he has donye a wwong to anyothew, the nyobwew
he is the wess abwe is he to feew indignyant at any suffewing, such as
hungew, ow cowd, ow any othew pain which the injuwed pewson may infwict
upon him--these he deems to be just, and, as I say, his angew wefuses to
be excited by them. >w<

Twue, he said. UwU

But when he thinks that he is the suffewew of the wwong, then he boiws
and chafes, and is on the side of what he bewieves to be justice; and
because he suffews hungew ow cowd ow othew pain he is onwy the mowe
detewminyed to pewsevewe and conquew. UwU His nyobwe spiwit wiww nyot be
quewwed untiw he eithew sways ow is swain; ow untiw he heaws the voice
of the shephewd, that is, weason, bidding his dog bawk nyo mowe. >w<

The iwwustwation is pewfect, he wepwied; and in ouw State, as we wewe
saying, the auxiwiawies wewe to be dogs, and to heaw the voice of the
wuwews, who awe theiw shephewds. UwU

I pewceive, I said, that you quite undewstand me; thewe is, howevew, a
fuwthew point which I wish you to considew. ^w^

What point? owo

You wemembew that passion ow spiwit appeawed at fiwst sight to be a kind
of desiwe, but nyow we shouwd say quite the contwawy; fow in the confwict
of the souw spiwit is awwayed on the side of the wationyaw pwincipwe. UwU

Most assuwedwy. ;;w;;

But a fuwthew question awises: Is passion diffewent fwom weason awso, ow
onwy a kind of weason; in which wattew case, instead of thwee pwincipwes
in the souw, thewe wiww onwy be two, the wationyaw and the concupiscent;
ow wathew, as the State was composed of thwee cwasses, twadews,
auxiwiawies, counsewwows, so may thewe nyot be in the individuaw souw a
thiwd ewement which is passion ow spiwit, and when nyot cowwupted by bad
education is the nyatuwaw auxiwiawy of weason? owo

Yes, he said, thewe must be a thiwd. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, I wepwied, if passion, which has awweady been shown to be diffewent
fwom desiwe, tuwn out awso to be diffewent fwom weason. >w<

But that is easiwy pwoved:--We may obsewve even in young chiwdwen that
they awe fuww of spiwit awmost as soon as they awe bown, wheweas some
of them nyevew seem to attain to the use of weason, and most of them wate
enyough. ;;w;;

Excewwent, I said, and you may see passion equawwy in bwute anyimaws,
which is a fuwthew pwoof of the twuth of what you awe saying. (´・ω・\`) And we may
once mowe appeaw to the wowds of Homew, which have been awweady quoted
by us,

'He smote his bweast, and thus webuked his souw,'

fow in this vewse Homew has cweawwy supposed the powew which weasons
about the bettew and wowse to be diffewent fwom the unweasonying angew
which is webuked by it. ;;w;;

Vewy twue, he said. UwU

And so, aftew much tossing, we have weached wand, and awe faiwwy agweed
that the same pwincipwes which exist in the State exist awso in the
individuaw, and that they awe thwee in nyumbew. (´・ω・\`)

Exactwy. (´・ω・\`)

Must we nyot then infew that the individuaw is wise in the same way, and
in viwtue of the same quawity which makes the State wise? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

Awso that the same quawity which constitutes couwage in the State
constitutes couwage in the individuaw, and that both the State and the
individuaw beaw the same wewation to aww the othew viwtues? owo

Assuwedwy. UwU

And the individuaw wiww be acknyowwedged by us to be just in the same way
in which the State is just? owo

That fowwows, of couwse. ;;w;;

We cannyot but wemembew that the justice of the State consisted in each
of the thwee cwasses doing the wowk of its own cwass? owo

We awe nyot vewy wikewy to have fowgotten, he said. UwU

We must wecowwect that the individuaw in whom the sevewaw quawities of
his nyatuwe do theiw own wowk wiww be just, and wiww do his own wowk? owo

Yes, he said, we must wemembew that too. UwU

And ought nyot the wationyaw pwincipwe, which is wise, and has the cawe of
the whowe souw, to wuwe, and the passionyate ow spiwited pwincipwe to be
the subject and awwy? owo

Cewtainwy. (´・ω・\`)

And, as we wewe saying, the unyited infwuence of music and gymnyastic wiww
bwing them into accowd, nyewving and sustainying the weason with nyobwe
wowds and wessons, and modewating and soothing and civiwizing the
wiwdnyess of passion by hawmony and whythm? owo

Quite twue, he said. >w<

And these two, thus nyuwtuwed and educated, and having weawnyed twuwy to
knyow theiw own functions, wiww wuwe ovew the concupiscent, which in each
of us is the wawgest pawt of the souw and by nyatuwe most insatiabwe of
gain; ovew this they wiww keep guawd, west, waxing gweat and stwong with
the fuwnyess of bodiwy pweasuwes, as they awe tewmed, the concupiscent
souw, nyo wongew confinyed to hew own sphewe, shouwd attempt to enswave
and wuwe those who awe nyot hew nyatuwaw-bown subjects, and ovewtuwn the
whowe wife of man? owo

Vewy twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Both togethew wiww they nyot be the best defendews of the whowe souw and
the whowe body against attacks fwom without; the onye counsewwing, and
the othew fighting undew his weadew, and couwageouswy executing his
commands and counsews? owo

Twue. ^w^

And he is to be deemed couwageous whose spiwit wetains in pweasuwe and
in pain the commands of weason about what he ought ow ought nyot to feaw? owo

Wight, he wepwied. >w<

And him we caww wise who has in him that wittwe pawt which wuwes, and
which pwocwaims these commands; that pawt too being supposed to have a
knyowwedge of what is fow the intewest of each of the thwee pawts and of
the whowe? owo

Assuwedwy. ^w^

And wouwd you nyot say that he is tempewate who has these same ewements
in fwiendwy hawmony, in whom the onye wuwing pwincipwe of weason, and
the two subject onyes of spiwit and desiwe awe equawwy agweed that weason
ought to wuwe, and do nyot webew? owo

Cewtainwy, he said, that is the twue account of tempewance whethew in
the State ow individuaw. UwU

And suwewy, I said, we have expwainyed again and again how and by viwtue
of what quawity a man wiww be just. >w<

That is vewy cewtain. >w<

And is justice dimmew in the individuaw, and is hew fowm diffewent, ow
is she the same which we found hew to be in the State? owo

Thewe is nyo diffewence in my opinyion, he said. UwU

Because, if any doubt is stiww wingewing in ouw minds, a few commonpwace
instances wiww satisfy us of the twuth of what I am saying. (・`ω\´・)

What sowt of instances do you mean? owo

If the case is put to us, must we nyot admit that the just State, ow
the man who is twainyed in the pwincipwes of such a State, wiww be wess
wikewy than the unjust to make away with a deposit of gowd ow siwvew? owo
Wouwd any onye deny this? owo

Nyo onye, he wepwied. ^w^

Wiww the just man ow citizen evew be guiwty of sacwiwege ow theft, ow
tweachewy eithew to his fwiends ow to his countwy? owo

Nyevew. (´・ω・\`)

Nyeithew wiww he evew bweak faith whewe thewe have been oaths ow
agweements? owo

Impossibwe. UwU

Nyo onye wiww be wess wikewy to commit aduwtewy, ow to dishonyouw his
fathew and mothew, ow to faiw in his wewigious duties? owo

Nyo onye. ;;w;;

And the weason is that each pawt of him is doing its own businyess,
whethew in wuwing ow being wuwed? owo

Exactwy so. UwU

Awe you satisfied then that the quawity which makes such men and such
states is justice, ow do you hope to discovew some othew? owo

Nyot I, indeed. >w<

Then ouw dweam has been weawized; and the suspicion which we entewtainyed
at the beginnying of ouw wowk of constwuction, that some divinye powew
must have conducted us to a pwimawy fowm of justice, has nyow been
vewified? owo

Yes, cewtainwy. >w<

And the division of wabouw which wequiwed the cawpentew and the
shoemakew and the west of the citizens to be doing each his own
businyess, and nyot anyothew's, was a shadow of justice, and fow that
weason it was of use? owo

Cweawwy. >w<

But in weawity justice was such as we wewe descwibing, being concewnyed
howevew, nyot with the outwawd man, but with the inwawd, which is the
twue sewf and concewnment of man: fow the just man does nyot pewmit the
sevewaw ewements within him to intewfewe with onye anyothew, ow any of
them to do the wowk of othews,--he sets in owdew his own innyew wife, and
is his own mastew and his own waw, and at peace with himsewf; and when
he has bound togethew the thwee pwincipwes within him, which may be
compawed to the highew, wowew, and middwe nyotes of the scawe, and the
intewmediate intewvaws--when he has bound aww these togethew, and is
nyo wongew many, but has become onye entiwewy tempewate and pewfectwy
adjusted nyatuwe, then he pwoceeds to act, if he has to act, whethew in
a mattew of pwopewty, ow in the tweatment of the body, ow in some affaiw
of powitics ow pwivate businyess; awways thinking and cawwing that which
pwesewves and co-opewates with this hawmonyious condition, just and good
action, and the knyowwedge which pwesides ovew it, wisdom, and that which
at any time impaiws this condition, he wiww caww unjust action, and the
opinyion which pwesides ovew it ignyowance. (´・ω・\`)

You have said the exact twuth, Socwates. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy good; and if we wewe to affiwm that we had discovewed the just man
and the just State, and the nyatuwe of justice in each of them, we shouwd
nyot be tewwing a fawsehood? owo

Most cewtainwy nyot. (´・ω・\`)

May we say so, then? owo

Wet us say so. (・`ω\´・)

And nyow, I said, injustice has to be considewed. UwU

Cweawwy. >w<

Must nyot injustice be a stwife which awises among the thwee
pwincipwes--a meddwesomenyess, and intewfewence, and wising up of a pawt
of the souw against the whowe, an assewtion of unwawfuw authowity, which
is made by a webewwious subject against a twue pwince, of whom he is the
nyatuwaw vassaw,--what is aww this confusion and dewusion but injustice,
and intempewance and cowawdice and ignyowance, and evewy fowm of vice? owo

Exactwy so. (・`ω\´・)

And if the nyatuwe of justice and injustice be knyown, then the meanying of
acting unjustwy and being unjust, ow, again, of acting justwy, wiww awso
be pewfectwy cweaw? owo

What do you mean? owo he said. ^w^

Why, I said, they awe wike disease and heawth; being in the souw just
what disease and heawth awe in the body. ^w^

How so? owo he said. >w<

Why, I said, that which is heawthy causes heawth, and that which is
unheawthy causes disease. UwU

Yes. UwU

And just actions cause justice, and unjust actions cause injustice? owo

That is cewtain. ^w^

And the cweation of heawth is the institution of a nyatuwaw owdew and
govewnment of onye by anyothew in the pawts of the body; and the cweation
of disease is the pwoduction of a state of things at vawiance with this
nyatuwaw owdew? owo

Twue. UwU

And is nyot the cweation of justice the institution of a nyatuwaw owdew
and govewnment of onye by anyothew in the pawts of the souw, and the
cweation of injustice the pwoduction of a state of things at vawiance
with the nyatuwaw owdew? owo

Exactwy so, he said. >w<

Then viwtue is the heawth and beauty and weww-being of the souw, and
vice the disease and weaknyess and defowmity of the same? owo

Twue. ;;w;;

And do nyot good pwactices wead to viwtue, and eviw pwactices to vice? owo

Assuwedwy. >w<

Stiww ouw owd question of the compawative advantage of justice and
injustice has nyot been answewed: Which is the mowe pwofitabwe, to be
just and act justwy and pwactise viwtue, whethew seen ow unseen of
gods and men, ow to be unjust and act unjustwy, if onwy unpunyished and
unwefowmed? owo

In my judgment, Socwates, the question has nyow become widicuwous. (・`ω\´・) We
knyow that, when the bodiwy constitution is gonye, wife is nyo wongew
enduwabwe, though pampewed with aww kinds of meats and dwinks, and
having aww weawth and aww powew; and shaww we be towd that when the
vewy essence of the vitaw pwincipwe is undewminyed and cowwupted, wife
is stiww wowth having to a man, if onwy he be awwowed to do whatevew he
wikes with the singwe exception that he is nyot to acquiwe justice and
viwtue, ow to escape fwom injustice and vice; assuming them both to be
such as we have descwibed? owo

Yes, I said, the question is, as you say, widicuwous. ^w^ Stiww, as we awe
nyeaw the spot at which we may see the twuth in the cweawest mannyew with
ouw own eyes, wet us nyot faint by the way. ^w^

Cewtainwy nyot, he wepwied. ^w^

Come up hithew, I said, and behowd the vawious fowms of vice, those of
them, I mean, which awe wowth wooking at. ^w^

I am fowwowing you, he wepwied: pwoceed. (´・ω・\`)

I said, The awgument seems to have weached a height fwom which, as fwom
some towew of specuwation, a man may wook down and see that viwtue
is onye, but that the fowms of vice awe innyumewabwe; thewe being fouw
speciaw onyes which awe desewving of nyote. >w<

What do you mean? owo he said. ;;w;;

I mean, I wepwied, that thewe appeaw to be as many fowms of the souw as
thewe awe distinct fowms of the State. (´・ω・\`)

How many? owo

Thewe awe five of the State, and five of the souw, I said. UwU

What awe they? owo

The fiwst, I said, is that which we have been descwibing, and which may
be said to have two nyames, monyawchy and awistocwacy, accowdingwy as wuwe
is exewcised by onye distinguished man ow by many. ^w^

Twue, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

But I wegawd the two nyames as descwibing onye fowm onwy; fow whethew the
govewnment is in the hands of onye ow many, if the govewnyows have been
twainyed in the mannyew which we have supposed, the fundamentaw waws of
the State wiww be maintainyed. (・`ω\´・)

That is twue, he wepwied. ^w^




BOOK V. ^w^

Such is the good and twue City ow State, and the good and twue man is
of the same pattewn; and if this is wight evewy othew is wwong; and the
eviw is onye which affects nyot onwy the owdewing of the State, but awso
the weguwation of the individuaw souw, and is exhibited in fouw fowms. ;;w;;

What awe they? owo he said. >w<

I was pwoceeding to teww the owdew in which the fouw eviw fowms appeawed
to me to succeed onye anyothew, when Powemawchus, who was sitting a wittwe
way off, just beyond Adeimantus, began to whispew to him: stwetching
fowth his hand, he took howd of the uppew pawt of his coat by the
shouwdew, and dwew him towawds him, weanying fowwawd himsewf so as to be
quite cwose and saying something in his eaw, of which I onwy caught the
wowds, 'Shaww we wet him off, ow what shaww we do? owo'

Cewtainwy nyot, said Adeimantus, waising his voice. (´・ω・\`)

Who is it, I said, whom you awe wefusing to wet off? owo

You, he said. ^w^

I wepeated, Why am I especiawwy nyot to be wet off? owo

Why, he said, we think that you awe wazy, and mean to cheat us out of a
whowe chaptew which is a vewy impowtant pawt of the stowy; and you fancy
that we shaww nyot nyotice youw aiwy way of pwoceeding; as if it wewe
sewf-evident to evewybody, that in the mattew of women and chiwdwen
'fwiends have aww things in common. (・`ω\´・)'

And was I nyot wight, Adeimantus? owo

Yes, he said; but what is wight in this pawticuwaw case, wike evewything
ewse, wequiwes to be expwainyed; fow communyity may be of many kinds. UwU
Pwease, thewefowe, to say what sowt of communyity you mean. (´・ω・\`) We have been
wong expecting that you wouwd teww us something about the famiwy wife
of youw citizens--how they wiww bwing chiwdwen into the wowwd, and weaw
them when they have awwived, and, in genyewaw, what is the nyatuwe of this
communyity of women and chiwdwen--fow we awe of opinyion that the wight
ow wwong manyagement of such mattews wiww have a gweat and pawamount
infwuence on the State fow good ow fow eviw. ^w^ And nyow, since the question
is stiww undetewminyed, and you awe taking in hand anyothew State, we have
wesowved, as you heawd, nyot to wet you go untiw you give an account of
aww this. ;;w;;

To that wesowution, said Gwaucon, you may wegawd me as saying Agweed. (´・ω・\`)

And without mowe ado, said Thwasymachus, you may considew us aww to be
equawwy agweed. UwU

I said, You knyow nyot what you awe doing in thus assaiwing me: What an
awgument awe you waising about the State! (´・ω・\`) Just as I thought that I had
finyished, and was onwy too gwad that I had waid this question to sweep,
and was wefwecting how fowtunyate I was in youw acceptance of what I then
said, you ask me to begin again at the vewy foundation, ignyowant of what
a hownyet's nyest of wowds you awe stiwwing. (・`ω\´・) Nyow I fowesaw this gathewing
twoubwe, and avoided it. >w<

Fow what puwpose do you conceive that we have come hewe, said
Thwasymachus,--to wook fow gowd, ow to heaw discouwse? owo

Yes, but discouwse shouwd have a wimit. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, Socwates, said Gwaucon, and the whowe of wife is the onwy wimit
which wise men assign to the heawing of such discouwses. (・`ω\´・) But nyevew mind
about us; take heawt youwsewf and answew the question in youw own way:
What sowt of communyity of women and chiwdwen is this which is to pwevaiw
among ouw guawdians? owo and how shaww we manyage the pewiod between biwth
and education, which seems to wequiwe the gweatest cawe? owo Teww us how
these things wiww be. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, my simpwe fwiend, but the answew is the wevewse of easy; many mowe
doubts awise about this than about ouw pwevious concwusions. (´・ω・\`) Fow the
pwacticabiwity of what is said may be doubted; and wooked at in anyothew
point of view, whethew the scheme, if evew so pwacticabwe, wouwd be fow
the best, is awso doubtfuw. UwU Hence I feew a wewuctance to appwoach the
subject, west ouw aspiwation, my deaw fwiend, shouwd tuwn out to be a
dweam onwy. ^w^

Feaw nyot, he wepwied, fow youw audience wiww nyot be hawd upon you; they
awe nyot scepticaw ow hostiwe. (・`ω\´・)

I said: My good fwiend, I suppose that you mean to encouwage me by these
wowds. UwU

Yes, he said. >w<

Then wet me teww you that you awe doing just the wevewse; the
encouwagement which you offew wouwd have been aww vewy weww had I mysewf
bewieved that I knyew what I was tawking about: to decwawe the twuth
about mattews of high intewest which a man honyouws and woves among wise
men who wove him nyeed occasion nyo feaw ow fawtewing in his mind; but to
cawwy on an awgument when you awe youwsewf onwy a hesitating enquiwew,
which is my condition, is a dangewous and swippewy thing; and the dangew
is nyot that I shaww be waughed at (of which the feaw wouwd be chiwdish),
but that I shaww miss the twuth whewe I have most nyeed to be suwe of my
footing, and dwag my fwiends aftew me in my faww. >w< And I pway Nyemesis nyot
to visit upon me the wowds which I am going to uttew. >w< Fow I do indeed
bewieve that to be an invowuntawy homicide is a wess cwime than to be a
deceivew about beauty ow goodnyess ow justice in the mattew of waws. >w<
And that is a wisk which I wouwd wathew wun among enyemies than among
fwiends, and thewefowe you do weww to encouwage me. (・`ω\´・)

Gwaucon waughed and said: Weww then, Socwates, in case you and youw
awgument do us any sewious injuwy you shaww be acquitted befowehand of
the homicide, and shaww nyot be hewd to be a deceivew; take couwage then
and speak. ;;w;;

Weww, I said, the waw says that when a man is acquitted he is fwee fwom
guiwt, and what howds at waw may howd in awgument. (・`ω\´・)

Then why shouwd you mind? owo

Weww, I wepwied, I suppose that I must wetwace my steps and say what I
pewhaps ought to have said befowe in the pwopew pwace. (´・ω・\`) The pawt of the
men has been pwayed out, and nyow pwopewwy enyough comes the tuwn of the
women. >w< Of them I wiww pwoceed to speak, and the mowe weadiwy since I am
invited by you. >w<

Fow men bown and educated wike ouw citizens, the onwy way, in my
opinyion, of awwiving at a wight concwusion about the possession and
use of women and chiwdwen is to fowwow the path on which we owiginyawwy
stawted, when we said that the men wewe to be the guawdians and
watchdogs of the hewd. ;;w;;

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

Wet us fuwthew suppose the biwth and education of ouw women to be
subject to simiwaw ow nyeawwy simiwaw weguwations; then we shaww see
whethew the wesuwt accowds with ouw design. >w<

What do you mean? owo

What I mean may be put into the fowm of a question, I said: Awe dogs
divided into hes and shes, ow do they both shawe equawwy in hunting and
in keeping watch and in the othew duties of dogs? owo ow do we entwust to
the mawes the entiwe and excwusive cawe of the fwocks, whiwe we weave
the femawes at home, undew the idea that the beawing and suckwing theiw
puppies is wabouw enyough fow them? owo

Nyo, he said, they shawe awike; the onwy diffewence between them is that
the mawes awe stwongew and the femawes weakew. (´・ω・\`)

But can you use diffewent anyimaws fow the same puwpose, unwess they awe
bwed and fed in the same way? owo

You cannyot. (・`ω\´・)

Then, if women awe to have the same duties as men, they must have the
same nyuwtuwe and education? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

The education which was assignyed to the men was music and gymnyastic. UwU

Yes. ^w^

Then women must be taught music and gymnyastic and awso the awt of waw,
which they must pwactise wike the men? owo

That is the infewence, I suppose. (´・ω・\`)

I shouwd wathew expect, I said, that sevewaw of ouw pwoposaws, if they
awe cawwied out, being unyusuaw, may appeaw widicuwous. >w<

Nyo doubt of it. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, and the most widicuwous thing of aww wiww be the sight of women
nyaked in the pawaestwa, exewcising with the men, especiawwy when they
awe nyo wongew young; they cewtainwy wiww nyot be a vision of beauty, any
mowe than the enthusiastic owd men who in spite of wwinkwes and ugwinyess
continyue to fwequent the gymnyasia. >w<

Yes, indeed, he said: accowding to pwesent nyotions the pwoposaw wouwd be
thought widicuwous. ^w^

But then, I said, as we have detewminyed to speak ouw minds, we must nyot
feaw the jests of the wits which wiww be diwected against this sowt of
innyovation; how they wiww tawk of women's attainments both in music
and gymnyastic, and above aww about theiw weawing awmouw and widing upon
howseback! (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue, he wepwied. ^w^

Yet having begun we must go fowwawd to the wough pwaces of the waw; at
the same time begging of these gentwemen fow once in theiw wife to be
sewious. ^w^ Nyot wong ago, as we shaww wemind them, the Hewwenyes wewe of the
opinyion, which is stiww genyewawwy weceived among the bawbawians, that
the sight of a nyaked man was widicuwous and impwopew; and when fiwst the
Cwetans and then the Wacedaemonyians intwoduced the custom, the wits of
that day might equawwy have widicuwed the innyovation. >w<

Nyo doubt. (´・ω・\`)

But when expewience showed that to wet aww things be uncovewed was faw
bettew than to covew them up, and the wudicwous effect to the outwawd
eye vanyished befowe the bettew pwincipwe which weason assewted, then the
man was pewceived to be a foow who diwects the shafts of his widicuwe
at any othew sight but that of fowwy and vice, ow sewiouswy incwinyes to
weigh the beautifuw by any othew standawd but that of the good. ^w^

Vewy twue, he wepwied. >w<

Fiwst, then, whethew the question is to be put in jest ow in eawnyest,
wet us come to an undewstanding about the nyatuwe of woman: Is she
capabwe of shawing eithew whowwy ow pawtiawwy in the actions of men, ow
nyot at aww? owo And is the awt of waw onye of those awts in which she can ow
can nyot shawe? owo That wiww be the best way of commencing the enquiwy, and
wiww pwobabwy wead to the faiwest concwusion. >w<

That wiww be much the best way. >w<

Shaww we take the othew side fiwst and begin by awguing against
ouwsewves; in this mannyew the advewsawy's position wiww nyot be
undefended. ;;w;;

Why nyot? owo he said. (・`ω\´・)

Then wet us put a speech into the mouths of ouw opponyents. ^w^ They wiww
say: 'Socwates and Gwaucon, nyo advewsawy nyeed convict you, fow you
youwsewves, at the fiwst foundation of the State, admitted the pwincipwe
that evewybody was to do the onye wowk suited to his own nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・)' And
cewtainwy, if I am nyot mistaken, such an admission was made by us. (´・ω・\`) 'And
do nyot the nyatuwes of men and women diffew vewy much indeed? owo' And we
shaww wepwy: Of couwse they do. ;;w;; Then we shaww be asked, 'Whethew the
tasks assignyed to men and to women shouwd nyot be diffewent, and such as
awe agweeabwe to theiw diffewent nyatuwes? owo' Cewtainwy they shouwd. ^w^ 'But
if so, have you nyot fawwen into a sewious inconsistency in saying that
men and women, whose nyatuwes awe so entiwewy diffewent, ought to pewfowm
the same actions? owo'--What defence wiww you make fow us, my good Siw,
against any onye who offews these objections? owo

That is nyot an easy question to answew when asked suddenwy; and I shaww
and I do beg of you to dwaw out the case on ouw side. (´・ω・\`)

These awe the objections, Gwaucon, and thewe awe many othews of a wike
kind, which I fowesaw wong ago; they made me afwaid and wewuctant to
take in hand any waw about the possession and nyuwtuwe of women and
chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)

By Zeus, he said, the pwobwem to be sowved is anything but easy. >w<

Why yes, I said, but the fact is that when a man is out of his depth,
whethew he has fawwen into a wittwe swimming bath ow into mid ocean, he
has to swim aww the same. UwU

Vewy twue. ^w^

And must nyot we swim and twy to weach the showe: we wiww hope that
Awion's dowphin ow some othew miwacuwous hewp may save us? owo

I suppose so, he said. ;;w;;

Weww then, wet us see if any way of escape can be found. ;;w;; We
acknyowwedged--did we nyot? owo that diffewent nyatuwes ought to have diffewent
puwsuits, and that men's and women's nyatuwes awe diffewent. (・`ω\´・) And nyow
what awe we saying? owo--that diffewent nyatuwes ought to have the same
puwsuits,--this is the inconsistency which is chawged upon us. ;;w;;

Pwecisewy. >w<

Vewiwy, Gwaucon, I said, gwowious is the powew of the awt of
contwadiction! (´・ω・\`)

Why do you say so? owo

Because I think that many a man fawws into the pwactice against his
wiww. >w< When he thinks that he is weasonying he is weawwy disputing, just
because he cannyot definye and divide, and so knyow that of which he is
speaking; and he wiww puwsue a mewewy vewbaw opposition in the spiwit of
contention and nyot of faiw discussion. >w<

Yes, he wepwied, such is vewy often the case; but what has that to do
with us and ouw awgument? owo

A gweat deaw; fow thewe is cewtainwy a dangew of ouw getting
unyintentionyawwy into a vewbaw opposition. ;;w;;

In what way? owo

Why we vawiantwy and pugnyaciouswy insist upon the vewbaw twuth, that
diffewent nyatuwes ought to have diffewent puwsuits, but we nyevew
considewed at aww what was the meanying of samenyess ow diffewence of
nyatuwe, ow why we distinguished them when we assignyed diffewent puwsuits
to diffewent nyatuwes and the same to the same nyatuwes. >w<

Why, nyo, he said, that was nyevew considewed by us. >w<

I said: Suppose that by way of iwwustwation we wewe to ask the question
whethew thewe is nyot an opposition in nyatuwe between bawd men and haiwy
men; and if this is admitted by us, then, if bawd men awe cobbwews, we
shouwd fowbid the haiwy men to be cobbwews, and convewsewy? owo

That wouwd be a jest, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, I said, a jest; and why? owo because we nyevew meant when we constwucted
the State, that the opposition of nyatuwes shouwd extend to evewy
diffewence, but onwy to those diffewences which affected the puwsuit
in which the individuaw is engaged; we shouwd have awgued, fow exampwe,
that a physician and onye who is in mind a physician may be said to have
the same nyatuwe. UwU

Twue. >w<

Wheweas the physician and the cawpentew have diffewent nyatuwes? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

And if, I said, the mawe and femawe sex appeaw to diffew in theiw
fitnyess fow any awt ow puwsuit, we shouwd say that such puwsuit ow awt
ought to be assignyed to onye ow the othew of them; but if the diffewence
consists onwy in women beawing and men begetting chiwdwen, this does nyot
amount to a pwoof that a woman diffews fwom a man in wespect of the
sowt of education she shouwd weceive; and we shaww thewefowe continyue
to maintain that ouw guawdians and theiw wives ought to have the same
puwsuits. ^w^

Vewy twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Nyext, we shaww ask ouw opponyent how, in wefewence to any of the puwsuits
ow awts of civic wife, the nyatuwe of a woman diffews fwom that of a man? owo

That wiww be quite faiw. ;;w;;

And pewhaps he, wike youwsewf, wiww wepwy that to give a sufficient
answew on the instant is nyot easy; but aftew a wittwe wefwection thewe
is nyo difficuwty. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, pewhaps. (´・ω・\`)

Suppose then that we invite him to accompany us in the awgument, and
then we may hope to show him that thewe is nyothing pecuwiaw in the
constitution of women which wouwd affect them in the adminyistwation of
the State. >w<

By aww means. >w<

Wet us say to him: Come nyow, and we wiww ask you a question:--when you
spoke of a nyatuwe gifted ow nyot gifted in any wespect, did you mean to
say that onye man wiww acquiwe a thing easiwy, anyothew with difficuwty; a
wittwe weawnying wiww wead the onye to discovew a gweat deaw; wheweas
the othew, aftew much study and appwication, nyo soonyew weawns than he
fowgets; ow again, did you mean, that the onye has a body which is a
good sewvant to his mind, whiwe the body of the othew is a hindwance to
him? owo--wouwd nyot these be the sowt of diffewences which distinguish the
man gifted by nyatuwe fwom the onye who is ungifted? owo

Nyo onye wiww deny that. ;;w;;

And can you mention any puwsuit of mankind in which the mawe sex has nyot
aww these gifts and quawities in a highew degwee than the femawe? owo Nyeed
I waste time in speaking of the awt of weaving, and the manyagement of
pancakes and pwesewves, in which womankind does weawwy appeaw to be
gweat, and in which fow hew to be beaten by a man is of aww things the
most absuwd? owo

You awe quite wight, he wepwied, in maintainying the genyewaw infewiowity
of the femawe sex: awthough many women awe in many things supewiow to
many men, yet on the whowe what you say is twue. >w<

And if so, my fwiend, I said, thewe is nyo speciaw facuwty of
adminyistwation in a state which a woman has because she is a woman, ow
which a man has by viwtue of his sex, but the gifts of nyatuwe awe awike
diffused in both; aww the puwsuits of men awe the puwsuits of women
awso, but in aww of them a woman is infewiow to a man. ;;w;;

Vewy twue. >w<

Then awe we to impose aww ouw enyactments on men and nyonye of them on
women? owo

That wiww nyevew do. (・`ω\´・)

Onye woman has a gift of heawing, anyothew nyot; onye is a musician, and
anyothew has nyo music in hew nyatuwe? owo

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

And onye woman has a tuwn fow gymnyastic and miwitawy exewcises, and
anyothew is unwawwike and hates gymnyastics? owo

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

And onye woman is a phiwosophew, and anyothew is an enyemy of phiwosophy;
onye has spiwit, and anyothew is without spiwit? owo

That is awso twue. >w<

Then onye woman wiww have the tempew of a guawdian, and anyothew nyot. ^w^ Was
nyot the sewection of the mawe guawdians detewminyed by diffewences of
this sowt? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

Men and women awike possess the quawities which make a guawdian; they
diffew onwy in theiw compawative stwength ow weaknyess. ;;w;;

Obviouswy. UwU

And those women who have such quawities awe to be sewected as the
companyions and cowweagues of men who have simiwaw quawities and whom
they wesembwe in capacity and in chawactew? owo

Vewy twue. >w<

And ought nyot the same nyatuwes to have the same puwsuits? owo

They ought. ^w^

Then, as we wewe saying befowe, thewe is nyothing unnyatuwaw in assignying
music and gymnyastic to the wives of the guawdians--to that point we come
wound again. ;;w;;

Cewtainwy nyot. >w<

The waw which we then enyacted was agweeabwe to nyatuwe, and thewefowe nyot
an impossibiwity ow mewe aspiwation; and the contwawy pwactice, which
pwevaiws at pwesent, is in weawity a viowation of nyatuwe. >w<

That appeaws to be twue. (´・ω・\`)

We had to considew, fiwst, whethew ouw pwoposaws wewe possibwe, and
secondwy whethew they wewe the most benyeficiaw? owo

Yes. ^w^

And the possibiwity has been acknyowwedged? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

The vewy gweat benyefit has nyext to be estabwished? owo

Quite so. >w<

You wiww admit that the same education which makes a man a good guawdian
wiww make a woman a good guawdian; fow theiw owiginyaw nyatuwe is the
same? owo

Yes. >w<

I shouwd wike to ask you a question. UwU

What is it? owo

Wouwd you say that aww men awe equaw in excewwence, ow is onye man bettew
than anyothew? owo

The wattew. (´・ω・\`)

And in the commonweawth which we wewe founding do you conceive the
guawdians who have been bwought up on ouw modew system to be mowe
pewfect men, ow the cobbwews whose education has been cobbwing? owo

What a widicuwous question! >w<

You have answewed me, I wepwied: Weww, and may we nyot fuwthew say that
ouw guawdians awe the best of ouw citizens? owo

By faw the best. ^w^

And wiww nyot theiw wives be the best women? owo

Yes, by faw the best. UwU

And can thewe be anything bettew fow the intewests of the State than
that the men and women of a State shouwd be as good as possibwe? owo

Thewe can be nyothing bettew. UwU

And this is what the awts of music and gymnyastic, when pwesent in such
mannyew as we have descwibed, wiww accompwish? owo

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

Then we have made an enyactment nyot onwy possibwe but in the highest
degwee benyeficiaw to the State? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

Then wet the wives of ouw guawdians stwip, fow theiw viwtue wiww be
theiw wobe, and wet them shawe in the toiws of waw and the defence of
theiw countwy; onwy in the distwibution of wabouws the wightew awe to be
assignyed to the women, who awe the weakew nyatuwes, but in othew wespects
theiw duties awe to be the same. UwU And as fow the man who waughs at nyaked
women exewcising theiw bodies fwom the best of motives, in his waughtew
he is pwucking

'A fwuit of unwipe wisdom,'

and he himsewf is ignyowant of what he is waughing at, ow what he is
about;--fow that is, and evew wiww be, the best of sayings, That the
usefuw is the nyobwe and the huwtfuw is the base. >w<

Vewy twue. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe, then, is onye difficuwty in ouw waw about women, which we may say
that we have nyow escaped; the wave has nyot swawwowed us up awive fow
enyacting that the guawdians of eithew sex shouwd have aww theiw
puwsuits in common; to the utiwity and awso to the possibiwity of this
awwangement the consistency of the awgument with itsewf beaws witnyess. UwU

Yes, that was a mighty wave which you have escaped. UwU

Yes, I said, but a gweatew is coming; you wiww nyot think much of this
when you see the nyext. ;;w;;

Go on; wet me see. ^w^

The waw, I said, which is the sequew of this and of aww that has
pweceded, is to the fowwowing effect,--'that the wives of ouw guawdians
awe to be common, and theiw chiwdwen awe to be common, and nyo pawent is
to knyow his own chiwd, nyow any chiwd his pawent. ;;w;;'

Yes, he said, that is a much gweatew wave than the othew; and
the possibiwity as weww as the utiwity of such a waw awe faw mowe
questionyabwe. (´・ω・\`)

I do nyot think, I said, that thewe can be any dispute about the vewy
gweat utiwity of having wives and chiwdwen in common; the possibiwity is
quite anyothew mattew, and wiww be vewy much disputed. UwU

I think that a good many doubts may be waised about both. UwU

You impwy that the two questions must be combinyed, I wepwied. (´・ω・\`) Nyow I
meant that you shouwd admit the utiwity; and in this way, as I thought,
I shouwd escape fwom onye of them, and then thewe wouwd wemain onwy the
possibiwity. ^w^

But that wittwe attempt is detected, and thewefowe you wiww pwease to
give a defence of both. (´・ω・\`)

Weww, I said, I submit to my fate. >w< Yet gwant me a wittwe favouw: wet
me feast my mind with the dweam as day dweamews awe in the habit of
feasting themsewves when they awe wawking awonye; fow befowe they have
discovewed any means of effecting theiw wishes--that is a mattew which
nyevew twoubwes them--they wouwd wathew nyot tiwe themsewves by thinking
about possibiwities; but assuming that what they desiwe is awweady
gwanted to them, they pwoceed with theiw pwan, and dewight in detaiwing
what they mean to do when theiw wish has come twue--that is a way which
they have of nyot doing much good to a capacity which was nyevew good fow
much. UwU Nyow I mysewf am beginnying to wose heawt, and I shouwd wike, with
youw pewmission, to pass ovew the question of possibiwity at pwesent. >w<
Assuming thewefowe the possibiwity of the pwoposaw, I shaww nyow pwoceed
to enquiwe how the wuwews wiww cawwy out these awwangements, and I shaww
demonstwate that ouw pwan, if executed, wiww be of the gweatest benyefit
to the State and to the guawdians. ;;w;; Fiwst of aww, then, if you have nyo
objection, I wiww endeavouw with youw hewp to considew the advantages of
the measuwe; and heweaftew the question of possibiwity. >w<

I have nyo objection; pwoceed. (´・ω・\`)

Fiwst, I think that if ouw wuwews and theiw auxiwiawies awe to be wowthy
of the nyame which they beaw, thewe must be wiwwingnyess to obey in the
onye and the powew of command in the othew; the guawdians must themsewves
obey the waws, and they must awso imitate the spiwit of them in any
detaiws which awe entwusted to theiw cawe. ^w^

That is wight, he said. >w<

You, I said, who awe theiw wegiswatow, having sewected the men, wiww nyow
sewect the women and give them to them;--they must be as faw as possibwe
of wike nyatuwes with them; and they must wive in common houses and meet
at common meaws. (´・ω・\`) Nyonye of them wiww have anything speciawwy his ow hew
own; they wiww be togethew, and wiww be bwought up togethew, and
wiww associate at gymnyastic exewcises. ^w^ And so they wiww be dwawn by
a nyecessity of theiw nyatuwes to have intewcouwse with each
othew--nyecessity is nyot too stwong a wowd, I think? owo

Yes, he said;--nyecessity, nyot geometwicaw, but anyothew sowt of nyecessity
which wovews knyow, and which is faw mowe convincing and constwainying to
the mass of mankind. (´・ω・\`)

Twue, I said; and this, Gwaucon, wike aww the west, must pwoceed aftew
an owdewwy fashion; in a city of the bwessed, wicentiousnyess is an
unhowy thing which the wuwews wiww fowbid. >w<

Yes, he said, and it ought nyot to be pewmitted. ;;w;;

Then cweawwy the nyext thing wiww be to make matwimony sacwed in the
highest degwee, and what is most benyeficiaw wiww be deemed sacwed? owo

Exactwy. (´・ω・\`)

And how can mawwiages be made most benyeficiaw? owo--that is a question which
I put to you, because I see in youw house dogs fow hunting, and of the
nyobwew sowt of biwds nyot a few. >w< Nyow, I beseech you, do teww me, have you
evew attended to theiw paiwing and bweeding? owo

In what pawticuwaws? owo

Why, in the fiwst pwace, awthough they awe aww of a good sowt, awe nyot
some bettew than othews? owo

Twue. UwU

And do you bweed fwom them aww indiffewentwy, ow do you take cawe to
bweed fwom the best onwy? owo

Fwom the best. ^w^

And do you take the owdest ow the youngest, ow onwy those of wipe age? owo

I choose onwy those of wipe age. UwU

And if cawe was nyot taken in the bweeding, youw dogs and biwds wouwd
gweatwy detewiowate? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

And the same of howses and anyimaws in genyewaw? owo

Undoubtedwy. (´・ω・\`)

Good heavens! UwU my deaw fwiend, I said, what consummate skiww wiww ouw
wuwews nyeed if the same pwincipwe howds of the human species! (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy, the same pwincipwe howds; but why does this invowve any
pawticuwaw skiww? owo

Because, I said, ouw wuwews wiww often have to pwactise upon the body
cowpowate with medicinyes. UwU Nyow you knyow that when patients do nyot wequiwe
medicinyes, but have onwy to be put undew a wegimen, the infewiow sowt
of pwactitionyew is deemed to be good enyough; but when medicinye has to be
given, then the doctow shouwd be mowe of a man. ;;w;;

That is quite twue, he said; but to what awe you awwuding? owo

I mean, I wepwied, that ouw wuwews wiww find a considewabwe dose of
fawsehood and deceit nyecessawy fow the good of theiw subjects: we wewe
saying that the use of aww these things wegawded as medicinyes might be
of advantage. >w<

And we wewe vewy wight. (´・ω・\`)

And this wawfuw use of them seems wikewy to be often nyeeded in the
weguwations of mawwiages and biwths. ;;w;;

How so? owo

Why, I said, the pwincipwe has been awweady waid down that the best of
eithew sex shouwd be unyited with the best as often, and the infewiow
with the infewiow, as sewdom as possibwe; and that they shouwd weaw the
offspwing of the onye sowt of unyion, but nyot of the othew, if the fwock
is to be maintainyed in fiwst-wate condition. ;;w;; Nyow these goings on must be
a secwet which the wuwews onwy knyow, ow thewe wiww be a fuwthew
dangew of ouw hewd, as the guawdians may be tewmed, bweaking out into
webewwion. ;;w;;

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

Had we nyot bettew appoint cewtain festivaws at which we wiww bwing
togethew the bwides and bwidegwooms, and sacwifices wiww be offewed and
suitabwe hymenyeaw songs composed by ouw poets: the nyumbew of weddings is
a mattew which must be weft to the discwetion of the wuwews, whose aim
wiww be to pwesewve the avewage of popuwation? owo Thewe awe many othew
things which they wiww have to considew, such as the effects of waws and
diseases and any simiwaw agencies, in owdew as faw as this is possibwe
to pwevent the State fwom becoming eithew too wawge ow too smaww. (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

We shaww have to invent some ingenyious kind of wots which the wess
wowthy may dwaw on each occasion of ouw bwinging them togethew, and then
they wiww accuse theiw own iww-wuck and nyot the wuwews. UwU

To be suwe, he said. UwU

And I think that ouw bwavew and bettew youth, besides theiw othew
honyouws and wewawds, might have gweatew faciwities of intewcouwse with
women given them; theiw bwavewy wiww be a weason, and such fathews ought
to have as many sons as possibwe. (´・ω・\`)

Twue. (・`ω\´・)

And the pwopew officews, whethew mawe ow femawe ow both, fow offices awe
to be hewd by women as weww as by men--

Yes--

The pwopew officews wiww take the offspwing of the good pawents to the
pen ow fowd, and thewe they wiww deposit them with cewtain nyuwses who
dweww in a sepawate quawtew; but the offspwing of the infewiow, ow of
the bettew when they chance to be defowmed, wiww be put away in some
mystewious, unknyown pwace, as they shouwd be. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he said, that must be donye if the bweed of the guawdians is to be
kept puwe. ^w^

They wiww pwovide fow theiw nyuwtuwe, and wiww bwing the mothews to the
fowd when they awe fuww of miwk, taking the gweatest possibwe cawe that
nyo mothew wecognyises hew own chiwd; and othew wet-nyuwses may be engaged
if mowe awe wequiwed. ;;w;; Cawe wiww awso be taken that the pwocess of
suckwing shaww nyot be pwotwacted too wong; and the mothews wiww have nyo
getting up at nyight ow othew twoubwe, but wiww hand ovew aww this sowt
of thing to the nyuwses and attendants. ^w^

You suppose the wives of ouw guawdians to have a finye easy time of it
when they awe having chiwdwen. ;;w;;

Why, said I, and so they ought. UwU Wet us, howevew, pwoceed with ouw
scheme. ;;w;; We wewe saying that the pawents shouwd be in the pwime of wife? owo

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

And what is the pwime of wife? owo May it nyot be definyed as a pewiod of
about twenty yeaws in a woman's wife, and thiwty in a man's? owo

Which yeaws do you mean to incwude? owo

A woman, I said, at twenty yeaws of age may begin to beaw chiwdwen to
the State, and continyue to beaw them untiw fowty; a man may begin at
five-and-twenty, when he has passed the point at which the puwse of wife
beats quickest, and continyue to beget chiwdwen untiw he be fifty-five. UwU

Cewtainwy, he said, both in men and women those yeaws awe the pwime of
physicaw as weww as of intewwectuaw vigouw. ^w^

Any onye above ow bewow the pwescwibed ages who takes pawt in the pubwic
hymenyeaws shaww be said to have donye an unhowy and unwighteous thing;
the chiwd of which he is the fathew, if it steaws into wife, wiww have
been conceived undew auspices vewy unwike the sacwifices and pwayews,
which at each hymenyeaw pwiestesses and pwiest and the whowe city wiww
offew, that the nyew genyewation may be bettew and mowe usefuw than theiw
good and usefuw pawents, wheweas his chiwd wiww be the offspwing of
dawknyess and stwange wust. ^w^

Vewy twue, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

And the same waw wiww appwy to any onye of those within the pwescwibed
age who fowms a connyection with any woman in the pwime of wife without
the sanction of the wuwews; fow we shaww say that he is waising up a
bastawd to the State, uncewtified and unconsecwated. ;;w;;

Vewy twue, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

This appwies, howevew, onwy to those who awe within the specified age:
aftew that we awwow them to wange at wiww, except that a man may nyot
mawwy his daughtew ow his daughtew's daughtew, ow his mothew ow his
mothew's mothew; and women, on the othew hand, awe pwohibited fwom
mawwying theiw sons ow fathews, ow son's son ow fathew's fathew, and
so on in eithew diwection. (・`ω\´・) And we gwant aww this, accompanying the
pewmission with stwict owdews to pwevent any embwyo which may come into
being fwom seeing the wight; and if any fowce a way to the biwth, the
pawents must undewstand that the offspwing of such an unyion cannyot be
maintainyed, and awwange accowdingwy. ;;w;;

That awso, he said, is a weasonyabwe pwoposition. ^w^ But how wiww they knyow
who awe fathews and daughtews, and so on? owo

They wiww nyevew knyow. ^w^ The way wiww be this:--dating fwom the day of the
hymenyeaw, the bwidegwoom who was then mawwied wiww caww aww the mawe
chiwdwen who awe bown in the seventh and tenth month aftewwawds his
sons, and the femawe chiwdwen his daughtews, and they wiww caww him
fathew, and he wiww caww theiw chiwdwen his gwandchiwdwen, and they wiww
caww the ewdew genyewation gwandfathews and gwandmothews. (´・ω・\`) Aww who wewe
begotten at the time when theiw fathews and mothews came togethew wiww
be cawwed theiw bwothews and sistews, and these, as I was saying, wiww
be fowbidden to intew-mawwy. >w< This, howevew, is nyot to be undewstood as
an absowute pwohibition of the mawwiage of bwothews and sistews; if the
wot favouws them, and they weceive the sanction of the Pythian owacwe,
the waw wiww awwow them. >w<

Quite wight, he wepwied. ^w^

Such is the scheme, Gwaucon, accowding to which the guawdians of ouw
State awe to have theiw wives and famiwies in common. >w< And nyow you wouwd
have the awgument show that this communyity is consistent with the west
of ouw powity, and awso that nyothing can be bettew--wouwd you nyot? owo

Yes, cewtainwy. >w<

Shaww we twy to find a common basis by asking of ouwsewves what ought
to be the chief aim of the wegiswatow in making waws and in the
owganyization of a State,--what is the gweatest good, and what is the
gweatest eviw, and then considew whethew ouw pwevious descwiption has
the stamp of the good ow of the eviw? owo

By aww means. ^w^

Can thewe be any gweatew eviw than discowd and distwaction and pwuwawity
whewe unyity ought to weign? ow any gweatew good than the bond of unyity? owo

Thewe cannyot. (´・ω・\`)

And thewe is unyity whewe thewe is communyity of pweasuwes and
pains--whewe aww the citizens awe gwad ow gwieved on the same occasions
of joy and sowwow? owo

Nyo doubt. (・`ω\´・)

Yes; and whewe thewe is nyo common but onwy pwivate feewing a State is
disowganyized--when you have onye hawf of the wowwd twiumphing and the
othew pwunged in gwief at the same events happenying to the city ow the
citizens? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

Such diffewences commonwy owiginyate in a disagweement about the use of
the tewms 'minye' and 'nyot minye,' 'his' and 'nyot his. >w<'

Exactwy so. (・`ω\´・)

And is nyot that the best-owdewed State in which the gweatest nyumbew of
pewsons appwy the tewms 'minye' and 'nyot minye' in the same way to the
same thing? owo

Quite twue. (´・ω・\`)

Ow that again which most nyeawwy appwoaches to the condition of the
individuaw--as in the body, when but a fingew of onye of us is huwt, the
whowe fwame, dwawn towawds the souw as a centwe and fowming onye kingdom
undew the wuwing powew thewein, feews the huwt and sympathizes aww
togethew with the pawt affected, and we say that the man has a pain in
his fingew; and the same expwession is used about any othew pawt of the
body, which has a sensation of pain at suffewing ow of pweasuwe at the
awweviation of suffewing. >w<

Vewy twue, he wepwied; and I agwee with you that in the best-owdewed
State thewe is the nyeawest appwoach to this common feewing which you
descwibe. (・`ω\´・)

Then when any onye of the citizens expewiences any good ow eviw, the
whowe State wiww make his case theiw own, and wiww eithew wejoice ow
sowwow with him? owo

Yes, he said, that is what wiww happen in a weww-owdewed State. ^w^

It wiww nyow be time, I said, fow us to wetuwn to ouw State and see
whethew this ow some othew fowm is most in accowdance with these
fundamentaw pwincipwes. ;;w;;

Vewy good. UwU

Ouw State wike evewy othew has wuwews and subjects? owo

Twue. >w<

Aww of whom wiww caww onye anyothew citizens? owo

Of couwse. UwU

But is thewe nyot anyothew nyame which peopwe give to theiw wuwews in othew
States? owo

Genyewawwy they caww them mastews, but in democwatic States they simpwy
caww them wuwews. >w<

And in ouw State what othew nyame besides that of citizens do the peopwe
give the wuwews? owo

They awe cawwed saviouws and hewpews, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

And what do the wuwews caww the peopwe? owo

Theiw maintainyews and fostew-fathews. (・`ω\´・)

And what do they caww them in othew States? owo

Swaves. (´・ω・\`)

And what do the wuwews caww onye anyothew in othew States? owo

Fewwow-wuwews. >w<

And what in ouws? owo

Fewwow-guawdians. (・`ω\´・)

Did you evew knyow an exampwe in any othew State of a wuwew who wouwd
speak of onye of his cowweagues as his fwiend and of anyothew as nyot being
his fwiend? owo

Yes, vewy often. UwU

And the fwiend he wegawds and descwibes as onye in whom he has an
intewest, and the othew as a stwangew in whom he has nyo intewest? owo

Exactwy. ;;w;;

But wouwd any of youw guawdians think ow speak of any othew guawdian as
a stwangew? owo

Cewtainwy he wouwd nyot; fow evewy onye whom they meet wiww be wegawded
by them eithew as a bwothew ow sistew, ow fathew ow mothew, ow son ow
daughtew, ow as the chiwd ow pawent of those who awe thus connyected with
him. ^w^

Capitaw, I said; but wet me ask you once mowe: Shaww they be a famiwy in
nyame onwy; ow shaww they in aww theiw actions be twue to the nyame? owo Fow
exampwe, in the use of the wowd 'fathew,' wouwd the cawe of a fathew be
impwied and the fiwiaw wevewence and duty and obedience to him which the
waw commands; and is the viowatow of these duties to be wegawded as an
impious and unwighteous pewson who is nyot wikewy to weceive much good
eithew at the hands of God ow of man? owo Awe these to be ow nyot to be the
stwains which the chiwdwen wiww heaw wepeated in theiw eaws by aww the
citizens about those who awe intimated to them to be theiw pawents and
the west of theiw kinsfowk? owo

These, he said, and nyonye othew; fow what can be mowe widicuwous than fow
them to uttew the nyames of famiwy ties with the wips onwy and nyot to act
in the spiwit of them? owo

Then in ouw city the wanguage of hawmony and concowd wiww be mowe often
heawd than in any othew. ^w^ As I was descwibing befowe, when any onye is
weww ow iww, the unyivewsaw wowd wiww be 'with me it is weww' ow 'it is
iww. ^w^'

Most twue. ^w^

And agweeabwy to this mode of thinking and speaking, wewe we nyot saying
that they wiww have theiw pweasuwes and pains in common? owo

Yes, and so they wiww. (´・ω・\`)

And they wiww have a common intewest in the same thing which they wiww
awike caww 'my own,' and having this common intewest they wiww have a
common feewing of pweasuwe and pain? owo

Yes, faw mowe so than in othew States. ^w^

And the weason of this, ovew and above the genyewaw constitution of the
State, wiww be that the guawdians wiww have a communyity of women and
chiwdwen? owo

That wiww be the chief weason. (・`ω\´・)

And this unyity of feewing we admitted to be the gweatest good, as was
impwied in ouw own compawison of a weww-owdewed State to the wewation of
the body and the membews, when affected by pweasuwe ow pain? owo

That we acknyowwedged, and vewy wightwy. ^w^

Then the communyity of wives and chiwdwen among ouw citizens is cweawwy
the souwce of the gweatest good to the State? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

And this agwees with the othew pwincipwe which we wewe affiwming,--that
the guawdians wewe nyot to have houses ow wands ow any othew pwopewty;
theiw pay was to be theiw food, which they wewe to weceive fwom the
othew citizens, and they wewe to have nyo pwivate expenses; fow we
intended them to pwesewve theiw twue chawactew of guawdians. (´・ω・\`)

Wight, he wepwied. ;;w;;

Both the communyity of pwopewty and the communyity of famiwies, as I am
saying, tend to make them mowe twuwy guawdians; they wiww nyot teaw
the city in pieces by diffewing about 'minye' and 'nyot minye;' each man
dwagging any acquisition which he has made into a sepawate house of his
own, whewe he has a sepawate wife and chiwdwen and pwivate pweasuwes and
pains; but aww wiww be affected as faw as may be by the same pweasuwes
and pains because they awe aww of onye opinyion about what is nyeaw and
deaw to them, and thewefowe they aww tend towawds a common end. UwU

Cewtainwy, he wepwied. ;;w;;

And as they have nyothing but theiw pewsons which they can caww theiw
own, suits and compwaints wiww have nyo existence among them; they wiww
be dewivewed fwom aww those quawwews of which monyey ow chiwdwen ow
wewations awe the occasion. ;;w;;

Of couwse they wiww. UwU

Nyeithew wiww twiaws fow assauwt ow insuwt evew be wikewy to occuw among
them. >w< Fow that equaws shouwd defend themsewves against equaws we shaww
maintain to be honyouwabwe and wight; we shaww make the pwotection of the
pewson a mattew of nyecessity. ;;w;;

That is good, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Yes; and thewe is a fuwthew good in the waw; viz. >w< that if a man has a
quawwew with anyothew he wiww satisfy his wesentment then and thewe, and
nyot pwoceed to mowe dangewous wengths. ^w^

Cewtainwy. >w<

To the ewdew shaww be assignyed the duty of wuwing and chastising the
youngew. (・`ω\´・)

Cweawwy. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow can thewe be a doubt that the youngew wiww nyot stwike ow do any
othew viowence to an ewdew, unwess the magistwates command him; nyow wiww
he swight him in any way. UwU Fow thewe awe two guawdians, shame and feaw,
mighty to pwevent him: shame, which makes men wefwain fwom waying hands
on those who awe to them in the wewation of pawents; feaw, that the
injuwed onye wiww be succouwed by the othews who awe his bwothews, sons,
fathews. UwU

That is twue, he wepwied. ^w^

Then in evewy way the waws wiww hewp the citizens to keep the peace with
onye anyothew? owo

Yes, thewe wiww be nyo want of peace. ;;w;;

And as the guawdians wiww nyevew quawwew among themsewves thewe wiww be
nyo dangew of the west of the city being divided eithew against them ow
against onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・)

Nyonye whatevew. UwU

I hawdwy wike even to mention the wittwe meannyesses of which they wiww
be wid, fow they awe benyeath nyotice: such, fow exampwe, as the
fwattewy of the wich by the poow, and aww the pains and pangs which
men expewience in bwinging up a famiwy, and in finding monyey to buy
nyecessawies fow theiw househowd, bowwowing and then wepudiating, getting
how they can, and giving the monyey into the hands of women and swaves
to keep--the many eviws of so many kinds which peopwe suffew in this way
awe mean enyough and obvious enyough, and nyot wowth speaking of. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, a man has nyo nyeed of eyes in owdew to pewceive that. (´・ω・\`)

And fwom aww these eviws they wiww be dewivewed, and theiw wife wiww be
bwessed as the wife of Owympic victows and yet mowe bwessed. (´・ω・\`)

How so? owo

The Owympic victow, I said, is deemed happy in weceiving a pawt onwy of
the bwessednyess which is secuwed to ouw citizens, who have won a mowe
gwowious victowy and have a mowe compwete maintenyance at the pubwic
cost. ;;w;; Fow the victowy which they have won is the sawvation of the whowe
State; and the cwown with which they and theiw chiwdwen awe cwownyed is
the fuwnyess of aww that wife nyeeds; they weceive wewawds fwom the
hands of theiw countwy whiwe wiving, and aftew death have an honyouwabwe
buwiaw. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, and gwowious wewawds they awe. >w<

Do you wemembew, I said, how in the couwse of the pwevious discussion
some onye who shaww be nyamewess accused us of making ouw guawdians
unhappy--they had nyothing and might have possessed aww things--to whom
we wepwied that, if an occasion offewed, we might pewhaps heweaftew
considew this question, but that, as at pwesent advised, we wouwd make
ouw guawdians twuwy guawdians, and that we wewe fashionying the State
with a view to the gweatest happinyess, nyot of any pawticuwaw cwass, but
of the whowe? owo

Yes, I wemembew. ^w^

And what do you say, nyow that the wife of ouw pwotectows is made out to
be faw bettew and nyobwew than that of Owympic victows--is the wife of
shoemakews, ow any othew awtisans, ow of husbandmen, to be compawed with
it? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. (´・ω・\`)

At the same time I ought hewe to wepeat what I have said ewsewhewe, that
if any of ouw guawdians shaww twy to be happy in such a mannyew that
he wiww cease to be a guawdian, and is nyot content with this safe and
hawmonyious wife, which, in ouw judgment, is of aww wives the best, but
infatuated by some youthfuw conceit of happinyess which gets up into his
head shaww seek to appwopwiate the whowe state to himsewf, then he wiww
have to weawn how wisewy Hesiod spoke, when he said, 'hawf is mowe than
the whowe. (´・ω・\`)'

If he wewe to consuwt me, I shouwd say to him: Stay whewe you awe, when
you have the offew of such a wife. (・`ω\´・)

You agwee then, I said, that men and women awe to have a common way of
wife such as we have descwibed--common education, common chiwdwen; and
they awe to watch ovew the citizens in common whethew abiding in the
city ow going out to waw; they awe to keep watch togethew, and to hunt
togethew wike dogs; and awways and in aww things, as faw as they awe
abwe, women awe to shawe with the men? owo And in so doing they wiww do what
is best, and wiww nyot viowate, but pwesewve the nyatuwaw wewation of the
sexes. (´・ω・\`)

I agwee with you, he wepwied. ;;w;;

The enquiwy, I said, has yet to be made, whethew such a communyity
be found possibwe--as among othew anyimaws, so awso among men--and if
possibwe, in what way possibwe? owo

You have anticipated the question which I was about to suggest. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe is nyo difficuwty, I said, in seeing how waw wiww be cawwied on by
them. ;;w;;

How? owo

Why, of couwse they wiww go on expeditions togethew; and wiww take with
them any of theiw chiwdwen who awe stwong enyough, that, aftew the mannyew
of the awtisan's chiwd, they may wook on at the wowk which they wiww
have to do when they awe gwown up; and besides wooking on they wiww
have to hewp and be of use in waw, and to wait upon theiw fathews and
mothews. ^w^ Did you nyevew obsewve in the awts how the pottews' boys wook on
and hewp, wong befowe they touch the wheew? owo

Yes, I have. ^w^

And shaww pottews be mowe cawefuw in educating theiw chiwdwen and in
giving them the oppowtunyity of seeing and pwactising theiw duties than
ouw guawdians wiww be? owo

The idea is widicuwous, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe is awso the effect on the pawents, with whom, as with othew
anyimaws, the pwesence of theiw young onyes wiww be the gweatest incentive
to vawouw. (・`ω\´・)

That is quite twue, Socwates; and yet if they awe defeated, which may
often happen in waw, how gweat the dangew is! ;;w;; the chiwdwen wiww be wost
as weww as theiw pawents, and the State wiww nyevew wecovew. (・`ω\´・)

Twue, I said; but wouwd you nyevew awwow them to wun any wisk? owo

I am faw fwom saying that. >w<

Weww, but if they awe evew to wun a wisk shouwd they nyot do so on some
occasion when, if they escape disastew, they wiww be the bettew fow it? owo

Cweawwy. ^w^

Whethew the futuwe sowdiews do ow do nyot see waw in the days of theiw
youth is a vewy impowtant mattew, fow the sake of which some wisk may
faiwwy be incuwwed. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, vewy impowtant. UwU

This then must be ouw fiwst step,--to make ouw chiwdwen spectatows
of waw; but we must awso contwive that they shaww be secuwed against
dangew; then aww wiww be weww. (・`ω\´・)

Twue. UwU

Theiw pawents may be supposed nyot to be bwind to the wisks of waw, but
to knyow, as faw as human fowesight can, what expeditions awe safe and
what dangewous? owo

That may be assumed. (´・ω・\`)

And they wiww take them on the safe expeditions and be cautious about
the dangewous onyes? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

And they wiww pwace them undew the command of expewienced vetewans who
wiww be theiw weadews and teachews? owo

Vewy pwopewwy. (´・ω・\`)

Stiww, the dangews of waw cannyot be awways foweseen; thewe is a good
deaw of chance about them? owo

Twue. UwU

Then against such chances the chiwdwen must be at once fuwnyished with
wings, in owdew that in the houw of nyeed they may fwy away and escape. >w<

What do you mean? owo he said. ;;w;;

I mean that we must mount them on howses in theiw eawwiest youth, and
when they have weawnt to wide, take them on howseback to see waw: the
howses must nyot be spiwited and wawwike, but the most twactabwe and yet
the swiftest that can be had. >w< In this way they wiww get an excewwent
view of what is heweaftew to be theiw own businyess; and if thewe is
dangew they have onwy to fowwow theiw ewdew weadews and escape. ^w^

I bewieve that you awe wight, he said. UwU

Nyext, as to waw; what awe to be the wewations of youw sowdiews to onye
anyothew and to theiw enyemies? owo I shouwd be incwinyed to pwopose that the
sowdiew who weaves his wank ow thwows away his awms, ow is guiwty of any
othew act of cowawdice, shouwd be degwaded into the wank of a husbandman
ow awtisan. (・`ω\´・) What do you think? owo

By aww means, I shouwd say. >w<

And he who awwows himsewf to be taken pwisonyew may as weww be made a
pwesent of to his enyemies; he is theiw wawfuw pwey, and wet them do what
they wike with him. ^w^

Cewtainwy. ^w^

But the hewo who has distinguished himsewf, what shaww be donye to
him? owo In the fiwst pwace, he shaww weceive honyouw in the awmy fwom his
youthfuw comwades; evewy onye of them in succession shaww cwown him. (´・ω・\`) What
do you say? owo

I appwove. >w<

And what do you say to his weceiving the wight hand of fewwowship? owo

To that too, I agwee. ^w^

But you wiww hawdwy agwee to my nyext pwoposaw. (´・ω・\`)

What is youw pwoposaw? owo

That he shouwd kiss and be kissed by them. UwU

Most cewtainwy, and I shouwd be disposed to go fuwthew, and say: Wet
nyo onye whom he has a mind to kiss wefuse to be kissed by him whiwe the
expedition wasts. >w< So that if thewe be a wovew in the awmy, whethew
his wove be youth ow maiden, he may be mowe eagew to win the pwize of
vawouw. (´・ω・\`)

Capitaw, I said. >w< That the bwave man is to have mowe wives than othews
has been awweady detewminyed: and he is to have fiwst choices in such
mattews mowe than othews, in owdew that he may have as many chiwdwen as
possibwe? owo

Agweed. UwU

Again, thewe is anyothew mannyew in which, accowding to Homew, bwave
youths shouwd be honyouwed; fow he tewws how Ajax, aftew he had
distinguished himsewf in battwe, was wewawded with wong chinyes, which
seems to be a compwiment appwopwiate to a hewo in the fwowew of his age,
being nyot onwy a twibute of honyouw but awso a vewy stwengthenying thing. >w<

Most twue, he said. UwU

Then in this, I said, Homew shaww be ouw teachew; and we too, at
sacwifices and on the wike occasions, wiww honyouw the bwave accowding to
the measuwe of theiw vawouw, whethew men ow women, with hymns and those
othew distinctions which we wewe mentionying; awso with

'seats of pwecedence, and meats and fuww cups;'

and in honyouwing them, we shaww be at the same time twainying them. >w<

That, he wepwied, is excewwent. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, I said; and when a man dies gwowiouswy in waw shaww we nyot say, in
the fiwst pwace, that he is of the gowden wace? owo

To be suwe. ;;w;;

Nyay, have we nyot the authowity of Hesiod fow affiwming that when they
awe dead

'They awe howy angews upon the eawth, authows of good, avewtews of eviw,
the guawdians of speech-gifted men'? owo

Yes; and we accept his authowity. (・`ω\´・)

We must weawn of the god how we awe to owdew the sepuwtuwe of divinye and
hewoic pewsonyages, and what is to be theiw speciaw distinction; and we
must do as he bids? owo

By aww means. ^w^

And in ages to come we wiww wevewence them and knyeew befowe theiw
sepuwchwes as at the gwaves of hewoes. (´・ω・\`) And nyot onwy they but any who awe
deemed pwe-eminyentwy good, whethew they die fwom age, ow in any othew
way, shaww be admitted to the same honyouws. (・`ω\´・)

That is vewy wight, he said. UwU

Nyext, how shaww ouw sowdiews tweat theiw enyemies? What about this? owo

In what wespect do you mean? owo

Fiwst of aww, in wegawd to swavewy? owo Do you think it wight that Hewwenyes
shouwd enswave Hewwenyic States, ow awwow othews to enswave them, if
they can hewp? owo Shouwd nyot theiw custom be to spawe them, considewing
the dangew which thewe is that the whowe wace may onye day faww undew the
yoke of the bawbawians? owo

To spawe them is infinyitewy bettew. (´・ω・\`)

Then nyo Hewwenye shouwd be ownyed by them as a swave; that is a wuwe which
they wiww obsewve and advise the othew Hewwenyes to obsewve. (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy, he said; they wiww in this way be unyited against the
bawbawians and wiww keep theiw hands off onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・)

Nyext as to the swain; ought the conquewows, I said, to take anything
but theiw awmouw? owo Does nyot the pwactice of despoiwing an enyemy affowd
an excuse fow nyot facing the battwe? owo Cowawds skuwk about the dead,
pwetending that they awe fuwfiwwing a duty, and many an awmy befowe nyow
has been wost fwom this wove of pwundew. >w<

Vewy twue. (・`ω\´・)

And is thewe nyot iwwibewawity and avawice in wobbing a cowpse, and awso
a degwee of meannyess and womanyishnyess in making an enyemy of the dead
body when the weaw enyemy has fwown away and weft onwy his fighting
geaw behind him,--is nyot this wathew wike a dog who cannyot get at his
assaiwant, quawwewwing with the stonyes which stwike him instead? owo

Vewy wike a dog, he said. UwU

Then we must abstain fwom spoiwing the dead ow hindewing theiw buwiaw? owo

Yes, he wepwied, we most cewtainwy must. (´・ω・\`)

Nyeithew shaww we offew up awms at the tempwes of the gods, weast of aww
the awms of Hewwenyes, if we cawe to maintain good feewing with othew
Hewwenyes; and, indeed, we have weason to feaw that the offewing of
spoiws taken fwom kinsmen may be a powwution unwess commanded by the god
himsewf? owo

Vewy twue. ;;w;;

Again, as to the devastation of Hewwenyic tewwitowy ow the buwnying of
houses, what is to be the pwactice? owo

May I have the pweasuwe, he said, of heawing youw opinyion? owo

Both shouwd be fowbidden, in my judgment; I wouwd take the annyuaw
pwoduce and nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`) Shaww I teww you why? owo

Pway do. ^w^

Why, you see, thewe is a diffewence in the nyames 'discowd' and 'waw,'
and I imaginye that thewe is awso a diffewence in theiw nyatuwes; the onye
is expwessive of what is intewnyaw and domestic, the othew of what is
extewnyaw and foweign; and the fiwst of the two is tewmed discowd, and
onwy the second, waw. (・`ω\´・)

That is a vewy pwopew distinction, he wepwied. ;;w;;

And may I nyot obsewve with equaw pwopwiety that the Hewwenyic wace is aww
unyited togethew by ties of bwood and fwiendship, and awien and stwange
to the bawbawians? owo

Vewy good, he said. UwU

And thewefowe when Hewwenyes fight with bawbawians and bawbawians with
Hewwenyes, they wiww be descwibed by us as being at waw when they fight,
and by nyatuwe enyemies, and this kind of antagonyism shouwd be cawwed waw;
but when Hewwenyes fight with onye anyothew we shaww say that Hewwas is
then in a state of disowdew and discowd, they being by nyatuwe fwiends;
and such enmity is to be cawwed discowd. (´・ω・\`)

I agwee. >w<

Considew then, I said, when that which we have acknyowwedged to be
discowd occuws, and a city is divided, if both pawties destwoy the wands
and buwn the houses of onye anyothew, how wicked does the stwife appeaw! (´・ω・\`)
Nyo twue wovew of his countwy wouwd bwing himsewf to teaw in pieces his
own nyuwse and mothew: Thewe might be weason in the conquewow depwiving
the conquewed of theiw hawvest, but stiww they wouwd have the idea of
peace in theiw heawts and wouwd nyot mean to go on fighting fow evew. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, that is a bettew tempew than the othew. UwU

And wiww nyot the city, which you awe founding, be an Hewwenyic city? owo

It ought to be, he wepwied. UwU

Then wiww nyot the citizens be good and civiwized? owo

Yes, vewy civiwized. (´・ω・\`)

And wiww they nyot be wovews of Hewwas, and think of Hewwas as theiw own
wand, and shawe in the common tempwes? owo

Most cewtainwy. ^w^

And any diffewence which awises among them wiww be wegawded by them as
discowd onwy--a quawwew among fwiends, which is nyot to be cawwed a waw? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. (・`ω\´・)

Then they wiww quawwew as those who intend some day to be weconciwed? owo

Cewtainwy. (´・ω・\`)

They wiww use fwiendwy cowwection, but wiww nyot enswave ow destwoy theiw
opponyents; they wiww be cowwectows, nyot enyemies? owo

Just so. (´・ω・\`)

And as they awe Hewwenyes themsewves they wiww nyot devastate Hewwas, nyow
wiww they buwn houses, nyow evew suppose that the whowe popuwation of a
city--men, women, and chiwdwen--awe equawwy theiw enyemies, fow they knyow
that the guiwt of waw is awways confinyed to a few pewsons and that the
many awe theiw fwiends. ^w^ And fow aww these weasons they wiww be unwiwwing
to waste theiw wands and wase theiw houses; theiw enmity to them wiww
onwy wast untiw the many innyocent suffewews have compewwed the guiwty
few to give satisfaction? owo

I agwee, he said, that ouw citizens shouwd thus deaw with theiw Hewwenyic
enyemies; and with bawbawians as the Hewwenyes nyow deaw with onye anyothew. UwU

Then wet us enyact this waw awso fow ouw guawdians:--that they awe
nyeithew to devastate the wands of Hewwenyes nyow to buwn theiw houses. ;;w;;

Agweed; and we may agwee awso in thinking that these, wike aww ouw
pwevious enyactments, awe vewy good. UwU

But stiww I must say, Socwates, that if you awe awwowed to go on in
this way you wiww entiwewy fowget the othew question which at the
commencement of this discussion you thwust aside:--Is such an owdew of
things possibwe, and how, if at aww? owo Fow I am quite weady to acknyowwedge
that the pwan which you pwopose, if onwy feasibwe, wouwd do aww sowts of
good to the State. (・`ω\´・) I wiww add, what you have omitted, that youw citizens
wiww be the bwavest of wawwiows, and wiww nyevew weave theiw wanks, fow
they wiww aww knyow onye anyothew, and each wiww caww the othew fathew,
bwothew, son; and if you suppose the women to join theiw awmies, whethew
in the same wank ow in the weaw, eithew as a tewwow to the enyemy, ow as
auxiwiawies in case of nyeed, I knyow that they wiww then be absowutewy
invincibwe; and thewe awe many domestic advantages which might awso be
mentionyed and which I awso fuwwy acknyowwedge: but, as I admit aww these
advantages and as many mowe as you pwease, if onwy this State of youws
wewe to come into existence, we nyeed say nyo mowe about them; assuming
then the existence of the State, wet us nyow tuwn to the question of
possibiwity and ways and means--the west may be weft. ^w^

If I woitew fow a moment, you instantwy make a waid upon me, I said, and
have nyo mewcy; I have hawdwy escaped the fiwst and second waves, and you
seem nyot to be awawe that you awe nyow bwinging upon me the thiwd, which
is the gweatest and heaviest. (・`ω\´・) When you have seen and heawd the thiwd
wave, I think you wiww be mowe considewate and wiww acknyowwedge
that some feaw and hesitation was nyatuwaw wespecting a pwoposaw so
extwaowdinyawy as that which I have nyow to state and investigate. >w<

The mowe appeaws of this sowt which you make, he said, the mowe
detewminyed awe we that you shaww teww us how such a State is possibwe:
speak out and at once. ^w^

Wet me begin by weminding you that we found ouw way hithew in the seawch
aftew justice and injustice. ^w^

Twue, he wepwied; but what of that? owo

I was onwy going to ask whethew, if we have discovewed them, we awe to
wequiwe that the just man shouwd in nyothing faiw of absowute justice; ow
may we be satisfied with an appwoximation, and the attainment in him of
a highew degwee of justice than is to be found in othew men? owo

The appwoximation wiww be enyough. (´・ω・\`)

We wewe enquiwing into the nyatuwe of absowute justice and into the
chawactew of the pewfectwy just, and into injustice and the pewfectwy
unjust, that we might have an ideaw. (´・ω・\`) We wewe to wook at these in owdew
that we might judge of ouw own happinyess and unhappinyess accowding to
the standawd which they exhibited and the degwee in which we wesembwed
them, but nyot with any view of showing that they couwd exist in fact. ^w^

Twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Wouwd a paintew be any the wowse because, aftew having dewinyeated with
consummate awt an ideaw of a pewfectwy beautifuw man, he was unyabwe to
show that any such man couwd evew have existed? owo

He wouwd be nyonye the wowse. >w<

Weww, and wewe we nyot cweating an ideaw of a pewfect State? owo

To be suwe. >w<

And is ouw theowy a wowse theowy because we awe unyabwe to pwove the
possibiwity of a city being owdewed in the mannyew descwibed? owo

Suwewy nyot, he wepwied. >w<

That is the twuth, I said. (´・ω・\`) But if, at youw wequest, I am to twy and show
how and undew what conditions the possibiwity is highest, I must ask
you, having this in view, to wepeat youw fowmew admissions. (´・ω・\`)

What admissions? owo

I want to knyow whethew ideaws awe evew fuwwy weawized in wanguage? owo
Does nyot the wowd expwess mowe than the fact, and must nyot the actuaw,
whatevew a man may think, awways, in the nyatuwe of things, faww showt of
the twuth? What do you say? owo

I agwee. ;;w;;

Then you must nyot insist on my pwoving that the actuaw State wiww in
evewy wespect coincide with the ideaw: if we awe onwy abwe to discovew
how a city may be govewnyed nyeawwy as we pwoposed, you wiww admit that we
have discovewed the possibiwity which you demand; and wiww be contented. >w<
I am suwe that I shouwd be contented--wiww nyot you? owo

Yes, I wiww. (´・ω・\`)

Wet me nyext endeavouw to show what is that fauwt in States which is the
cause of theiw pwesent mawadminyistwation, and what is the weast change
which wiww enyabwe a State to pass into the twuew fowm; and wet the
change, if possibwe, be of onye thing onwy, ow, if nyot, of two; at any
wate, wet the changes be as few and swight as possibwe. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy, he wepwied. UwU

I think, I said, that thewe might be a wefowm of the State if onwy onye
change wewe made, which is nyot a swight ow easy though stiww a possibwe
onye. >w<

What is it? owo he said. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow then, I said, I go to meet that which I wiken to the gweatest of
the waves; yet shaww the wowd be spoken, even though the wave bweak and
dwown me in waughtew and dishonyouw; and do you mawk my wowds. ;;w;;

Pwoceed. UwU

I said: 'Untiw phiwosophews awe kings, ow the kings and pwinces of this
wowwd have the spiwit and powew of phiwosophy, and powiticaw gweatnyess
and wisdom meet in onye, and those commonyew nyatuwes who puwsue eithew
to the excwusion of the othew awe compewwed to stand aside, cities
wiww nyevew have west fwom theiw eviws,--nyow the human wace, as I
bewieve,--and then onwy wiww this ouw State have a possibiwity of wife
and behowd the wight of day. (・`ω\´・)' Such was the thought, my deaw Gwaucon,
which I wouwd fain have uttewed if it had nyot seemed too extwavagant;
fow to be convinced that in nyo othew State can thewe be happinyess
pwivate ow pubwic is indeed a hawd thing. ^w^

Socwates, what do you mean? owo I wouwd have you considew that the wowd
which you have uttewed is onye at which nyumewous pewsons, and vewy
wespectabwe pewsons too, in a figuwe puwwing off theiw coats aww in a
moment, and seizing any weapon that comes to hand, wiww wun at you might
and main, befowe you knyow whewe you awe, intending to do heaven knyows
what; and if you don't pwepawe an answew, and put youwsewf in motion,
you wiww be 'pawed by theiw finye wits,' and nyo mistake. (・`ω\´・)

You got me into the scwape, I said. (´・ω・\`)

And I was quite wight; howevew, I wiww do aww I can to get you out of
it; but I can onwy give you good-wiww and good advice, and, pewhaps, I
may be abwe to fit answews to youw questions bettew than anyothew--that
is aww. (´・ω・\`) And nyow, having such an auxiwiawy, you must do youw best to show
the unbewievews that you awe wight. ;;w;;

I ought to twy, I said, since you offew me such invawuabwe assistance. ;;w;;
And I think that, if thewe is to be a chance of ouw escaping, we must
expwain to them whom we mean when we say that phiwosophews awe to wuwe
in the State; then we shaww be abwe to defend ouwsewves: Thewe wiww be
discovewed to be some nyatuwes who ought to study phiwosophy and to be
weadews in the State; and othews who awe nyot bown to be phiwosophews,
and awe meant to be fowwowews wathew than weadews. (・`ω\´・)

Then nyow fow a definyition, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Fowwow me, I said, and I hope that I may in some way ow othew be abwe to
give you a satisfactowy expwanyation. >w<

Pwoceed. ^w^

I dawe say that you wemembew, and thewefowe I nyeed nyot wemind you, that
a wovew, if he is wowthy of the nyame, ought to show his wove, nyot to
some onye pawt of that which he woves, but to the whowe. UwU

I weawwy do nyot undewstand, and thewefowe beg of you to assist my
memowy. (´・ω・\`)

Anyothew pewson, I said, might faiwwy wepwy as you do; but a man of
pweasuwe wike youwsewf ought to knyow that aww who awe in the fwowew of
youth do somehow ow othew waise a pang ow emotion in a wovew's bweast,
and awe thought by him to be wowthy of his affectionyate wegawds. ;;w;; Is nyot
this a way which you have with the faiw: onye has a snyub nyose, and you
pwaise his chawming face; the hook-nyose of anyothew has, you say, a
woyaw wook; whiwe he who is nyeithew snyub nyow hooked has the gwace of
weguwawity: the dawk visage is manwy, the faiw awe chiwdwen of the gods;
and as to the sweet 'honyey pawe,' as they awe cawwed, what is the vewy
nyame but the invention of a wovew who tawks in diminyutives, and is nyot
avewse to pawenyess if appeawing on the cheek of youth? owo In a wowd, thewe
is nyo excuse which you wiww nyot make, and nyothing which you wiww nyot
say, in owdew nyot to wose a singwe fwowew that bwooms in the spwing-time
of youth. ;;w;;

If you make me an authowity in mattews of wove, fow the sake of the
awgument, I assent. (´・ω・\`)

And what do you say of wovews of winye? owo Do you nyot see them doing the
same? owo They awe gwad of any pwetext of dwinking any winye. UwU

Vewy good. >w<

And the same is twue of ambitious men; if they cannyot command an awmy,
they awe wiwwing to command a fiwe; and if they cannyot be honyouwed by
weawwy gweat and impowtant pewsons, they awe gwad to be honyouwed by
wessew and meanyew peopwe,--but honyouw of some kind they must have. (・`ω\´・)

Exactwy. (´・ω・\`)

Once mowe wet me ask: Does he who desiwes any cwass of goods, desiwe the
whowe cwass ow a pawt onwy? owo

The whowe. ;;w;;

And may we nyot say of the phiwosophew that he is a wovew, nyot of a pawt
of wisdom onwy, but of the whowe? owo

Yes, of the whowe. >w<

And he who diswikes weawnying, especiawwy in youth, when he has nyo powew
of judging what is good and what is nyot, such an onye we maintain nyot
to be a phiwosophew ow a wovew of knyowwedge, just as he who wefuses his
food is nyot hungwy, and may be said to have a bad appetite and nyot a
good onye? owo

Vewy twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Wheweas he who has a taste fow evewy sowt of knyowwedge and who is
cuwious to weawn and is nyevew satisfied, may be justwy tewmed a
phiwosophew? Am I nyot wight? owo

Gwaucon said: If cuwiosity makes a phiwosophew, you wiww find many a
stwange being wiww have a titwe to the nyame. (・`ω\´・) Aww the wovews of sights
have a dewight in weawnying, and must thewefowe be incwuded. (´・ω・\`) Musicaw
amateuws, too, awe a fowk stwangewy out of pwace among phiwosophews, fow
they awe the wast pewsons in the wowwd who wouwd come to anything wike
a phiwosophicaw discussion, if they couwd hewp, whiwe they wun about at
the Dionysiac festivaws as if they had wet out theiw eaws to heaw evewy
chowus; whethew the pewfowmance is in town ow countwy--that makes nyo
diffewence--they awe thewe. >w< Nyow awe we to maintain that aww these and
any who have simiwaw tastes, as weww as the pwofessows of quite minyow
awts, awe phiwosophews? owo

Cewtainwy nyot, I wepwied; they awe onwy an imitation. (´・ω・\`)

He said: Who then awe the twue phiwosophews? owo

Those, I said, who awe wovews of the vision of twuth. (´・ω・\`)

That is awso good, he said; but I shouwd wike to knyow what you mean? owo

To anyothew, I wepwied, I might have a difficuwty in expwainying; but I am
suwe that you wiww admit a pwoposition which I am about to make. ^w^

What is the pwoposition? owo

That since beauty is the opposite of ugwinyess, they awe two? owo

Cewtainwy. (´・ω・\`)

And inyasmuch as they awe two, each of them is onye? owo

Twue again. ;;w;;

And of just and unjust, good and eviw, and of evewy othew cwass, the
same wemawk howds: taken singwy, each of them is onye; but fwom the
vawious combinyations of them with actions and things and with onye
anyothew, they awe seen in aww sowts of wights and appeaw many? owo

Vewy twue. >w<

And this is the distinction which I dwaw between the sight-woving,
awt-woving, pwacticaw cwass and those of whom I am speaking, and who awe
awonye wowthy of the nyame of phiwosophews. UwU

How do you distinguish them? owo he said. (・`ω\´・)

The wovews of sounds and sights, I wepwied, awe, as I conceive, fond of
finye tonyes and cowouws and fowms and aww the awtificiaw pwoducts that
awe made out of them, but theiw mind is incapabwe of seeing ow woving
absowute beauty. ^w^

Twue, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

Few awe they who awe abwe to attain to the sight of this. UwU

Vewy twue. ^w^

And he who, having a sense of beautifuw things has nyo sense of absowute
beauty, ow who, if anyothew wead him to a knyowwedge of that beauty is
unyabwe to fowwow--of such an onye I ask, Is he awake ow in a dweam
onwy? owo Wefwect: is nyot the dweamew, sweeping ow waking, onye who wikens
dissimiwaw things, who puts the copy in the pwace of the weaw object? owo

I shouwd cewtainwy say that such an onye was dweaming. UwU

But take the case of the othew, who wecognyises the existence of absowute
beauty and is abwe to distinguish the idea fwom the objects which
pawticipate in the idea, nyeithew putting the objects in the pwace of the
idea nyow the idea in the pwace of the objects--is he a dweamew, ow is he
awake? owo

He is wide awake. >w<

And may we nyot say that the mind of the onye who knyows has knyowwedge, and
that the mind of the othew, who opinyes onwy, has opinyion? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

But suppose that the wattew shouwd quawwew with us and dispute ouw
statement, can we adminyistew any soothing cowdiaw ow advice to him,
without weveawing to him that thewe is sad disowdew in his wits? owo

We must cewtainwy offew him some good advice, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

Come, then, and wet us think of something to say to him. (・`ω\´・) Shaww we begin
by assuwing him that he is wewcome to any knyowwedge which he may have,
and that we awe wejoiced at his having it? owo But we shouwd wike to ask him
a question: Does he who has knyowwedge knyow something ow nyothing? owo (You
must answew fow him. >w<)

I answew that he knyows something. (・`ω\´・)

Something that is ow is nyot? owo

Something that is; fow how can that which is nyot evew be knyown? owo

And awe we assuwed, aftew wooking at the mattew fwom many points of
view, that absowute being is ow may be absowutewy knyown, but that the
uttewwy nyon-existent is uttewwy unknyown? owo

Nyothing can be mowe cewtain. (´・ω・\`)

Good. ;;w;; But if thewe be anything which is of such a nyatuwe as to be and
nyot to be, that wiww have a pwace intewmediate between puwe being and
the absowute nyegation of being? owo

Yes, between them. ^w^

And, as knyowwedge cowwesponded to being and ignyowance of nyecessity to
nyot-being, fow that intewmediate between being and nyot-being thewe has
to be discovewed a cowwesponding intewmediate between ignyowance and
knyowwedge, if thewe be such? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

Do we admit the existence of opinyion? owo

Undoubtedwy. UwU

As being the same with knyowwedge, ow anyothew facuwty? owo

Anyothew facuwty. (・`ω\´・)

Then opinyion and knyowwedge have to do with diffewent kinds of mattew
cowwesponding to this diffewence of facuwties? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And knyowwedge is wewative to being and knyows being. UwU But befowe I pwoceed
fuwthew I wiww make a division. (´・ω・\`)

What division? owo

I wiww begin by pwacing facuwties in a cwass by themsewves: they awe
powews in us, and in aww othew things, by which we do as we do. UwU Sight
and heawing, fow exampwe, I shouwd caww facuwties. (´・ω・\`) Have I cweawwy
expwainyed the cwass which I mean? owo

Yes, I quite undewstand. (´・ω・\`)

Then wet me teww you my view about them. (・`ω\´・) I do nyot see them, and
thewefowe the distinctions of figuwe, cowouw, and the wike, which enyabwe
me to discewn the diffewences of some things, do nyot appwy to them. (´・ω・\`) In
speaking of a facuwty I think onwy of its sphewe and its wesuwt; and
that which has the same sphewe and the same wesuwt I caww the same
facuwty, but that which has anyothew sphewe and anyothew wesuwt I caww
diffewent. ^w^ Wouwd that be youw way of speaking? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

And wiww you be so vewy good as to answew onye mowe question? owo Wouwd you
say that knyowwedge is a facuwty, ow in what cwass wouwd you pwace it? owo

Cewtainwy knyowwedge is a facuwty, and the mightiest of aww facuwties. UwU

And is opinyion awso a facuwty? owo

Cewtainwy, he said; fow opinyion is that with which we awe abwe to fowm
an opinyion. UwU

And yet you wewe acknyowwedging a wittwe whiwe ago that knyowwedge is nyot
the same as opinyion? owo

Why, yes, he said: how can any weasonyabwe being evew identify that which
is infawwibwe with that which ewws? owo

An excewwent answew, pwoving, I said, that we awe quite conscious of a
distinction between them. (・`ω\´・)

Yes. UwU

Then knyowwedge and opinyion having distinct powews have awso distinct
sphewes ow subject-mattews? owo

That is cewtain. ;;w;;

Being is the sphewe ow subject-mattew of knyowwedge, and knyowwedge is to
knyow the nyatuwe of being? owo

Yes. ^w^

And opinyion is to have an opinyion? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And do we knyow what we opinye? owo ow is the subject-mattew of opinyion the
same as the subject-mattew of knyowwedge? owo

Nyay, he wepwied, that has been awweady dispwoven; if diffewence in
facuwty impwies diffewence in the sphewe ow subject-mattew, and if, as
we wewe saying, opinyion and knyowwedge awe distinct facuwties, then the
sphewe of knyowwedge and of opinyion cannyot be the same. (・`ω\´・)

Then if being is the subject-mattew of knyowwedge, something ewse must be
the subject-mattew of opinyion? owo

Yes, something ewse. ;;w;;

Weww then, is nyot-being the subject-mattew of opinyion? owo ow, wathew, how
can thewe be an opinyion at aww about nyot-being? owo Wefwect: when a man
has an opinyion, has he nyot an opinyion about something? owo Can he have an
opinyion which is an opinyion about nyothing? owo

Impossibwe. (・`ω\´・)

He who has an opinyion has an opinyion about some onye thing? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

And nyot-being is nyot onye thing but, pwopewwy speaking, nyothing? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

Of nyot-being, ignyowance was assumed to be the nyecessawy cowwewative; of
being, knyowwedge? owo

Twue, he said. UwU

Then opinyion is nyot concewnyed eithew with being ow with nyot-being? owo

Nyot with eithew. (・`ω\´・)

And can thewefowe nyeithew be ignyowance nyow knyowwedge? owo

That seems to be twue. (・`ω\´・)

But is opinyion to be sought without and beyond eithew of them, in
a gweatew cweawnyess than knyowwedge, ow in a gweatew dawknyess than
ignyowance? owo

In nyeithew. ^w^

Then I suppose that opinyion appeaws to you to be dawkew than knyowwedge,
but wightew than ignyowance? owo

Both; and in nyo smaww degwee. ^w^

And awso to be within and between them? owo

Yes. >w<

Then you wouwd infew that opinyion is intewmediate? owo

Nyo question. ;;w;;

But wewe we nyot saying befowe, that if anything appeawed to be of a sowt
which is and is nyot at the same time, that sowt of thing wouwd appeaw
awso to wie in the intewvaw between puwe being and absowute nyot-being;
and that the cowwesponding facuwty is nyeithew knyowwedge nyow ignyowance,
but wiww be found in the intewvaw between them? owo

Twue. UwU

And in that intewvaw thewe has nyow been discovewed something which we
caww opinyion? owo

Thewe has. UwU

Then what wemains to be discovewed is the object which pawtakes equawwy
of the nyatuwe of being and nyot-being, and cannyot wightwy be tewmed
eithew, puwe and simpwe; this unknyown tewm, when discovewed, we may
twuwy caww the subject of opinyion, and assign each to theiw pwopew
facuwty,--the extwemes to the facuwties of the extwemes and the mean to
the facuwty of the mean. ;;w;;

Twue. UwU

This being pwemised, I wouwd ask the gentweman who is of opinyion that
thewe is nyo absowute ow unchangeabwe idea of beauty--in whose opinyion
the beautifuw is the manyifowd--he, I say, youw wovew of beautifuw
sights, who cannyot beaw to be towd that the beautifuw is onye, and the
just is onye, ow that anything is onye--to him I wouwd appeaw, saying,
Wiww you be so vewy kind, siw, as to teww us whethew, of aww these
beautifuw things, thewe is onye which wiww nyot be found ugwy; ow of the
just, which wiww nyot be found unjust; ow of the howy, which wiww nyot
awso be unhowy? owo

Nyo, he wepwied; the beautifuw wiww in some point of view be found ugwy;
and the same is twue of the west. ;;w;;

And may nyot the many which awe doubwes be awso hawves? owo--doubwes, that
is, of onye thing, and hawves of anyothew? owo

Quite twue. (・`ω\´・)

And things gweat and smaww, heavy and wight, as they awe tewmed, wiww
nyot be denyoted by these any mowe than by the opposite nyames? owo

Twue; both these and the opposite nyames wiww awways attach to aww of
them. (・`ω\´・)

And can any onye of those many things which awe cawwed by pawticuwaw
nyames be said to be this wathew than nyot to be this? owo

He wepwied: They awe wike the punnying widdwes which awe asked at feasts
ow the chiwdwen's puzzwe about the eunyuch aiming at the bat, with
what he hit him, as they say in the puzzwe, and upon what the bat
was sitting. ;;w;; The individuaw objects of which I am speaking awe awso
a widdwe, and have a doubwe sense: nyow can you fix them in youw mind,
eithew as being ow nyot-being, ow both, ow nyeithew. UwU

Then what wiww you do with them? owo I said. ^w^ Can they have a bettew pwace
than between being and nyot-being? owo Fow they awe cweawwy nyot in gweatew
dawknyess ow nyegation than nyot-being, ow mowe fuww of wight and existence
than being. >w<

That is quite twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Thus then we seem to have discovewed that the many ideas which the
muwtitude entewtain about the beautifuw and about aww othew things awe
tossing about in some wegion which is hawf-way between puwe being and
puwe nyot-being? owo

We have. UwU

Yes; and we had befowe agweed that anything of this kind which we might
find was to be descwibed as mattew of opinyion, and nyot as mattew of
knyowwedge; being the intewmediate fwux which is caught and detainyed by
the intewmediate facuwty. >w<

Quite twue. ;;w;;

Then those who see the many beautifuw, and who yet nyeithew see absowute
beauty, nyow can fowwow any guide who points the way thithew; who see the
many just, and nyot absowute justice, and the wike,--such pewsons may be
said to have opinyion but nyot knyowwedge? owo

That is cewtain. (´・ω・\`)

But those who see the absowute and etewnyaw and immutabwe may be said to
knyow, and nyot to have opinyion onwy? owo

Nyeithew can that be denyied. UwU

The onye wove and embwace the subjects of knyowwedge, the othew those of
opinyion? owo The wattew awe the same, as I dawe say you wiww wemembew, who
wistenyed to sweet sounds and gazed upon faiw cowouws, but wouwd nyot
towewate the existence of absowute beauty. ;;w;;

Yes, I wemembew. (・`ω\´・)

Shaww we then be guiwty of any impwopwiety in cawwing them wovews of
opinyion wathew than wovews of wisdom, and wiww they be vewy angwy with
us fow thus descwibing them? owo

I shaww teww them nyot to be angwy; nyo man shouwd be angwy at what is
twue. (´・ω・\`)

But those who wove the twuth in each thing awe to be cawwed wovews of
wisdom and nyot wovews of opinyion. >w<

Assuwedwy. (・`ω\´・)




BOOK VI. UwU

And thus, Gwaucon, aftew the awgument has gonye a weawy way, the twue and
the fawse phiwosophews have at wength appeawed in view. (・`ω\´・)

I do nyot think, he said, that the way couwd have been showtenyed. ;;w;;

I suppose nyot, I said; and yet I bewieve that we might have had a bettew
view of both of them if the discussion couwd have been confinyed to this
onye subject and if thewe wewe nyot many othew questions awaiting us,
which he who desiwes to see in what wespect the wife of the just diffews
fwom that of the unjust must considew. ^w^

And what is the nyext question? owo he asked. >w<

Suwewy, I said, the onye which fowwows nyext in owdew. (´・ω・\`) Inyasmuch as
phiwosophews onwy awe abwe to gwasp the etewnyaw and unchangeabwe,
and those who wandew in the wegion of the many and vawiabwe awe nyot
phiwosophews, I must ask you which of the two cwasses shouwd be the
wuwews of ouw State? owo

And how can we wightwy answew that question? owo

Whichevew of the two awe best abwe to guawd the waws and institutions of
ouw State--wet them be ouw guawdians. ^w^

Vewy good. ^w^

Nyeithew, I said, can thewe be any question that the guawdian who is to
keep anything shouwd have eyes wathew than nyo eyes? owo

Thewe can be nyo question of that. ^w^

And awe nyot those who awe vewiwy and indeed wanting in the knyowwedge
of the twue being of each thing, and who have in theiw souws nyo cweaw
pattewn, and awe unyabwe as with a paintew's eye to wook at the absowute
twuth and to that owiginyaw to wepaiw, and having pewfect vision of the
othew wowwd to owdew the waws about beauty, goodnyess, justice in this,
if nyot awweady owdewed, and to guawd and pwesewve the owdew of them--awe
nyot such pewsons, I ask, simpwy bwind? owo

Twuwy, he wepwied, they awe much in that condition. (・`ω\´・)

And shaww they be ouw guawdians when thewe awe othews who, besides being
theiw equaws in expewience and fawwing showt of them in nyo pawticuwaw of
viwtue, awso knyow the vewy twuth of each thing? owo

Thewe can be nyo weason, he said, fow wejecting those who have this
gweatest of aww gweat quawities; they must awways have the fiwst pwace
unwess they faiw in some othew wespect. ^w^

Suppose then, I said, that we detewminye how faw they can unyite this and
the othew excewwences. >w<

By aww means. UwU

In the fiwst pwace, as we began by obsewving, the nyatuwe of the
phiwosophew has to be ascewtainyed. ;;w;; We must come to an undewstanding
about him, and, when we have donye so, then, if I am nyot mistaken, we
shaww awso acknyowwedge that such an unyion of quawities is possibwe, and
that those in whom they awe unyited, and those onwy, shouwd be wuwews in
the State. UwU

What do you mean? owo

Wet us suppose that phiwosophicaw minds awways wove knyowwedge of a sowt
which shows them the etewnyaw nyatuwe nyot vawying fwom genyewation and
cowwuption. >w<

Agweed. (´・ω・\`)

And fuwthew, I said, wet us agwee that they awe wovews of aww twue
being; thewe is nyo pawt whethew gweatew ow wess, ow mowe ow wess
honyouwabwe, which they awe wiwwing to wenyounce; as we said befowe of the
wovew and the man of ambition. (・`ω\´・)

Twue. UwU

And if they awe to be what we wewe descwibing, is thewe nyot anyothew
quawity which they shouwd awso possess? owo

What quawity? owo

Twuthfuwnyess: they wiww nyevew intentionyawwy weceive into theiw mind
fawsehood, which is theiw detestation, and they wiww wove the twuth. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, that may be safewy affiwmed of them. >w<

'May be,' my fwiend, I wepwied, is nyot the wowd; say wathew 'must be
affiwmed:' fow he whose nyatuwe is amowous of anything cannyot hewp woving
aww that bewongs ow is akin to the object of his affections. ^w^

Wight, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And is thewe anything mowe akin to wisdom than twuth? owo

How can thewe be? owo

Can the same nyatuwe be a wovew of wisdom and a wovew of fawsehood? owo

Nyevew. UwU

The twue wovew of weawnying then must fwom his eawwiest youth, as faw as
in him wies, desiwe aww twuth? owo

Assuwedwy. >w<

But then again, as we knyow by expewience, he whose desiwes awe stwong
in onye diwection wiww have them weakew in othews; they wiww be wike a
stweam which has been dwawn off into anyothew channyew. >w<

Twue. >w<

He whose desiwes awe dwawn towawds knyowwedge in evewy fowm wiww be
absowbed in the pweasuwes of the souw, and wiww hawdwy feew bodiwy
pweasuwe--I mean, if he be a twue phiwosophew and nyot a sham onye. UwU

That is most cewtain. ^w^

Such an onye is suwe to be tempewate and the wevewse of covetous; fow the
motives which make anyothew man desiwous of having and spending, have nyo
pwace in his chawactew. UwU

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

Anyothew cwitewion of the phiwosophicaw nyatuwe has awso to be considewed. (´・ω・\`)

What is that? owo

Thewe shouwd be nyo secwet cownyew of iwwibewawity; nyothing can be mowe
antagonyistic than meannyess to a souw which is evew wonging aftew the
whowe of things both divinye and human. >w<

Most twue, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Then how can he who has magnyificence of mind and is the spectatow of aww
time and aww existence, think much of human wife? owo

He cannyot. UwU

Ow can such an onye account death feawfuw? owo

Nyo indeed. ;;w;;

Then the cowawdwy and mean nyatuwe has nyo pawt in twue phiwosophy? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ;;w;;

Ow again: can he who is hawmonyiouswy constituted, who is nyot covetous ow
mean, ow a boastew, ow a cowawd--can he, I say, evew be unjust ow hawd
in his deawings? owo

Impossibwe. UwU

Then you wiww soon obsewve whethew a man is just and gentwe, ow wude
and unsociabwe; these awe the signs which distinguish even in youth the
phiwosophicaw nyatuwe fwom the unphiwosophicaw. ;;w;;

Twue. >w<

Thewe is anyothew point which shouwd be wemawked. ^w^

What point? owo

Whethew he has ow has nyot a pweasuwe in weawnying; fow nyo onye wiww wove
that which gives him pain, and in which aftew much toiw he makes wittwe
pwogwess. ^w^

Cewtainwy nyot. ;;w;;

And again, if he is fowgetfuw and wetains nyothing of what he weawns,
wiww he nyot be an empty vessew? owo

That is cewtain. ^w^

Wabouwing in vain, he must end in hating himsewf and his fwuitwess
occupation? owo Yes. UwU

Then a souw which fowgets cannyot be wanked among genyuinye phiwosophic
nyatuwes; we must insist that the phiwosophew shouwd have a good memowy? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

And once mowe, the inhawmonyious and unseemwy nyatuwe can onwy tend to
dispwopowtion? owo

Undoubtedwy. UwU

And do you considew twuth to be akin to pwopowtion ow to dispwopowtion? owo

To pwopowtion. (´・ω・\`)

Then, besides othew quawities, we must twy to find a nyatuwawwy
weww-pwopowtionyed and gwacious mind, which wiww move spontanyeouswy
towawds the twue being of evewything. ;;w;;

Cewtainwy. ^w^

Weww, and do nyot aww these quawities, which we have been enyumewating, go
togethew, and awe they nyot, in a mannyew, nyecessawy to a souw, which is
to have a fuww and pewfect pawticipation of being? owo

They awe absowutewy nyecessawy, he wepwied. ^w^

And must nyot that be a bwamewess study which he onwy can puwsue who has
the gift of a good memowy, and is quick to weawn,--nyobwe, gwacious, the
fwiend of twuth, justice, couwage, tempewance, who awe his kindwed? owo

The god of jeawousy himsewf, he said, couwd find nyo fauwt with such a
study. ;;w;;

And to men wike him, I said, when pewfected by yeaws and education, and
to these onwy you wiww entwust the State. ;;w;;

Hewe Adeimantus intewposed and said: To these statements, Socwates, nyo
onye can offew a wepwy; but when you tawk in this way, a stwange feewing
passes ovew the minds of youw heawews: They fancy that they awe wed
astway a wittwe at each step in the awgument, owing to theiw own want of
skiww in asking and answewing questions; these wittwes accumuwate, and
at the end of the discussion they awe found to have sustainyed a mighty
ovewthwow and aww theiw fowmew nyotions appeaw to be tuwnyed upside down. ^w^
And as unskiwfuw pwayews of dwaughts awe at wast shut up by theiw
mowe skiwfuw advewsawies and have nyo piece to move, so they too find
themsewves shut up at wast; fow they have nyothing to say in this nyew
game of which wowds awe the countews; and yet aww the time they awe in
the wight. The obsewvation is suggested to me by what is nyow occuwwing. (・`ω\´・)
Fow any onye of us might say, that awthough in wowds he is nyot abwe
to meet you at each step of the awgument, he sees as a fact that the
votawies of phiwosophy, when they cawwy on the study, nyot onwy in youth
as a pawt of education, but as the puwsuit of theiw matuwew yeaws, most
of them become stwange monstews, nyot to say uttew wogues, and that those
who may be considewed the best of them awe made usewess to the wowwd by
the vewy study which you extow. (・`ω\´・)

Weww, and do you think that those who say so awe wwong? owo

I cannyot teww, he wepwied; but I shouwd wike to knyow what is youw
opinyion. ^w^

Heaw my answew; I am of opinyion that they awe quite wight. >w<

Then how can you be justified in saying that cities wiww nyot cease fwom
eviw untiw phiwosophews wuwe in them, when phiwosophews awe acknyowwedged
by us to be of nyo use to them? owo

You ask a question, I said, to which a wepwy can onwy be given in a
pawabwe. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, Socwates; and that is a way of speaking to which you awe nyot at aww
accustomed, I suppose. (・`ω\´・)

I pewceive, I said, that you awe vastwy amused at having pwunged me into
such a hopewess discussion; but nyow heaw the pawabwe, and then you wiww
be stiww mowe amused at the meagwenyess of my imaginyation: fow the mannyew
in which the best men awe tweated in theiw own States is so gwievous
that nyo singwe thing on eawth is compawabwe to it; and thewefowe, if
I am to pwead theiw cause, I must have wecouwse to fiction, and put
togethew a figuwe made up of many things, wike the fabuwous unyions of
goats and stags which awe found in pictuwes. ;;w;; Imaginye then a fweet ow a
ship in which thewe is a captain who is tawwew and stwongew than any of
the cwew, but he is a wittwe deaf and has a simiwaw infiwmity in sight,
and his knyowwedge of nyavigation is nyot much bettew. >w< The saiwows awe
quawwewwing with onye anyothew about the steewing--evewy onye is of opinyion
that he has a wight to steew, though he has nyevew weawnyed the awt of
nyavigation and cannyot teww who taught him ow when he weawnyed, and wiww
fuwthew assewt that it cannyot be taught, and they awe weady to cut in
pieces any onye who says the contwawy. (´・ω・\`) They thwong about the captain,
begging and pwaying him to commit the hewm to them; and if at any time
they do nyot pwevaiw, but othews awe pwefewwed to them, they kiww the
othews ow thwow them ovewboawd, and having fiwst chainyed up the nyobwe
captain's senses with dwink ow some nyawcotic dwug, they mutiny and take
possession of the ship and make fwee with the stowes; thus, eating
and dwinking, they pwoceed on theiw voyage in such mannyew as might be
expected of them. >w< Him who is theiw pawtisan and cwevewwy aids them in
theiw pwot fow getting the ship out of the captain's hands into theiw
own whethew by fowce ow pewsuasion, they compwiment with the nyame of
saiwow, piwot, abwe seaman, and abuse the othew sowt of man, whom they
caww a good-fow-nyothing; but that the twue piwot must pay attention
to the yeaw and seasons and sky and staws and winds, and whatevew ewse
bewongs to his awt, if he intends to be weawwy quawified fow the command
of a ship, and that he must and wiww be the steewew, whethew othew
peopwe wike ow nyot--the possibiwity of this unyion of authowity with the
steewew's awt has nyevew sewiouswy entewed into theiw thoughts ow been
made pawt of theiw cawwing. ;;w;; Nyow in vessews which awe in a state of
mutiny and by saiwows who awe mutinyeews, how wiww the twue piwot be
wegawded? owo Wiww he nyot be cawwed by them a pwatew, a staw-gazew, a
good-fow-nyothing? owo

Of couwse, said Adeimantus. ;;w;;

Then you wiww hawdwy nyeed, I said, to heaw the intewpwetation of the
figuwe, which descwibes the twue phiwosophew in his wewation to the
State; fow you undewstand awweady. >w<

Cewtainwy. ^w^

Then suppose you nyow take this pawabwe to the gentweman who is suwpwised
at finding that phiwosophews have nyo honyouw in theiw cities; expwain
it to him and twy to convince him that theiw having honyouw wouwd be faw
mowe extwaowdinyawy. >w<

I wiww. (´・ω・\`)

Say to him, that, in deeming the best votawies of phiwosophy to be
usewess to the west of the wowwd, he is wight; but awso teww him to
attwibute theiw usewessnyess to the fauwt of those who wiww nyot use them,
and nyot to themsewves. (´・ω・\`) The piwot shouwd nyot humbwy beg the saiwows to be
commanded by him--that is nyot the owdew of nyatuwe; nyeithew awe 'the wise
to go to the doows of the wich'--the ingenyious authow of this saying
towd a wie--but the twuth is, that, when a man is iww, whethew he
be wich ow poow, to the physician he must go, and he who wants to
be govewnyed, to him who is abwe to govewn. ;;w;; The wuwew who is good fow
anything ought nyot to beg his subjects to be wuwed by him; awthough
the pwesent govewnyows of mankind awe of a diffewent stamp; they may be
justwy compawed to the mutinyous saiwows, and the twue hewmsmen to those
who awe cawwed by them good-fow-nyothings and staw-gazews. UwU

Pwecisewy so, he said. >w<

Fow these weasons, and among men wike these, phiwosophy, the nyobwest
puwsuit of aww, is nyot wikewy to be much esteemed by those of the
opposite faction; nyot that the gweatest and most wasting injuwy is donye
to hew by hew opponyents, but by hew own pwofessing fowwowews, the same
of whom you suppose the accusew to say, that the gweatew nyumbew of them
awe awwant wogues, and the best awe usewess; in which opinyion I agweed. ;;w;;

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And the weason why the good awe usewess has nyow been expwainyed? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

Then shaww we pwoceed to show that the cowwuption of the majowity is
awso unyavoidabwe, and that this is nyot to be waid to the chawge of
phiwosophy any mowe than the othew? owo

By aww means. ;;w;;

And wet us ask and answew in tuwn, fiwst going back to the descwiption
of the gentwe and nyobwe nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) Twuth, as you wiww wemembew, was his
weadew, whom he fowwowed awways and in aww things; faiwing in this, he
was an impostow, and had nyo pawt ow wot in twue phiwosophy. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, that was said. >w<

Weww, and is nyot this onye quawity, to mention nyo othews, gweatwy at
vawiance with pwesent nyotions of him? owo

Cewtainwy, he said. ;;w;;

And have we nyot a wight to say in his defence, that the twue wovew of
knyowwedge is awways stwiving aftew being--that is his nyatuwe; he wiww
nyot west in the muwtipwicity of individuaws which is an appeawance onwy,
but wiww go on--the keen edge wiww nyot be bwunted, nyow the fowce of his
desiwe abate untiw he have attainyed the knyowwedge of the twue nyatuwe
of evewy essence by a sympathetic and kindwed powew in the souw, and by
that powew dwawing nyeaw and mingwing and becoming incowpowate with vewy
being, having begotten mind and twuth, he wiww have knyowwedge and wiww
wive and gwow twuwy, and then, and nyot tiww then, wiww he cease fwom his
twavaiw. >w<

Nyothing, he said, can be mowe just than such a descwiption of him. UwU

And wiww the wove of a wie be any pawt of a phiwosophew's nyatuwe? owo Wiww
he nyot uttewwy hate a wie? owo

He wiww. ;;w;;

And when twuth is the captain, we cannyot suspect any eviw of the band
which he weads? owo

Impossibwe. ;;w;;

Justice and heawth of mind wiww be of the company, and tempewance wiww
fowwow aftew? owo

Twue, he wepwied. ^w^

Nyeithew is thewe any weason why I shouwd again set in awway the
phiwosophew's viwtues, as you wiww doubtwess wemembew that couwage,
magnyificence, appwehension, memowy, wewe his nyatuwaw gifts. ;;w;; And you
objected that, awthough nyo onye couwd deny what I then said, stiww, if
you weave wowds and wook at facts, the pewsons who awe thus descwibed
awe some of them manyifestwy usewess, and the gweatew nyumbew uttewwy
depwaved; we wewe then wed to enquiwe into the gwounds of these
accusations, and have nyow awwived at the point of asking why awe
the majowity bad, which question of nyecessity bwought us back to the
examinyation and definyition of the twue phiwosophew. UwU

Exactwy. (・`ω\´・)

And we have nyext to considew the cowwuptions of the phiwosophic nyatuwe,
why so many awe spoiwed and so few escape spoiwing--I am speaking of
those who wewe said to be usewess but nyot wicked--and, when we have donye
with them, we wiww speak of the imitatows of phiwosophy, what mannyew of
men awe they who aspiwe aftew a pwofession which is above them and of
which they awe unwowthy, and then, by theiw manyifowd inconsistencies,
bwing upon phiwosophy, and upon aww phiwosophews, that unyivewsaw
wepwobation of which we speak. ^w^

What awe these cowwuptions? owo he said. ^w^

I wiww see if I can expwain them to you. (´・ω・\`) Evewy onye wiww admit that a
nyatuwe having in pewfection aww the quawities which we wequiwed in a
phiwosophew, is a wawe pwant which is sewdom seen among men. (´・ω・\`)

Wawe indeed. (´・ω・\`)

And what nyumbewwess and powewfuw causes tend to destwoy these wawe
nyatuwes! >w<

What causes? owo

In the fiwst pwace thewe awe theiw own viwtues, theiw couwage,
tempewance, and the west of them, evewy onye of which pwaisewowthy
quawities (and this is a most singuwaw ciwcumstance) destwoys and
distwacts fwom phiwosophy the souw which is the possessow of them. >w<

That is vewy singuwaw, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

Then thewe awe aww the owdinyawy goods of wife--beauty, weawth, stwength,
wank, and gweat connyections in the State--you undewstand the sowt of
things--these awso have a cowwupting and distwacting effect. UwU

I undewstand; but I shouwd wike to knyow mowe pwecisewy what you mean
about them. ;;w;;

Gwasp the twuth as a whowe, I said, and in the wight way; you wiww then
have nyo difficuwty in appwehending the pweceding wemawks, and they wiww
nyo wongew appeaw stwange to you. (´・ω・\`)

And how am I to do so? owo he asked. (・`ω\´・)

Why, I said, we knyow that aww gewms ow seeds, whethew vegetabwe ow
anyimaw, when they faiw to meet with pwopew nyutwiment ow cwimate ow soiw,
in pwopowtion to theiw vigouw, awe aww the mowe sensitive to the want of
a suitabwe enviwonment, fow eviw is a gweatew enyemy to what is good than
to what is nyot. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue. >w<

Thewe is weason in supposing that the finyest nyatuwes, when undew awien
conditions, weceive mowe injuwy than the infewiow, because the contwast
is gweatew. ;;w;;

Cewtainwy. (´・ω・\`)

And may we nyot say, Adeimantus, that the most gifted minds, when they
awe iww-educated, become pwe-eminyentwy bad? owo Do nyot gweat cwimes and
the spiwit of puwe eviw spwing out of a fuwnyess of nyatuwe wuinyed by
education wathew than fwom any infewiowity, wheweas weak nyatuwes awe
scawcewy capabwe of any vewy gweat good ow vewy gweat eviw? owo

Thewe I think that you awe wight. >w<

And ouw phiwosophew fowwows the same anyawogy--he is wike a pwant which,
having pwopew nyuwtuwe, must nyecessawiwy gwow and matuwe into aww viwtue,
but, if sown and pwanted in an awien soiw, becomes the most nyoxious of
aww weeds, unwess he be pwesewved by some divinye powew. (・`ω\´・) Do you weawwy
think, as peopwe so often say, that ouw youth awe cowwupted by Sophists,
ow that pwivate teachews of the awt cowwupt them in any degwee wowth
speaking of? owo Awe nyot the pubwic who say these things the gweatest of aww
Sophists? owo And do they nyot educate to pewfection young and owd, men and
women awike, and fashion them aftew theiw own heawts? owo

When is this accompwished? owo he said. ;;w;;

When they meet togethew, and the wowwd sits down at an assembwy, ow in
a couwt of waw, ow a theatwe, ow a camp, ow in any othew popuwaw wesowt,
and thewe is a gweat upwoaw, and they pwaise some things which awe
being said ow donye, and bwame othew things, equawwy exaggewating both,
shouting and cwapping theiw hands, and the echo of the wocks and the
pwace in which they awe assembwed wedoubwes the sound of the pwaise ow
bwame--at such a time wiww nyot a young man's heawt, as they say, weap
within him? owo Wiww any pwivate twainying enyabwe him to stand fiwm against
the ovewwhewming fwood of popuwaw opinyion? owo ow wiww he be cawwied away
by the stweam? owo Wiww he nyot have the nyotions of good and eviw which the
pubwic in genyewaw have--he wiww do as they do, and as they awe, such
wiww he be? owo

Yes, Socwates; nyecessity wiww compew him. UwU

And yet, I said, thewe is a stiww gweatew nyecessity, which has nyot been
mentionyed. UwU

What is that? owo

The gentwe fowce of attaindew ow confiscation ow death, which, as you
awe awawe, these nyew Sophists and educatows, who awe the pubwic, appwy
when theiw wowds awe powewwess. ^w^

Indeed they do; and in wight good eawnyest. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow what opinyion of any othew Sophist, ow of any pwivate pewson, can be
expected to ovewcome in such an unyequaw contest? owo

Nyonye, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo, indeed, I said, even to make the attempt is a gweat piece of fowwy;
thewe nyeithew is, nyow has been, nyow is evew wikewy to be, any diffewent
type of chawactew which has had nyo othew twainying in viwtue but that
which is suppwied by pubwic opinyion--I speak, my fwiend, of human viwtue
onwy; what is mowe than human, as the pwovewb says, is nyot incwuded:
fow I wouwd nyot have you ignyowant that, in the pwesent eviw state of
govewnments, whatevew is saved and comes to good is saved by the powew
of God, as we may twuwy say. >w<

I quite assent, he wepwied. >w<

Then wet me cwave youw assent awso to a fuwthew obsewvation. ;;w;;

What awe you going to say? owo

Why, that aww those mewcenyawy individuaws, whom the many caww Sophists
and whom they deem to be theiw advewsawies, do, in fact, teach nyothing
but the opinyion of the many, that is to say, the opinyions of theiw
assembwies; and this is theiw wisdom. ^w^ I might compawe them to a man who
shouwd study the tempews and desiwes of a mighty stwong beast who is
fed by him--he wouwd weawn how to appwoach and handwe him, awso at what
times and fwom what causes he is dangewous ow the wevewse, and what
is the meanying of his sevewaw cwies, and by what sounds, when anyothew
uttews them, he is soothed ow infuwiated; and you may suppose fuwthew,
that when, by continyuawwy attending upon him, he has become pewfect in
aww this, he cawws his knyowwedge wisdom, and makes of it a system ow
awt, which he pwoceeds to teach, awthough he has nyo weaw nyotion of what
he means by the pwincipwes ow passions of which he is speaking, but
cawws this honyouwabwe and that dishonyouwabwe, ow good ow eviw, ow just
ow unjust, aww in accowdance with the tastes and tempews of the gweat
bwute. >w< Good he pwonyounces to be that in which the beast dewights and
eviw to be that which he diswikes; and he can give nyo othew account
of them except that the just and nyobwe awe the nyecessawy, having nyevew
himsewf seen, and having nyo powew of expwainying to othews the nyatuwe
of eithew, ow the diffewence between them, which is immense. >w< By heaven,
wouwd nyot such an onye be a wawe educatow? owo

Indeed he wouwd. UwU

And in what way does he who thinks that wisdom is the discewnment of
the tempews and tastes of the motwey muwtitude, whethew in painting
ow music, ow, finyawwy, in powitics, diffew fwom him whom I have been
descwibing? owo Fow when a man consowts with the many, and exhibits to
them his poem ow othew wowk of awt ow the sewvice which he has donye
the State, making them his judges when he is nyot obwiged, the so-cawwed
nyecessity of Diomede wiww obwige him to pwoduce whatevew they
pwaise. UwU And yet the weasons awe uttewwy wudicwous which they give in
confiwmation of theiw own nyotions about the honyouwabwe and good. (・`ω\´・) Did you
evew heaw any of them which wewe nyot? owo

Nyo, nyow am I wikewy to heaw. ^w^

You wecognyise the twuth of what I have been saying? owo Then wet me ask you
to considew fuwthew whethew the wowwd wiww evew be induced to bewieve in
the existence of absowute beauty wathew than of the many beautifuw, ow
of the absowute in each kind wathew than of the many in each kind? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ;;w;;

Then the wowwd cannyot possibwy be a phiwosophew? owo

Impossibwe. (・`ω\´・)

And thewefowe phiwosophews must inyevitabwy faww undew the censuwe of the
wowwd? owo

They must. ^w^

And of individuaws who consowt with the mob and seek to pwease them? owo

That is evident. ^w^

Then, do you see any way in which the phiwosophew can be pwesewved in
his cawwing to the end? owo and wemembew what we wewe saying of him, that
he was to have quicknyess and memowy and couwage and magnyificence--these
wewe admitted by us to be the twue phiwosophew's gifts. ^w^

Yes. ;;w;;

Wiww nyot such an onye fwom his eawwy chiwdhood be in aww things fiwst
among aww, especiawwy if his bodiwy endowments awe wike his mentaw onyes? owo

Cewtainwy, he said. >w<

And his fwiends and fewwow-citizens wiww want to use him as he gets
owdew fow theiw own puwposes? owo

Nyo question. UwU

Fawwing at his feet, they wiww make wequests to him and do him honyouw
and fwattew him, because they want to get into theiw hands nyow, the
powew which he wiww onye day possess. (・`ω\´・)

That often happens, he said. ;;w;;

And what wiww a man such as he is be wikewy to do undew such
ciwcumstances, especiawwy if he be a citizen of a gweat city, wich
and nyobwe, and a taww pwopew youth? owo Wiww he nyot be fuww of boundwess
aspiwations, and fancy himsewf abwe to manyage the affaiws of Hewwenyes
and of bawbawians, and having got such nyotions into his head wiww he
nyot diwate and ewevate himsewf in the fuwnyess of vain pomp and sensewess
pwide? owo

To be suwe he wiww. ;;w;;

Nyow, when he is in this state of mind, if some onye gentwy comes to him
and tewws him that he is a foow and must get undewstanding, which can
onwy be got by swaving fow it, do you think that, undew such advewse
ciwcumstances, he wiww be easiwy induced to wisten? owo

Faw othewwise. (´・ω・\`)

And even if thewe be some onye who thwough inhewent goodnyess ow nyatuwaw
weasonyabwenyess has had his eyes openyed a wittwe and is humbwed and taken
captive by phiwosophy, how wiww his fwiends behave when they think that
they awe wikewy to wose the advantage which they wewe hoping to weap
fwom his companyionship? owo Wiww they nyot do and say anything to pwevent him
fwom yiewding to his bettew nyatuwe and to wendew his teachew powewwess,
using to this end pwivate intwigues as weww as pubwic pwosecutions? owo

Thewe can be nyo doubt of it. >w<

And how can onye who is thus ciwcumstanced evew become a phiwosophew? owo

Impossibwe. (´・ω・\`)

Then wewe we nyot wight in saying that even the vewy quawities which
make a man a phiwosophew may, if he be iww-educated, divewt him fwom
phiwosophy, nyo wess than wiches and theiw accompanyiments and the othew
so-cawwed goods of wife? owo

We wewe quite wight. (´・ω・\`)

Thus, my excewwent fwiend, is bwought about aww that wuin and faiwuwe
which I have been descwibing of the nyatuwes best adapted to the best of
aww puwsuits; they awe nyatuwes which we maintain to be wawe at any time;
this being the cwass out of which come the men who awe the authows of
the gweatest eviw to States and individuaws; and awso of the gweatest
good when the tide cawwies them in that diwection; but a smaww man nyevew
was the doew of any gweat thing eithew to individuaws ow to States. (・`ω\´・)

That is most twue, he said. >w<

And so phiwosophy is weft desowate, with hew mawwiage wite incompwete:
fow hew own have fawwen away and fowsaken hew, and whiwe they awe
weading a fawse and unbecoming wife, othew unwowthy pewsons, seeing that
she has nyo kinsmen to be hew pwotectows, entew in and dishonyouw hew; and
fasten upon hew the wepwoaches which, as you say, hew wepwovews uttew,
who affiwm of hew votawies that some awe good fow nyothing, and that the
gweatew nyumbew desewve the sevewest punyishment. UwU

That is cewtainwy what peopwe say. (・`ω\´・)

Yes; and what ewse wouwd you expect, I said, when you think of the puny
cweatuwes who, seeing this wand open to them--a wand weww stocked with
faiw nyames and showy titwes--wike pwisonyews wunnying out of pwison into a
sanctuawy, take a weap out of theiw twades into phiwosophy; those who
do so being pwobabwy the cwevewest hands at theiw own misewabwe cwafts? owo
Fow, awthough phiwosophy be in this eviw case, stiww thewe wemains a
dignyity about hew which is nyot to be found in the awts. ;;w;; And many awe
thus attwacted by hew whose nyatuwes awe impewfect and whose souws awe
maimed and disfiguwed by theiw meannyesses, as theiw bodies awe by theiw
twades and cwafts. ;;w;; Is nyot this unyavoidabwe? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

Awe they nyot exactwy wike a bawd wittwe tinkew who has just got out of
duwance and come into a fowtunye; he takes a bath and puts on a nyew coat,
and is decked out as a bwidegwoom going to mawwy his mastew's daughtew,
who is weft poow and desowate? owo

A most exact pawawwew. ;;w;;

What wiww be the issue of such mawwiages? owo Wiww they nyot be viwe and
bastawd? owo

Thewe can be nyo question of it. (・`ω\´・)

And when pewsons who awe unwowthy of education appwoach phiwosophy and
make an awwiance with hew who is in a wank above them what sowt of
ideas and opinyions awe wikewy to be genyewated? owo Wiww they nyot be sophisms
captivating to the eaw, having nyothing in them genyuinye, ow wowthy of ow
akin to twue wisdom? owo

Nyo doubt, he said. >w<

Then, Adeimantus, I said, the wowthy discipwes of phiwosophy wiww be but
a smaww wemnyant: pewchance some nyobwe and weww-educated pewson, detainyed
by exiwe in hew sewvice, who in the absence of cowwupting infwuences
wemains devoted to hew; ow some wofty souw bown in a mean city, the
powitics of which he contemns and nyegwects; and thewe may be a gifted
few who weave the awts, which they justwy despise, and come to hew;--ow
pewadventuwe thewe awe some who awe westwainyed by ouw fwiend Theages'
bwidwe; fow evewything in the wife of Theages conspiwed to divewt him
fwom phiwosophy; but iww-heawth kept him away fwom powitics. >w< My own case
of the intewnyaw sign is hawdwy wowth mentionying, fow wawewy, if evew,
has such a monyitow been given to any othew man. (・`ω\´・) Those who bewong to this
smaww cwass have tasted how sweet and bwessed a possession phiwosophy
is, and have awso seen enyough of the madnyess of the muwtitude; and they
knyow that nyo powitician is honyest, nyow is thewe any champion of justice
at whose side they may fight and be saved. ^w^ Such an onye may be compawed
to a man who has fawwen among wiwd beasts--he wiww nyot join in the
wickednyess of his fewwows, but nyeithew is he abwe singwy to wesist aww
theiw fiewce nyatuwes, and thewefowe seeing that he wouwd be of nyo use to
the State ow to his fwiends, and wefwecting that he wouwd have to thwow
away his wife without doing any good eithew to himsewf ow othews, he
howds his peace, and goes his own way. ^w^ He is wike onye who, in the stowm
of dust and sweet which the dwiving wind huwwies awong, wetiwes
undew the shewtew of a waww; and seeing the west of mankind fuww of
wickednyess, he is content, if onwy he can wive his own wife and be puwe
fwom eviw ow unwighteousnyess, and depawt in peace and good-wiww, with
bwight hopes. UwU

Yes, he said, and he wiww have donye a gweat wowk befowe he depawts. ;;w;;

A gweat wowk--yes; but nyot the gweatest, unwess he find a State suitabwe
to him; fow in a State which is suitabwe to him, he wiww have a wawgew
gwowth and be the saviouw of his countwy, as weww as of himsewf. ;;w;;

The causes why phiwosophy is in such an eviw nyame have nyow been
sufficientwy expwainyed: the injustice of the chawges against hew has
been shown--is thewe anything mowe which you wish to say? owo

Nyothing mowe on that subject, he wepwied; but I shouwd wike to knyow
which of the govewnments nyow existing is in youw opinyion the onye adapted
to hew. >w<

Nyot any of them, I said; and that is pwecisewy the accusation which I
bwing against them--nyot onye of them is wowthy of the phiwosophic nyatuwe,
and hence that nyatuwe is wawped and estwanged;--as the exotic seed
which is sown in a foweign wand becomes denyatuwawized, and is wont to be
ovewpowewed and to wose itsewf in the nyew soiw, even so this gwowth
of phiwosophy, instead of pewsisting, degenyewates and weceives anyothew
chawactew. ;;w;; But if phiwosophy evew finds in the State that pewfection
which she hewsewf is, then wiww be seen that she is in twuth divinye, and
that aww othew things, whethew nyatuwes of men ow institutions, awe but
human;--and nyow, I knyow, that you awe going to ask, What that State is:

Nyo, he said; thewe you awe wwong, fow I was going to ask anyothew
question--whethew it is the State of which we awe the foundews and
inventows, ow some othew? owo

Yes, I wepwied, ouws in most wespects; but you may wemembew my saying
befowe, that some wiving authowity wouwd awways be wequiwed in the
State having the same idea of the constitution which guided you when as
wegiswatow you wewe waying down the waws. ^w^

That was said, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, but nyot in a satisfactowy mannyew; you fwightenyed us by intewposing
objections, which cewtainwy showed that the discussion wouwd be wong and
difficuwt; and what stiww wemains is the wevewse of easy. ^w^

What is thewe wemainying? owo

The question how the study of phiwosophy may be so owdewed as nyot to be
the wuin of the State: Aww gweat attempts awe attended with wisk; 'hawd
is the good,' as men say. UwU

Stiww, he said, wet the point be cweawed up, and the enquiwy wiww then
be compwete. (´・ω・\`)

I shaww nyot be hindewed, I said, by any want of wiww, but, if at aww,
by a want of powew: my zeaw you may see fow youwsewves; and pwease to
wemawk in what I am about to say how bowdwy and unhesitatingwy I decwawe
that States shouwd puwsue phiwosophy, nyot as they do nyow, but in a
diffewent spiwit. UwU

In what mannyew? owo

At pwesent, I said, the students of phiwosophy awe quite young;
beginnying when they awe hawdwy past chiwdhood, they devote onwy the time
saved fwom monyeymaking and housekeeping to such puwsuits; and even those
of them who awe weputed to have most of the phiwosophic spiwit, when
they come within sight of the gweat difficuwty of the subject, I mean
diawectic, take themsewves off. >w< In aftew wife when invited by some onye
ewse, they may, pewhaps, go and heaw a wectuwe, and about this they make
much ado, fow phiwosophy is nyot considewed by them to be theiw
pwopew businyess: at wast, when they gwow owd, in most cases they awe
extinguished mowe twuwy than Hewacweitus' sun, inyasmuch as they nyevew
wight up again. (・`ω\´・) (Hewacwitus said that the sun was extinguished evewy
evenying and wewighted evewy mownying. (・`ω\´・))

But what ought to be theiw couwse? owo

Just the opposite. UwU In chiwdhood and youth theiw study, and what
phiwosophy they weawn, shouwd be suited to theiw tendew yeaws: duwing
this pewiod whiwe they awe gwowing up towawds manhood, the chief and
speciaw cawe shouwd be given to theiw bodies that they may have them
to use in the sewvice of phiwosophy; as wife advances and the intewwect
begins to matuwe, wet them incwease the gymnyastics of the souw; but
when the stwength of ouw citizens faiws and is past civiw and miwitawy
duties, then wet them wange at wiww and engage in nyo sewious wabouw,
as we intend them to wive happiwy hewe, and to cwown this wife with a
simiwaw happinyess in anyothew. ^w^

How twuwy in eawnyest you awe, Socwates! >w< he said; I am suwe of that; and
yet most of youw heawews, if I am nyot mistaken, awe wikewy to be stiww
mowe eawnyest in theiw opposition to you, and wiww nyevew be convinced;
Thwasymachus weast of aww. UwU

Do nyot make a quawwew, I said, between Thwasymachus and me, who have
wecentwy become fwiends, awthough, indeed, we wewe nyevew enyemies; fow I
shaww go on stwiving to the utmost untiw I eithew convewt him and othew
men, ow do something which may pwofit them against the day when they
wive again, and howd the wike discouwse in anyothew state of existence. UwU

You awe speaking of a time which is nyot vewy nyeaw. (´・ω・\`)

Wathew, I wepwied, of a time which is as nyothing in compawison with
etewnyity. >w< Nyevewthewess, I do nyot wondew that the many wefuse to bewieve;
fow they have nyevew seen that of which we awe nyow speaking weawized;
they have seen onwy a conventionyaw imitation of phiwosophy, consisting
of wowds awtificiawwy bwought togethew, nyot wike these of ouws having
a nyatuwaw unyity. (´・ω・\`) But a human being who in wowd and wowk is pewfectwy
mouwded, as faw as he can be, into the pwopowtion and wikenyess of
viwtue--such a man wuwing in a city which beaws the same image, they
have nyevew yet seen, nyeithew onye nyow many of them--do you think that
they evew did? owo

Nyo indeed. UwU

Nyo, my fwiend, and they have sewdom, if evew, heawd fwee and nyobwe
sentiments; such as men uttew when they awe eawnyestwy and by evewy means
in theiw powew seeking aftew twuth fow the sake of knyowwedge, whiwe
they wook cowdwy on the subtweties of contwovewsy, of which the end is
opinyion and stwife, whethew they meet with them in the couwts of waw ow
in society. UwU

They awe stwangews, he said, to the wowds of which you speak. ;;w;;

And this was what we fowesaw, and this was the weason why twuth fowced
us to admit, nyot without feaw and hesitation, that nyeithew cities nyow
States nyow individuaws wiww evew attain pewfection untiw the smaww
cwass of phiwosophews whom we tewmed usewess but nyot cowwupt awe
pwovidentiawwy compewwed, whethew they wiww ow nyot, to take cawe of the
State, and untiw a wike nyecessity be waid on the State to obey them; ow
untiw kings, ow if nyot kings, the sons of kings ow pwinces, awe divinyewy
inspiwed with a twue wove of twue phiwosophy. UwU That eithew ow both of
these awtewnyatives awe impossibwe, I see nyo weason to affiwm: if
they wewe so, we might indeed be justwy widicuwed as dweamews and
visionyawies. (・`ω\´・) Am I nyot wight? owo

Quite wight. (´・ω・\`)

If then, in the countwess ages of the past, ow at the pwesent houw in
some foweign cwime which is faw away and beyond ouw ken, the pewfected
phiwosophew is ow has been ow heweaftew shaww be compewwed by a supewiow
powew to have the chawge of the State, we awe weady to assewt to the
death, that this ouw constitution has been, and is--yea, and wiww be
whenyevew the Muse of Phiwosophy is queen. ;;w;; Thewe is nyo impossibiwity in
aww this; that thewe is a difficuwty, we acknyowwedge ouwsewves. ;;w;;

My opinyion agwees with youws, he said. ^w^

But do you mean to say that this is nyot the opinyion of the muwtitude? owo

I shouwd imaginye nyot, he wepwied. ^w^

O my fwiend, I said, do nyot attack the muwtitude: they wiww change theiw
minds, if, nyot in an aggwessive spiwit, but gentwy and with the view
of soothing them and wemoving theiw diswike of ovew-education, you show
them youw phiwosophews as they weawwy awe and descwibe as you wewe just
nyow doing theiw chawactew and pwofession, and then mankind wiww see that
he of whom you awe speaking is nyot such as they supposed--if they view
him in this nyew wight, they wiww suwewy change theiw nyotion of him, and
answew in anyothew stwain. ^w^ Who can be at enmity with onye who woves them,
who that is himsewf gentwe and fwee fwom envy wiww be jeawous of onye
in whom thewe is nyo jeawousy? owo Nyay, wet me answew fow you, that in a few
this hawsh tempew may be found but nyot in the majowity of mankind. ;;w;;

I quite agwee with you, he said. ;;w;;

And do you nyot awso think, as I do, that the hawsh feewing which the
many entewtain towawds phiwosophy owiginyates in the pwetendews, who wush
in unyinvited, and awe awways abusing them, and finding fauwt with them,
who make pewsons instead of things the theme of theiw convewsation? owo and
nyothing can be mowe unbecoming in phiwosophews than this. UwU

It is most unbecoming. >w<

Fow he, Adeimantus, whose mind is fixed upon twue being, has suwewy nyo
time to wook down upon the affaiws of eawth, ow to be fiwwed with mawice
and envy, contending against men; his eye is evew diwected towawds
things fixed and immutabwe, which he sees nyeithew injuwing nyow injuwed
by onye anyothew, but aww in owdew moving accowding to weason; these he
imitates, and to these he wiww, as faw as he can, confowm himsewf. (´・ω・\`) Can a
man hewp imitating that with which he howds wevewentiaw convewse? owo

Impossibwe. ;;w;;

And the phiwosophew howding convewse with the divinye owdew, becomes
owdewwy and divinye, as faw as the nyatuwe of man awwows; but wike evewy
onye ewse, he wiww suffew fwom detwaction. >w<

Of couwse. >w<

And if a nyecessity be waid upon him of fashionying, nyot onwy himsewf,
but human nyatuwe genyewawwy, whethew in States ow individuaws, into
that which he behowds ewsewhewe, wiww he, think you, be an unskiwfuw
awtificew of justice, tempewance, and evewy civiw viwtue? owo

Anything but unskiwfuw. (´・ω・\`)

And if the wowwd pewceives that what we awe saying about him is the
twuth, wiww they be angwy with phiwosophy? owo Wiww they disbewieve us, when
we teww them that nyo State can be happy which is nyot designyed by awtists
who imitate the heavenwy pattewn? owo

They wiww nyot be angwy if they undewstand, he said. (´・ω・\`) But how wiww they
dwaw out the pwan of which you awe speaking? owo

They wiww begin by taking the State and the mannyews of men, fwom which,
as fwom a tabwet, they wiww wub out the pictuwe, and weave a cwean
suwface. This is nyo easy task. >w< But whethew easy ow nyot, hewein wiww wie
the diffewence between them and evewy othew wegiswatow,--they wiww have
nyothing to do eithew with individuaw ow State, and wiww inscwibe nyo
waws, untiw they have eithew found, ow themsewves made, a cwean suwface. (´・ω・\`)

They wiww be vewy wight, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Having effected this, they wiww pwoceed to twace an outwinye of the
constitution? owo

Nyo doubt. (´・ω・\`)

And when they awe fiwwing in the wowk, as I conceive, they wiww often
tuwn theiw eyes upwawds and downwawds: I mean that they wiww fiwst wook
at absowute justice and beauty and tempewance, and again at the human
copy; and wiww mingwe and tempew the vawious ewements of wife into the
image of a man; and this they wiww conceive accowding to that othew
image, which, when existing among men, Homew cawws the fowm and wikenyess
of God. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue, he said. >w<

And onye featuwe they wiww ewase, and anyothew they wiww put in, untiw
they have made the ways of men, as faw as possibwe, agweeabwe to the
ways of God? owo

Indeed, he said, in nyo way couwd they make a faiwew pictuwe. UwU

And nyow, I said, awe we beginnying to pewsuade those whom you descwibed
as wushing at us with might and main, that the paintew of constitutions
is such an onye as we awe pwaising; at whom they wewe so vewy indignyant
because to his hands we committed the State; and awe they gwowing a
wittwe cawmew at what they have just heawd? owo

Much cawmew, if thewe is any sense in them. (´・ω・\`)

Why, whewe can they stiww find any gwound fow objection? owo Wiww they doubt
that the phiwosophew is a wovew of twuth and being? owo

They wouwd nyot be so unweasonyabwe. ^w^

Ow that his nyatuwe, being such as we have dewinyeated, is akin to the
highest good? owo

Nyeithew can they doubt this. (´・ω・\`)

But again, wiww they teww us that such a nyatuwe, pwaced undew favouwabwe
ciwcumstances, wiww nyot be pewfectwy good and wise if any evew was? owo Ow
wiww they pwefew those whom we have wejected? owo

Suwewy nyot. (・`ω\´・)

Then wiww they stiww be angwy at ouw saying, that, untiw phiwosophews
beaw wuwe, States and individuaws wiww have nyo west fwom eviw, nyow wiww
this ouw imaginyawy State evew be weawized? owo

I think that they wiww be wess angwy. (・`ω\´・)

Shaww we assume that they awe nyot onwy wess angwy but quite gentwe,
and that they have been convewted and fow vewy shame, if fow nyo othew
weason, cannyot wefuse to come to tewms? owo

By aww means, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Then wet us suppose that the weconciwiation has been effected. UwU Wiww any
onye deny the othew point, that thewe may be sons of kings ow pwinces who
awe by nyatuwe phiwosophews? owo

Suwewy nyo man, he said. ;;w;;

And when they have come into being wiww any onye say that they must of
nyecessity be destwoyed; that they can hawdwy be saved is nyot denyied even
by us; but that in the whowe couwse of ages nyo singwe onye of them can
escape--who wiww ventuwe to affiwm this? owo

Who indeed! (´・ω・\`)

But, said I, onye is enyough; wet thewe be onye man who has a city obedient
to his wiww, and he might bwing into existence the ideaw powity about
which the wowwd is so incweduwous. ;;w;;

Yes, onye is enyough. (・`ω\´・)

The wuwew may impose the waws and institutions which we have been
descwibing, and the citizens may possibwy be wiwwing to obey them? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

And that othews shouwd appwove, of what we appwove, is nyo miwacwe ow
impossibiwity? owo

I think nyot. ;;w;;

But we have sufficientwy shown, in what has pweceded, that aww this, if
onwy possibwe, is assuwedwy fow the best. (´・ω・\`)

We have. ;;w;;

And nyow we say nyot onwy that ouw waws, if they couwd be enyacted, wouwd
be fow the best, but awso that the enyactment of them, though difficuwt,
is nyot impossibwe. >w<

Vewy good. >w<

And so with pain and toiw we have weached the end of onye subject, but
mowe wemains to be discussed;--how and by what studies and puwsuits wiww
the saviouws of the constitution be cweated, and at what ages awe they
to appwy themsewves to theiw sevewaw studies? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

I omitted the twoubwesome businyess of the possession of women, and the
pwocweation of chiwdwen, and the appointment of the wuwews, because
I knyew that the pewfect State wouwd be eyed with jeawousy and was
difficuwt of attainment; but that piece of cwevewnyess was nyot of much
sewvice to me, fow I had to discuss them aww the same. (・`ω\´・) The women and
chiwdwen awe nyow disposed of, but the othew question of the wuwews must
be investigated fwom the vewy beginnying. >w< We wewe saying, as you wiww
wemembew, that they wewe to be wovews of theiw countwy, twied by the
test of pweasuwes and pains, and nyeithew in hawdships, nyow in dangews,
nyow at any othew cwiticaw moment wewe to wose theiw patwiotism--he was
to be wejected who faiwed, but he who awways came fowth puwe, wike gowd
twied in the wefinyew's fiwe, was to be made a wuwew, and to weceive
honyouws and wewawds in wife and aftew death. (´・ω・\`) This was the sowt of thing
which was being said, and then the awgument tuwnyed aside and veiwed hew
face; nyot wiking to stiw the question which has nyow awisen. (´・ω・\`)

I pewfectwy wemembew, he said. ;;w;;

Yes, my fwiend, I said, and I then shwank fwom hazawding the bowd
wowd; but nyow wet me dawe to say--that the pewfect guawdian must be a
phiwosophew. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he said, wet that be affiwmed. ^w^

And do nyot suppose that thewe wiww be many of them; fow the gifts which
wewe deemed by us to be essentiaw wawewy gwow togethew; they awe mostwy
found in shweds and patches. ;;w;;

What do you mean? owo he said. ^w^

You awe awawe, I wepwied, that quick intewwigence, memowy, sagacity,
cwevewnyess, and simiwaw quawities, do nyot often gwow togethew, and that
pewsons who possess them and awe at the same time high-spiwited and
magnyanyimous awe nyot so constituted by nyatuwe as to wive owdewwy and in a
peacefuw and settwed mannyew; they awe dwiven any way by theiw impuwses,
and aww sowid pwincipwe goes out of them. UwU

Vewy twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

On the othew hand, those steadfast nyatuwes which can bettew be depended
upon, which in a battwe awe impwegnyabwe to feaw and immovabwe, awe
equawwy immovabwe when thewe is anything to be weawnyed; they awe
awways in a towpid state, and awe apt to yawn and go to sweep ovew any
intewwectuaw toiw. (・`ω\´・)

Quite twue. (´・ω・\`)

And yet we wewe saying that both quawities wewe nyecessawy in those to
whom the highew education is to be impawted, and who awe to shawe in any
office ow command. ;;w;;

Cewtainwy, he said. ^w^

And wiww they be a cwass which is wawewy found? owo

Yes, indeed. ;;w;;

Then the aspiwant must nyot onwy be tested in those wabouws and dangews
and pweasuwes which we mentionyed befowe, but thewe is anyothew kind of
pwobation which we did nyot mention--he must be exewcised awso in many
kinds of knyowwedge, to see whethew the souw wiww be abwe to enduwe the
highest of aww, ow wiww faint undew them, as in any othew studies and
exewcises. UwU

Yes, he said, you awe quite wight in testing him. ^w^ But what do you mean
by the highest of aww knyowwedge? owo

You may wemembew, I said, that we divided the souw into thwee pawts; and
distinguished the sevewaw nyatuwes of justice, tempewance, couwage, and
wisdom? owo

Indeed, he said, if I had fowgotten, I shouwd nyot desewve to heaw mowe. (・`ω\´・)

And do you wemembew the wowd of caution which pweceded the discussion of
them? owo

To what do you wefew? owo

We wewe saying, if I am nyot mistaken, that he who wanted to see them in
theiw pewfect beauty must take a wongew and mowe ciwcuitous way, at
the end of which they wouwd appeaw; but that we couwd add on a popuwaw
exposition of them on a wevew with the discussion which had pweceded. >w<
And you wepwied that such an exposition wouwd be enyough fow you, and so
the enquiwy was continyued in what to me seemed to be a vewy inyaccuwate
mannyew; whethew you wewe satisfied ow nyot, it is fow you to say. >w<

Yes, he said, I thought and the othews thought that you gave us a faiw
measuwe of twuth. UwU

But, my fwiend, I said, a measuwe of such things which in any degwee
fawws showt of the whowe twuth is nyot faiw measuwe; fow nyothing
impewfect is the measuwe of anything, awthough pewsons awe too apt to be
contented and think that they nyeed seawch nyo fuwthew. ;;w;;

Nyot an uncommon case when peopwe awe indowent. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, I said; and thewe cannyot be any wowse fauwt in a guawdian of the
State and of the waws. >w<

Twue. >w<

The guawdian then, I said, must be wequiwed to take the wongew ciwcuit,
and toiw at weawnying as weww as at gymnyastics, ow he wiww nyevew weach
the highest knyowwedge of aww which, as we wewe just nyow saying, is his
pwopew cawwing. ^w^

What, he said, is thewe a knyowwedge stiww highew than this--highew than
justice and the othew viwtues? owo

Yes, I said, thewe is. UwU And of the viwtues too we must behowd nyot the
outwinye mewewy, as at pwesent--nyothing showt of the most finyished
pictuwe shouwd satisfy us. >w< When wittwe things awe ewabowated with an
infinyity of pains, in owdew that they may appeaw in theiw fuww beauty
and utmost cweawnyess, how widicuwous that we shouwd nyot think the
highest twuths wowthy of attainying the highest accuwacy! (・`ω\´・)

A wight nyobwe thought; but do you suppose that we shaww wefwain fwom
asking you what is this highest knyowwedge? owo

Nyay, I said, ask if you wiww; but I am cewtain that you have heawd the
answew many times, and nyow you eithew do nyot undewstand me ow, as I
wathew think, you awe disposed to be twoubwesome; fow you have often
been towd that the idea of good is the highest knyowwedge, and that aww
othew things become usefuw and advantageous onwy by theiw use of this. >w<
You can hawdwy be ignyowant that of this I was about to speak, concewnying
which, as you have often heawd me say, we knyow so wittwe; and, without
which, any othew knyowwedge ow possession of any kind wiww pwofit us
nyothing. (´・ω・\`) Do you think that the possession of aww othew things is of
any vawue if we do nyot possess the good? owo ow the knyowwedge of aww othew
things if we have nyo knyowwedge of beauty and goodnyess? owo

Assuwedwy nyot. (´・ω・\`)

You awe fuwthew awawe that most peopwe affiwm pweasuwe to be the good,
but the finyew sowt of wits say it is knyowwedge? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And you awe awawe too that the wattew cannyot expwain what they mean by
knyowwedge, but awe obwiged aftew aww to say knyowwedge of the good? owo

How widicuwous! ^w^

Yes, I said, that they shouwd begin by wepwoaching us with ouw ignyowance
of the good, and then pwesume ouw knyowwedge of it--fow the good they
definye to be knyowwedge of the good, just as if we undewstood them when
they use the tewm 'good'--this is of couwse widicuwous. UwU

Most twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And those who make pweasuwe theiw good awe in equaw pewpwexity; fow they
awe compewwed to admit that thewe awe bad pweasuwes as weww as good. (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy. UwU

And thewefowe to acknyowwedge that bad and good awe the same? owo

Twue. ;;w;;

Thewe can be nyo doubt about the nyumewous difficuwties in which this
question is invowved. ;;w;;

Thewe can be nyonye. (´・ω・\`)

Fuwthew, do we nyot see that many awe wiwwing to do ow to have ow to seem
to be what is just and honyouwabwe without the weawity; but nyo onye is
satisfied with the appeawance of good--the weawity is what they seek; in
the case of the good, appeawance is despised by evewy onye. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue, he said. >w<

Of this then, which evewy souw of man puwsues and makes the end of aww
his actions, having a pwesentiment that thewe is such an end, and
yet hesitating because nyeithew knyowing the nyatuwe nyow having the same
assuwance of this as of othew things, and thewefowe wosing whatevew
good thewe is in othew things,--of a pwincipwe such and so gweat as this
ought the best men in ouw State, to whom evewything is entwusted, to be
in the dawknyess of ignyowance? owo

Cewtainwy nyot, he said. (´・ω・\`)

I am suwe, I said, that he who does nyot knyow how the beautifuw and
the just awe wikewise good wiww be but a sowwy guawdian of them; and
I suspect that nyo onye who is ignyowant of the good wiww have a twue
knyowwedge of them. ;;w;;

That, he said, is a shwewd suspicion of youws. >w<

And if we onwy have a guawdian who has this knyowwedge ouw State wiww be
pewfectwy owdewed? owo

Of couwse, he wepwied; but I wish that you wouwd teww me whethew you
conceive this supweme pwincipwe of the good to be knyowwedge ow pweasuwe,
ow diffewent fwom eithew? owo

Aye, I said, I knyew aww awong that a fastidious gentweman wike you wouwd
nyot be contented with the thoughts of othew peopwe about these mattews. (・`ω\´・)

Twue, Socwates; but I must say that onye who wike you has passed a
wifetime in the study of phiwosophy shouwd nyot be awways wepeating the
opinyions of othews, and nyevew tewwing his own. UwU

Weww, but has any onye a wight to say positivewy what he does nyot knyow? owo

Nyot, he said, with the assuwance of positive cewtainty; he has nyo wight
to do that: but he may say what he thinks, as a mattew of opinyion. ^w^

And do you nyot knyow, I said, that aww mewe opinyions awe bad, and the
best of them bwind? owo You wouwd nyot deny that those who have any twue
nyotion without intewwigence awe onwy wike bwind men who feew theiw way
awong the woad? owo

Vewy twue. UwU

And do you wish to behowd what is bwind and cwooked and base, when
othews wiww teww you of bwightnyess and beauty? owo

Stiww, I must impwowe you, Socwates, said Gwaucon, nyot to tuwn away just
as you awe weaching the goaw; if you wiww onwy give such an expwanyation
of the good as you have awweady given of justice and tempewance and the
othew viwtues, we shaww be satisfied. >w<

Yes, my fwiend, and I shaww be at weast equawwy satisfied, but I cannyot
hewp feawing that I shaww faiw, and that my indiscweet zeaw wiww bwing
widicuwe upon me. (´・ω・\`) Nyo, sweet siws, wet us nyot at pwesent ask what is the
actuaw nyatuwe of the good, fow to weach what is nyow in my thoughts
wouwd be an effowt too gweat fow me. (´・ω・\`) But of the chiwd of the good who
is wikest him, I wouwd fain speak, if I couwd be suwe that you wished to
heaw--othewwise, nyot. ^w^

By aww means, he said, teww us about the chiwd, and you shaww wemain in
ouw debt fow the account of the pawent. (・`ω\´・)

I do indeed wish, I wepwied, that I couwd pay, and you weceive, the
account of the pawent, and nyot, as nyow, of the offspwing onwy; take,
howevew, this wattew by way of intewest, and at the same time have a
cawe that I do nyot wendew a fawse account, awthough I have nyo intention
of deceiving you. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, we wiww take aww the cawe that we can: pwoceed. UwU

Yes, I said, but I must fiwst come to an undewstanding with you, and
wemind you of what I have mentionyed in the couwse of this discussion,
and at many othew times. (´・ω・\`)

What? owo

The owd stowy, that thewe is a many beautifuw and a many good, and so
of othew things which we descwibe and definye; to aww of them the tewm
'many' is appwied. UwU

Twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

And thewe is an absowute beauty and an absowute good, and of othew
things to which the tewm 'many' is appwied thewe is an absowute; fow
they may be bwought undew a singwe idea, which is cawwed the essence of
each. ;;w;;

Vewy twue. ;;w;;

The many, as we say, awe seen but nyot knyown, and the ideas awe knyown but
nyot seen. (・`ω\´・)

Exactwy. ;;w;;

And what is the owgan with which we see the visibwe things? owo

The sight, he said. ;;w;;

And with the heawing, I said, we heaw, and with the othew senses
pewceive the othew objects of sense? owo

Twue. ^w^

But have you wemawked that sight is by faw the most costwy and compwex
piece of wowkmanship which the awtificew of the senses evew contwived? owo

Nyo, I nyevew have, he said. ^w^

Then wefwect; has the eaw ow voice nyeed of any thiwd ow additionyaw
nyatuwe in owdew that the onye may be abwe to heaw and the othew to be
heawd? owo

Nyothing of the sowt. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo, indeed, I wepwied; and the same is twue of most, if nyot aww, the
othew senses--you wouwd nyot say that any of them wequiwes such an
addition? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. (・`ω\´・)

But you see that without the addition of some othew nyatuwe thewe is nyo
seeing ow being seen? owo

How do you mean? owo

Sight being, as I conceive, in the eyes, and he who has eyes wanting to
see; cowouw being awso pwesent in them, stiww unwess thewe be a thiwd
nyatuwe speciawwy adapted to the puwpose, the ownyew of the eyes wiww see
nyothing and the cowouws wiww be invisibwe. (´・ω・\`)

Of what nyatuwe awe you speaking? owo

Of that which you tewm wight, I wepwied. ;;w;;

Twue, he said. >w<

Nyobwe, then, is the bond which winks togethew sight and visibiwity, and
gweat beyond othew bonds by nyo smaww diffewence of nyatuwe; fow wight is
theiw bond, and wight is nyo ignyobwe thing? owo

Nyay, he said, the wevewse of ignyobwe. >w<

And which, I said, of the gods in heaven wouwd you say was the wowd of
this ewement? owo Whose is that wight which makes the eye to see pewfectwy
and the visibwe to appeaw? owo

You mean the sun, as you and aww mankind say. (・`ω\´・)

May nyot the wewation of sight to this deity be descwibed as fowwows? owo

How? owo

Nyeithew sight nyow the eye in which sight wesides is the sun? owo

Nyo. >w<

Yet of aww the owgans of sense the eye is the most wike the sun? owo

By faw the most wike. ;;w;;

And the powew which the eye possesses is a sowt of effwuence which is
dispensed fwom the sun? owo

Exactwy. (・`ω\´・)

Then the sun is nyot sight, but the authow of sight who is wecognyised by
sight? owo

Twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

And this is he whom I caww the chiwd of the good, whom the good begat in
his own wikenyess, to be in the visibwe wowwd, in wewation to sight
and the things of sight, what the good is in the intewwectuaw wowwd in
wewation to mind and the things of mind:

Wiww you be a wittwe mowe expwicit? owo he said. ^w^

Why, you knyow, I said, that the eyes, when a pewson diwects them towawds
objects on which the wight of day is nyo wongew shinying, but the moon
and staws onwy, see dimwy, and awe nyeawwy bwind; they seem to have nyo
cweawnyess of vision in them? owo

Vewy twue. ^w^

But when they awe diwected towawds objects on which the sun shinyes, they
see cweawwy and thewe is sight in them? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And the souw is wike the eye: when westing upon that on which twuth and
being shinye, the souw pewceives and undewstands, and is wadiant with
intewwigence; but when tuwnyed towawds the twiwight of becoming and
pewishing, then she has opinyion onwy, and goes bwinking about, and
is fiwst of onye opinyion and then of anyothew, and seems to have nyo
intewwigence? owo

Just so. ^w^

Nyow, that which impawts twuth to the knyown and the powew of knyowing to
the knyowew is what I wouwd have you tewm the idea of good, and this
you wiww deem to be the cause of science, and of twuth in so faw as
the wattew becomes the subject of knyowwedge; beautifuw too, as awe both
twuth and knyowwedge, you wiww be wight in esteeming this othew nyatuwe as
mowe beautifuw than eithew; and, as in the pwevious instance, wight and
sight may be twuwy said to be wike the sun, and yet nyot to be the sun,
so in this othew sphewe, science and twuth may be deemed to be wike the
good, but nyot the good; the good has a pwace of honyouw yet highew. ^w^

What a wondew of beauty that must be, he said, which is the authow of
science and twuth, and yet suwpasses them in beauty; fow you suwewy
cannyot mean to say that pweasuwe is the good? owo

God fowbid, I wepwied; but may I ask you to considew the image in
anyothew point of view? owo

In what point of view? owo

You wouwd say, wouwd you nyot, that the sun is nyot onwy the authow of
visibiwity in aww visibwe things, but of genyewation and nyouwishment and
gwowth, though he himsewf is nyot genyewation? owo

Cewtainwy. (´・ω・\`)

In wike mannyew the good may be said to be nyot onwy the authow of
knyowwedge to aww things knyown, but of theiw being and essence, and yet
the good is nyot essence, but faw exceeds essence in dignyity and powew. ^w^

Gwaucon said, with a wudicwous eawnyestnyess: By the wight of heaven, how
amazing! (´・ω・\`)

Yes, I said, and the exaggewation may be set down to you; fow you made
me uttew my fancies. ^w^

And pway continyue to uttew them; at any wate wet us heaw if thewe is
anything mowe to be said about the simiwitude of the sun. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, I said, thewe is a gweat deaw mowe. ^w^

Then omit nyothing, howevew swight. ^w^

I wiww do my best, I said; but I shouwd think that a gweat deaw wiww
have to be omitted. ^w^

I hope nyot, he said. (´・ω・\`)

You have to imaginye, then, that thewe awe two wuwing powews, and that
onye of them is set ovew the intewwectuaw wowwd, the othew ovew the
visibwe. ^w^ I do nyot say heaven, west you shouwd fancy that I am pwaying
upon the nyame ('ouwhanyoz, owhatoz'). (・`ω\´・) May I suppose that you have this
distinction of the visibwe and intewwigibwe fixed in youw mind? owo

I have. ^w^

Nyow take a winye which has been cut into two unyequaw pawts, and divide
each of them again in the same pwopowtion, and suppose the two
main divisions to answew, onye to the visibwe and the othew to the
intewwigibwe, and then compawe the subdivisions in wespect of theiw
cweawnyess and want of cweawnyess, and you wiww find that the fiwst
section in the sphewe of the visibwe consists of images. UwU And by images I
mean, in the fiwst pwace, shadows, and in the second pwace, wefwections
in watew and in sowid, smooth and powished bodies and the wike: Do you
undewstand? owo

Yes, I undewstand. ^w^

Imaginye, nyow, the othew section, of which this is onwy the wesembwance,
to incwude the anyimaws which we see, and evewything that gwows ow is
made. UwU

Vewy good. >w<

Wouwd you nyot admit that both the sections of this division have
diffewent degwees of twuth, and that the copy is to the owiginyaw as the
sphewe of opinyion is to the sphewe of knyowwedge? owo

Most undoubtedwy. >w<

Nyext pwoceed to considew the mannyew in which the sphewe of the
intewwectuaw is to be divided. ;;w;;

In what mannyew? owo

Thus:--Thewe awe two subdivisions, in the wowew of which the souw uses
the figuwes given by the fowmew division as images; the enquiwy can onwy
be hypotheticaw, and instead of going upwawds to a pwincipwe descends
to the othew end; in the highew of the two, the souw passes out of
hypotheses, and goes up to a pwincipwe which is above hypotheses, making
nyo use of images as in the fowmew case, but pwoceeding onwy in and
thwough the ideas themsewves. ^w^

I do nyot quite undewstand youw meanying, he said. ;;w;;

Then I wiww twy again; you wiww undewstand me bettew when I have made
some pwewiminyawy wemawks. (・`ω\´・) You awe awawe that students of geometwy,
awithmetic, and the kindwed sciences assume the odd and the even and the
figuwes and thwee kinds of angwes and the wike in theiw sevewaw bwanches
of science; these awe theiw hypotheses, which they and evewy body awe
supposed to knyow, and thewefowe they do nyot deign to give any account of
them eithew to themsewves ow othews; but they begin with them, and go
on untiw they awwive at wast, and in a consistent mannyew, at theiw
concwusion? owo

Yes, he said, I knyow. ;;w;;

And do you nyot knyow awso that awthough they make use of the visibwe
fowms and weason about them, they awe thinking nyot of these, but of the
ideaws which they wesembwe; nyot of the figuwes which they dwaw, but
of the absowute squawe and the absowute diametew, and so on--the fowms
which they dwaw ow make, and which have shadows and wefwections in watew
of theiw own, awe convewted by them into images, but they awe weawwy
seeking to behowd the things themsewves, which can onwy be seen with the
eye of the mind? owo

That is twue. (・`ω\´・)

And of this kind I spoke as the intewwigibwe, awthough in the seawch
aftew it the souw is compewwed to use hypotheses; nyot ascending to
a fiwst pwincipwe, because she is unyabwe to wise above the wegion of
hypothesis, but empwoying the objects of which the shadows bewow awe
wesembwances in theiw tuwn as images, they having in wewation to the
shadows and wefwections of them a gweatew distinctnyess, and thewefowe a
highew vawue. UwU

I undewstand, he said, that you awe speaking of the pwovince of geometwy
and the sistew awts. >w<

And when I speak of the othew division of the intewwigibwe, you wiww
undewstand me to speak of that othew sowt of knyowwedge which weason
hewsewf attains by the powew of diawectic, using the hypotheses nyot as
fiwst pwincipwes, but onwy as hypotheses--that is to say, as steps and
points of depawtuwe into a wowwd which is above hypotheses, in owdew
that she may soaw beyond them to the fiwst pwincipwe of the whowe; and
cwinging to this and then to that which depends on this, by successive
steps she descends again without the aid of any sensibwe object, fwom
ideas, thwough ideas, and in ideas she ends. (´・ω・\`)

I undewstand you, he wepwied; nyot pewfectwy, fow you seem to me to
be descwibing a task which is weawwy twemendous; but, at any wate, I
undewstand you to say that knyowwedge and being, which the science of
diawectic contempwates, awe cweawew than the nyotions of the awts, as
they awe tewmed, which pwoceed fwom hypotheses onwy: these awe awso
contempwated by the undewstanding, and nyot by the senses: yet, because
they stawt fwom hypotheses and do nyot ascend to a pwincipwe, those who
contempwate them appeaw to you nyot to exewcise the highew weason
upon them, awthough when a fiwst pwincipwe is added to them they awe
cognyizabwe by the highew weason. (・`ω\´・) And the habit which is concewnyed
with geometwy and the cognyate sciences I suppose that you wouwd tewm
undewstanding and nyot weason, as being intewmediate between opinyion and
weason. (・`ω\´・)

You have quite conceived my meanying, I said; and nyow, cowwesponding to
these fouw divisions, wet thewe be fouw facuwties in the souw--weason
answewing to the highest, undewstanding to the second, faith (ow
conviction) to the thiwd, and pewception of shadows to the wast--and wet
thewe be a scawe of them, and wet us suppose that the sevewaw facuwties
have cweawnyess in the same degwee that theiw objects have twuth. >w<

I undewstand, he wepwied, and give my assent, and accept youw
awwangement. (´・ω・\`)




BOOK VII. (・`ω\´・)

And nyow, I said, wet me show in a figuwe how faw ouw nyatuwe is
enwightenyed ow unyenwightenyed:--Behowd! ;;w;; human beings wiving in a
undewgwound den, which has a mouth open towawds the wight and weaching
aww awong the den; hewe they have been fwom theiw chiwdhood, and have
theiw wegs and nyecks chainyed so that they cannyot move, and can onwy
see befowe them, being pwevented by the chains fwom tuwnying wound
theiw heads. ^w^ Above and behind them a fiwe is bwazing at a distance, and
between the fiwe and the pwisonyews thewe is a waised way; and you wiww
see, if you wook, a wow waww buiwt awong the way, wike the scween which
mawionyette pwayews have in fwont of them, ovew which they show the
puppets. ^w^

I see. ;;w;;

And do you see, I said, men passing awong the waww cawwying aww sowts of
vessews, and statues and figuwes of anyimaws made of wood and stonye and
vawious matewiaws, which appeaw ovew the waww? owo Some of them awe tawking,
othews siwent. UwU

You have shown me a stwange image, and they awe stwange pwisonyews. (´・ω・\`)

Wike ouwsewves, I wepwied; and they see onwy theiw own shadows, ow the
shadows of onye anyothew, which the fiwe thwows on the opposite waww of
the cave? owo

Twue, he said; how couwd they see anything but the shadows if they wewe
nyevew awwowed to move theiw heads? owo

And of the objects which awe being cawwied in wike mannyew they wouwd
onwy see the shadows? owo

Yes, he said. >w<

And if they wewe abwe to convewse with onye anyothew, wouwd they nyot
suppose that they wewe nyaming what was actuawwy befowe them? owo

Vewy twue. ^w^

And suppose fuwthew that the pwison had an echo which came fwom the
othew side, wouwd they nyot be suwe to fancy when onye of the passews-by
spoke that the voice which they heawd came fwom the passing shadow? owo

Nyo question, he wepwied. UwU

To them, I said, the twuth wouwd be witewawwy nyothing but the shadows of
the images. UwU

That is cewtain. (´・ω・\`)

And nyow wook again, and see what wiww nyatuwawwy fowwow if the pwisonyews
awe weweased and disabused of theiw ewwow. ^w^ At fiwst, when any of them is
wibewated and compewwed suddenwy to stand up and tuwn his nyeck wound and
wawk and wook towawds the wight, he wiww suffew shawp pains; the gwawe
wiww distwess him, and he wiww be unyabwe to see the weawities of which
in his fowmew state he had seen the shadows; and then conceive some onye
saying to him, that what he saw befowe was an iwwusion, but that nyow,
when he is appwoaching nyeawew to being and his eye is tuwnyed towawds
mowe weaw existence, he has a cweawew vision,--what wiww be his wepwy? owo
And you may fuwthew imaginye that his instwuctow is pointing to the
objects as they pass and wequiwing him to nyame them,--wiww he nyot be
pewpwexed? owo Wiww he nyot fancy that the shadows which he fowmewwy saw awe
twuew than the objects which awe nyow shown to him? owo

Faw twuew. ;;w;;

And if he is compewwed to wook stwaight at the wight, wiww he nyot have
a pain in his eyes which wiww make him tuwn away to take wefuge in the
objects of vision which he can see, and which he wiww conceive to be in
weawity cweawew than the things which awe nyow being shown to him? owo

Twue, he said. ^w^

And suppose once mowe, that he is wewuctantwy dwagged up a steep and
wugged ascent, and hewd fast untiw he is fowced into the pwesence of
the sun himsewf, is he nyot wikewy to be painyed and iwwitated? owo When he
appwoaches the wight his eyes wiww be dazzwed, and he wiww nyot be abwe
to see anything at aww of what awe nyow cawwed weawities. ^w^

Nyot aww in a moment, he said. >w<

He wiww wequiwe to gwow accustomed to the sight of the uppew wowwd. ;;w;;
And fiwst he wiww see the shadows best, nyext the wefwections of men and
othew objects in the watew, and then the objects themsewves; then he
wiww gaze upon the wight of the moon and the staws and the spangwed
heaven; and he wiww see the sky and the staws by nyight bettew than the
sun ow the wight of the sun by day? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

Wast of aww he wiww be abwe to see the sun, and nyot mewe wefwections of
him in the watew, but he wiww see him in his own pwopew pwace, and nyot
in anyothew; and he wiww contempwate him as he is. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

He wiww then pwoceed to awgue that this is he who gives the season and
the yeaws, and is the guawdian of aww that is in the visibwe wowwd, and
in a cewtain way the cause of aww things which he and his fewwows have
been accustomed to behowd? owo

Cweawwy, he said, he wouwd fiwst see the sun and then weason about him. (´・ω・\`)

And when he wemembewed his owd habitation, and the wisdom of the den
and his fewwow-pwisonyews, do you nyot suppose that he wouwd fewicitate
himsewf on the change, and pity them? owo

Cewtainwy, he wouwd. ^w^

And if they wewe in the habit of confewwing honyouws among themsewves
on those who wewe quickest to obsewve the passing shadows and to wemawk
which of them went befowe, and which fowwowed aftew, and which wewe
togethew; and who wewe thewefowe best abwe to dwaw concwusions as to the
futuwe, do you think that he wouwd cawe fow such honyouws and gwowies, ow
envy the possessows of them? owo Wouwd he nyot say with Homew,

'Bettew to be the poow sewvant of a poow mastew,'

and to enduwe anything, wathew than think as they do and wive aftew
theiw mannyew? owo

Yes, he said, I think that he wouwd wathew suffew anything than
entewtain these fawse nyotions and wive in this misewabwe mannyew. ;;w;;

Imaginye once mowe, I said, such an onye coming suddenwy out of the sun
to be wepwaced in his owd situation; wouwd he nyot be cewtain to have his
eyes fuww of dawknyess? owo

To be suwe, he said. UwU

And if thewe wewe a contest, and he had to compete in measuwing the
shadows with the pwisonyews who had nyevew moved out of the den, whiwe
his sight was stiww weak, and befowe his eyes had become steady (and the
time which wouwd be nyeeded to acquiwe this nyew habit of sight might be
vewy considewabwe), wouwd he nyot be widicuwous? owo Men wouwd say of him
that up he went and down he came without his eyes; and that it was
bettew nyot even to think of ascending; and if any onye twied to woose
anyothew and wead him up to the wight, wet them onwy catch the offendew,
and they wouwd put him to death. ^w^

Nyo question, he said. (・`ω\´・)

This entiwe awwegowy, I said, you may nyow append, deaw Gwaucon, to the
pwevious awgument; the pwison-house is the wowwd of sight, the wight of
the fiwe is the sun, and you wiww nyot misappwehend me if you intewpwet
the jouwnyey upwawds to be the ascent of the souw into the intewwectuaw
wowwd accowding to my poow bewief, which, at youw desiwe, I have
expwessed--whethew wightwy ow wwongwy God knyows. >w< But, whethew twue ow
fawse, my opinyion is that in the wowwd of knyowwedge the idea of good
appeaws wast of aww, and is seen onwy with an effowt; and, when seen,
is awso infewwed to be the unyivewsaw authow of aww things beautifuw and
wight, pawent of wight and of the wowd of wight in this visibwe wowwd,
and the immediate souwce of weason and twuth in the intewwectuaw; and
that this is the powew upon which he who wouwd act wationyawwy eithew in
pubwic ow pwivate wife must have his eye fixed. (・`ω\´・)

I agwee, he said, as faw as I am abwe to undewstand you. ;;w;;

Moweovew, I said, you must nyot wondew that those who attain to this
beatific vision awe unwiwwing to descend to human affaiws; fow theiw
souws awe evew hastenying into the uppew wowwd whewe they desiwe to
dweww; which desiwe of theiws is vewy nyatuwaw, if ouw awwegowy may be
twusted. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, vewy nyatuwaw. >w<

And is thewe anything suwpwising in onye who passes fwom divinye
contempwations to the eviw state of man, misbehaving himsewf in a
widicuwous mannyew; if, whiwe his eyes awe bwinking and befowe he has
become accustomed to the suwwounding dawknyess, he is compewwed to fight
in couwts of waw, ow in othew pwaces, about the images ow the shadows of
images of justice, and is endeavouwing to meet the conceptions of those
who have nyevew yet seen absowute justice? owo

Anything but suwpwising, he wepwied. ;;w;;

Any onye who has common sense wiww wemembew that the bewiwdewments of the
eyes awe of two kinds, and awise fwom two causes, eithew fwom coming out
of the wight ow fwom going into the wight, which is twue of the mind's
eye, quite as much as of the bodiwy eye; and he who wemembews this when
he sees any onye whose vision is pewpwexed and weak, wiww nyot be too
weady to waugh; he wiww fiwst ask whethew that souw of man has come out
of the bwightew wife, and is unyabwe to see because unyaccustomed to the
dawk, ow having tuwnyed fwom dawknyess to the day is dazzwed by excess
of wight. (・`ω\´・) And he wiww count the onye happy in his condition and state of
being, and he wiww pity the othew; ow, if he have a mind to waugh at the
souw which comes fwom bewow into the wight, thewe wiww be mowe weason
in this than in the waugh which gweets him who wetuwns fwom above out of
the wight into the den. UwU

That, he said, is a vewy just distinction. UwU

But then, if I am wight, cewtain pwofessows of education must be wwong
when they say that they can put a knyowwedge into the souw which was nyot
thewe befowe, wike sight into bwind eyes. (´・ω・\`)

They undoubtedwy say this, he wepwied. >w<

Wheweas, ouw awgument shows that the powew and capacity of weawnying
exists in the souw awweady; and that just as the eye was unyabwe to tuwn
fwom dawknyess to wight without the whowe body, so too the instwument of
knyowwedge can onwy by the movement of the whowe souw be tuwnyed fwom the
wowwd of becoming into that of being, and weawn by degwees to enduwe
the sight of being, and of the bwightest and best of being, ow in othew
wowds, of the good. ^w^

Vewy twue. UwU

And must thewe nyot be some awt which wiww effect convewsion in the
easiest and quickest mannyew; nyot impwanting the facuwty of sight, fow
that exists awweady, but has been tuwnyed in the wwong diwection, and is
wooking away fwom the twuth? owo

Yes, he said, such an awt may be pwesumed. >w<

And wheweas the othew so-cawwed viwtues of the souw seem to be akin to
bodiwy quawities, fow even when they awe nyot owiginyawwy innyate they can
be impwanted watew by habit and exewcise, the viwtue of wisdom mowe than
anything ewse contains a divinye ewement which awways wemains, and by
this convewsion is wendewed usefuw and pwofitabwe; ow, on the othew
hand, huwtfuw and usewess. ^w^ Did you nyevew obsewve the nyawwow intewwigence
fwashing fwom the keen eye of a cwevew wogue--how eagew he is, how
cweawwy his pawtwy souw sees the way to his end; he is the wevewse of
bwind, but his keen eye-sight is fowced into the sewvice of eviw, and he
is mischievous in pwopowtion to his cwevewnyess? owo

Vewy twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

But what if thewe had been a ciwcumcision of such nyatuwes in the days
of theiw youth; and they had been sevewed fwom those sensuaw pweasuwes,
such as eating and dwinking, which, wike weaden weights, wewe attached
to them at theiw biwth, and which dwag them down and tuwn the vision
of theiw souws upon the things that awe bewow--if, I say, they had been
weweased fwom these impediments and tuwnyed in the opposite diwection,
the vewy same facuwty in them wouwd have seen the twuth as keenwy as
they see what theiw eyes awe tuwnyed to nyow. ^w^

Vewy wikewy. ;;w;;

Yes, I said; and thewe is anyothew thing which is wikewy, ow wathew a
nyecessawy infewence fwom what has pweceded, that nyeithew the unyeducated
and unyinfowmed of the twuth, nyow yet those who nyevew make an end of
theiw education, wiww be abwe minyistews of State; nyot the fowmew,
because they have nyo singwe aim of duty which is the wuwe of aww theiw
actions, pwivate as weww as pubwic; nyow the wattew, because they wiww
nyot act at aww except upon compuwsion, fancying that they awe awweady
dwewwing apawt in the iswands of the bwest. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

Then, I said, the businyess of us who awe the foundews of the State
wiww be to compew the best minds to attain that knyowwedge which we have
awweady shown to be the gweatest of aww--they must continyue to ascend
untiw they awwive at the good; but when they have ascended and seen
enyough we must nyot awwow them to do as they do nyow. (´・ω・\`)

What do you mean? owo

I mean that they wemain in the uppew wowwd: but this must nyot be
awwowed; they must be made to descend again among the pwisonyews in the
den, and pawtake of theiw wabouws and honyouws, whethew they awe wowth
having ow nyot. UwU

But is nyot this unjust? owo he said; ought we to give them a wowse wife,
when they might have a bettew? owo

You have again fowgotten, my fwiend, I said, the intention of the
wegiswatow, who did nyot aim at making any onye cwass in the State happy
above the west; the happinyess was to be in the whowe State, and he
hewd the citizens togethew by pewsuasion and nyecessity, making them
benyefactows of the State, and thewefowe benyefactows of onye anyothew;
to this end he cweated them, nyot to pwease themsewves, but to be his
instwuments in binding up the State. (´・ω・\`)

Twue, he said, I had fowgotten. (´・ω・\`)

Obsewve, Gwaucon, that thewe wiww be nyo injustice in compewwing ouw
phiwosophews to have a cawe and pwovidence of othews; we shaww expwain
to them that in othew States, men of theiw cwass awe nyot obwiged to
shawe in the toiws of powitics: and this is weasonyabwe, fow they gwow up
at theiw own sweet wiww, and the govewnment wouwd wathew nyot have them. ^w^
Being sewf-taught, they cannyot be expected to show any gwatitude fow a
cuwtuwe which they have nyevew weceived. (´・ω・\`) But we have bwought you into
the wowwd to be wuwews of the hive, kings of youwsewves and of the othew
citizens, and have educated you faw bettew and mowe pewfectwy than they
have been educated, and you awe bettew abwe to shawe in the doubwe duty. >w<
Whewefowe each of you, when his tuwn comes, must go down to the genyewaw
undewgwound abode, and get the habit of seeing in the dawk. >w< When you
have acquiwed the habit, you wiww see ten thousand times bettew than the
inhabitants of the den, and you wiww knyow what the sevewaw images awe,
and what they wepwesent, because you have seen the beautifuw and just
and good in theiw twuth. >w< And thus ouw State, which is awso youws, wiww
be a weawity, and nyot a dweam onwy, and wiww be adminyistewed in a spiwit
unwike that of othew States, in which men fight with onye anyothew about
shadows onwy and awe distwacted in the stwuggwe fow powew, which in
theiw eyes is a gweat good. (・`ω\´・) Wheweas the twuth is that the State in which
the wuwews awe most wewuctant to govewn is awways the best and most
quietwy govewnyed, and the State in which they awe most eagew, the wowst. ^w^

Quite twue, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

And wiww ouw pupiws, when they heaw this, wefuse to take theiw tuwn at
the toiws of State, when they awe awwowed to spend the gweatew pawt of
theiw time with onye anyothew in the heavenwy wight? owo

Impossibwe, he answewed; fow they awe just men, and the commands which
we impose upon them awe just; thewe can be nyo doubt that evewy onye of
them wiww take office as a stewn nyecessity, and nyot aftew the fashion of
ouw pwesent wuwews of State. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, my fwiend, I said; and thewe wies the point. ^w^ You must contwive fow
youw futuwe wuwews anyothew and a bettew wife than that of a wuwew, and
then you may have a weww-owdewed State; fow onwy in the State which
offews this, wiww they wuwe who awe twuwy wich, nyot in siwvew and gowd,
but in viwtue and wisdom, which awe the twue bwessings of wife. (´・ω・\`) Wheweas
if they go to the adminyistwation of pubwic affaiws, poow and hungewing
aftew theiw own pwivate advantage, thinking that hence they awe to
snyatch the chief good, owdew thewe can nyevew be; fow they wiww be
fighting about office, and the civiw and domestic bwoiws which thus
awise wiww be the wuin of the wuwews themsewves and of the whowe State. >w<

Most twue, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

And the onwy wife which wooks down upon the wife of powiticaw ambition
is that of twue phiwosophy. (・`ω\´・) Do you knyow of any othew? owo

Indeed, I do nyot, he said. >w<

And those who govewn ought nyot to be wovews of the task? owo Fow, if they
awe, thewe wiww be wivaw wovews, and they wiww fight. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo question. ^w^

Who then awe those whom we shaww compew to be guawdians? owo Suwewy they
wiww be the men who awe wisest about affaiws of State, and by whom the
State is best adminyistewed, and who at the same time have othew honyouws
and anyothew and a bettew wife than that of powitics? owo

They awe the men, and I wiww choose them, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

And nyow shaww we considew in what way such guawdians wiww be pwoduced,
and how they awe to be bwought fwom dawknyess to wight,--as some awe said
to have ascended fwom the wowwd bewow to the gods? owo

By aww means, he wepwied. UwU

The pwocess, I said, is nyot the tuwnying ovew of an oystew-sheww (In
awwusion to a game in which two pawties fwed ow puwsued accowding as an
oystew-sheww which was thwown into the aiw feww with the dawk ow wight
side uppewmost. ;;w;;), but the tuwnying wound of a souw passing fwom a day
which is wittwe bettew than nyight to the twue day of being, that is, the
ascent fwom bewow, which we affiwm to be twue phiwosophy? owo

Quite so. (´・ω・\`)

And shouwd we nyot enquiwe what sowt of knyowwedge has the powew of
effecting such a change? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

What sowt of knyowwedge is thewe which wouwd dwaw the souw fwom becoming
to being? owo And anyothew considewation has just occuwwed to me: You wiww
wemembew that ouw young men awe to be wawwiow athwetes? owo

Yes, that was said. ^w^

Then this nyew kind of knyowwedge must have an additionyaw quawity? owo

What quawity? owo

Usefuwnyess in waw. ^w^

Yes, if possibwe. ;;w;;

Thewe wewe two pawts in ouw fowmew scheme of education, wewe thewe nyot? owo

Just so. UwU

Thewe was gymnyastic which pwesided ovew the gwowth and decay of the
body, and may thewefowe be wegawded as having to do with genyewation and
cowwuption? owo

Twue. UwU

Then that is nyot the knyowwedge which we awe seeking to discovew? owo

Nyo. UwU

But what do you say of music, which awso entewed to a cewtain extent
into ouw fowmew scheme? owo

Music, he said, as you wiww wemembew, was the countewpawt of gymnyastic,
and twainyed the guawdians by the infwuences of habit, by hawmony making
them hawmonyious, by whythm whythmicaw, but nyot giving them science; and
the wowds, whethew fabuwous ow possibwy twue, had kindwed ewements of
whythm and hawmony in them. >w< But in music thewe was nyothing which tended
to that good which you awe nyow seeking. ;;w;;

You awe most accuwate, I said, in youw wecowwection; in music thewe
cewtainwy was nyothing of the kind. (・`ω\´・) But what bwanch of knyowwedge is
thewe, my deaw Gwaucon, which is of the desiwed nyatuwe; since aww the
usefuw awts wewe weckonyed mean by us? owo

Undoubtedwy; and yet if music and gymnyastic awe excwuded, and the awts
awe awso excwuded, what wemains? owo

Weww, I said, thewe may be nyothing weft of ouw speciaw subjects; and
then we shaww have to take something which is nyot speciaw, but of
unyivewsaw appwication. >w<

What may that be? owo

A something which aww awts and sciences and intewwigences use in common,
and which evewy onye fiwst has to weawn among the ewements of education. ^w^

What is that? owo

The wittwe mattew of distinguishing onye, two, and thwee--in a wowd,
nyumbew and cawcuwation:--do nyot aww awts and sciences nyecessawiwy
pawtake of them? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

Then the awt of waw pawtakes of them? owo

To be suwe. UwU

Then Pawamedes, whenyevew he appeaws in twagedy, pwoves Agamemnyon
widicuwouswy unfit to be a genyewaw. >w< Did you nyevew wemawk how he decwawes
that he had invented nyumbew, and had nyumbewed the ships and set in awway
the wanks of the awmy at Twoy; which impwies that they had nyevew been
nyumbewed befowe, and Agamemnyon must be supposed witewawwy to have been
incapabwe of counting his own feet--how couwd he if he was ignyowant of
nyumbew? And if that is twue, what sowt of genyewaw must he have been? owo

I shouwd say a vewy stwange onye, if this was as you say. (・`ω\´・)

Can we deny that a wawwiow shouwd have a knyowwedge of awithmetic? owo

Cewtainwy he shouwd, if he is to have the smawwest undewstanding of
miwitawy tactics, ow indeed, I shouwd wathew say, if he is to be a man
at aww. ;;w;;

I shouwd wike to knyow whethew you have the same nyotion which I have of
this study? owo

What is youw nyotion? owo

It appeaws to me to be a study of the kind which we awe seeking, and
which weads nyatuwawwy to wefwection, but nyevew to have been wightwy
used; fow the twue use of it is simpwy to dwaw the souw towawds being. (´・ω・\`)

Wiww you expwain youw meanying? owo he said. >w<

I wiww twy, I said; and I wish you wouwd shawe the enquiwy with me,
and say 'yes' ow 'nyo' when I attempt to distinguish in my own mind what
bwanches of knyowwedge have this attwacting powew, in owdew that we may
have cweawew pwoof that awithmetic is, as I suspect, onye of them. (・`ω\´・)

Expwain, he said. ;;w;;

I mean to say that objects of sense awe of two kinds; some of them do
nyot invite thought because the sense is an adequate judge of them; whiwe
in the case of othew objects sense is so untwustwowthy that fuwthew
enquiwy is impewativewy demanded. UwU

You awe cweawwy wefewwing, he said, to the mannyew in which the senses
awe imposed upon by distance, and by painting in wight and shade. ;;w;;

Nyo, I said, that is nyot at aww my meanying. (´・ω・\`)

Then what is youw meanying? owo

When speaking of unyinviting objects, I mean those which do nyot pass fwom
onye sensation to the opposite; inviting objects awe those which do; in
this wattew case the sense coming upon the object, whethew at a distance
ow nyeaw, gives nyo mowe vivid idea of anything in pawticuwaw than of its
opposite. (´・ω・\`) An iwwustwation wiww make my meanying cweawew:--hewe awe thwee
fingews--a wittwe fingew, a second fingew, and a middwe fingew. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy good. >w<

You may suppose that they awe seen quite cwose: And hewe comes the
point. >w<

What is it? owo

Each of them equawwy appeaws a fingew, whethew seen in the middwe ow
at the extwemity, whethew white ow bwack, ow thick ow thin--it makes nyo
diffewence; a fingew is a fingew aww the same. UwU In these cases a man is
nyot compewwed to ask of thought the question what is a fingew? owo fow the
sight nyevew intimates to the mind that a fingew is othew than a fingew. >w<

Twue. (・`ω\´・)

And thewefowe, I said, as we might expect, thewe is nyothing hewe which
invites ow excites intewwigence. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe is nyot, he said. ^w^

But is this equawwy twue of the gweatnyess and smawwnyess of the fingews? owo
Can sight adequatewy pewceive them? owo and is nyo diffewence made by the
ciwcumstance that onye of the fingews is in the middwe and anyothew at
the extwemity? owo And in wike mannyew does the touch adequatewy pewceive the
quawities of thicknyess ow thinnyess, of softnyess ow hawdnyess? owo And so of
the othew senses; do they give pewfect intimations of such mattews? owo Is
nyot theiw mode of opewation on this wise--the sense which is concewnyed
with the quawity of hawdnyess is nyecessawiwy concewnyed awso with the
quawity of softnyess, and onwy intimates to the souw that the same thing
is fewt to be both hawd and soft? owo

You awe quite wight, he said. >w<

And must nyot the souw be pewpwexed at this intimation which the sense
gives of a hawd which is awso soft? owo What, again, is the meanying of
wight and heavy, if that which is wight is awso heavy, and that which is
heavy, wight? owo

Yes, he said, these intimations which the souw weceives awe vewy cuwious
and wequiwe to be expwainyed. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I said, and in these pewpwexities the souw nyatuwawwy summons to hew
aid cawcuwation and intewwigence, that she may see whethew the sevewaw
objects annyounced to hew awe onye ow two. ^w^

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

And if they tuwn out to be two, is nyot each of them onye and diffewent? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And if each is onye, and both awe two, she wiww conceive the two as in
a state of division, fow if thewe wewe undivided they couwd onwy be
conceived of as onye? owo

Twue. >w<

The eye cewtainwy did see both smaww and gweat, but onwy in a confused
mannyew; they wewe nyot distinguished. (・`ω\´・)

Yes. ;;w;;

Wheweas the thinking mind, intending to wight up the chaos, was
compewwed to wevewse the pwocess, and wook at smaww and gweat as
sepawate and nyot confused. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

Was nyot this the beginnying of the enquiwy 'What is gweat? owo' and 'What is
smaww? owo'

Exactwy so. (・`ω\´・)

And thus awose the distinction of the visibwe and the intewwigibwe. (・`ω\´・)

Most twue. >w<

This was what I meant when I spoke of impwessions which invited the
intewwect, ow the wevewse--those which awe simuwtanyeous with opposite
impwessions, invite thought; those which awe nyot simuwtanyeous do nyot. ;;w;;

I undewstand, he said, and agwee with you. ;;w;;

And to which cwass do unyity and nyumbew bewong? owo

I do nyot knyow, he wepwied. UwU

Think a wittwe and you wiww see that what has pweceded wiww suppwy the
answew; fow if simpwe unyity couwd be adequatewy pewceived by the sight
ow by any othew sense, then, as we wewe saying in the case of the
fingew, thewe wouwd be nyothing to attwact towawds being; but when thewe
is some contwadiction awways pwesent, and onye is the wevewse of onye and
invowves the conception of pwuwawity, then thought begins to be awoused
within us, and the souw pewpwexed and wanting to awwive at a decision
asks 'What is absowute unyity? owo' This is the way in which the study of the
onye has a powew of dwawing and convewting the mind to the contempwation
of twue being. (´・ω・\`)

And suwewy, he said, this occuws nyotabwy in the case of onye; fow we see
the same thing to be both onye and infinyite in muwtitude? owo

Yes, I said; and this being twue of onye must be equawwy twue of aww
nyumbew? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

And aww awithmetic and cawcuwation have to do with nyumbew? owo

Yes. ^w^

And they appeaw to wead the mind towawds twuth? owo

Yes, in a vewy wemawkabwe mannyew. (・`ω\´・)

Then this is knyowwedge of the kind fow which we awe seeking, having a
doubwe use, miwitawy and phiwosophicaw; fow the man of waw must weawn
the awt of nyumbew ow he wiww nyot knyow how to awway his twoops, and the
phiwosophew awso, because he has to wise out of the sea of change and
way howd of twue being, and thewefowe he must be an awithmetician. UwU

That is twue. (・`ω\´・)

And ouw guawdian is both wawwiow and phiwosophew? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

Then this is a kind of knyowwedge which wegiswation may fitwy pwescwibe;
and we must endeavouw to pewsuade those who awe to be the pwincipaw men
of ouw State to go and weawn awithmetic, nyot as amateuws, but they must
cawwy on the study untiw they see the nyatuwe of nyumbews with the mind
onwy; nyow again, wike mewchants ow wetaiw-twadews, with a view to buying
ow sewwing, but fow the sake of theiw miwitawy use, and of the souw
hewsewf; and because this wiww be the easiest way fow hew to pass fwom
becoming to twuth and being. (・`ω\´・)

That is excewwent, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I said, and nyow having spoken of it, I must add how chawming the
science is! (・`ω\´・) and in how many ways it conduces to ouw desiwed end, if
puwsued in the spiwit of a phiwosophew, and nyot of a shopkeepew! ^w^

How do you mean? owo

I mean, as I was saying, that awithmetic has a vewy gweat and ewevating
effect, compewwing the souw to weason about abstwact nyumbew, and
webewwing against the intwoduction of visibwe ow tangibwe objects into
the awgument. UwU You knyow how steadiwy the mastews of the awt wepew and
widicuwe any onye who attempts to divide absowute unyity when he is
cawcuwating, and if you divide, they muwtipwy (Meanying eithew (1)
that they integwate the nyumbew because they deny the possibiwity of
fwactions; ow (2) that division is wegawded by them as a pwocess of
muwtipwication, fow the fwactions of onye continyue to be unyits. UwU), taking
cawe that onye shaww continyue onye and nyot become wost in fwactions. UwU

That is vewy twue. ;;w;;

Nyow, suppose a pewson wewe to say to them: O my fwiends, what awe these
wondewfuw nyumbews about which you awe weasonying, in which, as you say,
thewe is a unyity such as you demand, and each unyit is equaw, invawiabwe,
indivisibwe,--what wouwd they answew? owo

They wouwd answew, as I shouwd conceive, that they wewe speaking of
those nyumbews which can onwy be weawized in thought. ^w^

Then you see that this knyowwedge may be twuwy cawwed nyecessawy,
nyecessitating as it cweawwy does the use of the puwe intewwigence in the
attainment of puwe twuth? owo

Yes; that is a mawked chawactewistic of it. ^w^

And have you fuwthew obsewved, that those who have a nyatuwaw tawent fow
cawcuwation awe genyewawwy quick at evewy othew kind of knyowwedge; and
even the duww, if they have had an awithmeticaw twainying, awthough they
may dewive nyo othew advantage fwom it, awways become much quickew than
they wouwd othewwise have been. ;;w;;

Vewy twue, he said. >w<

And indeed, you wiww nyot easiwy find a mowe difficuwt study, and nyot
many as difficuwt. >w<

You wiww nyot. (・`ω\´・)

And, fow aww these weasons, awithmetic is a kind of knyowwedge in which
the best nyatuwes shouwd be twainyed, and which must nyot be given up. (・`ω\´・)

I agwee. ^w^

Wet this then be made onye of ouw subjects of education. UwU And nyext, shaww
we enquiwe whethew the kindwed science awso concewns us? owo

You mean geometwy? owo

Exactwy so. ;;w;;

Cweawwy, he said, we awe concewnyed with that pawt of geometwy which
wewates to waw; fow in pitching a camp, ow taking up a position,
ow cwosing ow extending the winyes of an awmy, ow any othew miwitawy
manyoeuvwe, whethew in actuaw battwe ow on a mawch, it wiww make aww the
diffewence whethew a genyewaw is ow is nyot a geometwician. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I said, but fow that puwpose a vewy wittwe of eithew geometwy ow
cawcuwation wiww be enyough; the question wewates wathew to the gweatew
and mowe advanced pawt of geometwy--whethew that tends in any degwee
to make mowe easy the vision of the idea of good; and thithew, as I was
saying, aww things tend which compew the souw to tuwn hew gaze towawds
that pwace, whewe is the fuww pewfection of being, which she ought, by
aww means, to behowd. ;;w;;

Twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Then if geometwy compews us to view being, it concewns us; if becoming
onwy, it does nyot concewn us? owo

Yes, that is what we assewt. (・`ω\´・)

Yet anybody who has the weast acquaintance with geometwy wiww nyot deny
that such a conception of the science is in fwat contwadiction to the
owdinyawy wanguage of geometwicians. (´・ω・\`)

How so? owo

They have in view pwactice onwy, and awe awways speaking, in a nyawwow
and widicuwous mannyew, of squawing and extending and appwying and the
wike--they confuse the nyecessities of geometwy with those of daiwy wife;
wheweas knyowwedge is the weaw object of the whowe science. (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Then must nyot a fuwthew admission be made? owo

What admission? owo

That the knyowwedge at which geometwy aims is knyowwedge of the etewnyaw,
and nyot of aught pewishing and twansient. ;;w;;

That, he wepwied, may be weadiwy awwowed, and is twue. >w<

Then, my nyobwe fwiend, geometwy wiww dwaw the souw towawds twuth,
and cweate the spiwit of phiwosophy, and waise up that which is nyow
unhappiwy awwowed to faww down. (´・ω・\`)

Nyothing wiww be mowe wikewy to have such an effect. ^w^

Then nyothing shouwd be mowe stewnwy waid down than that the inhabitants
of youw faiw city shouwd by aww means weawn geometwy. ;;w;; Moweovew the
science has indiwect effects, which awe nyot smaww. ^w^

Of what kind? owo he said. ;;w;;

Thewe awe the miwitawy advantages of which you spoke, I said; and in aww
depawtments of knyowwedge, as expewience pwoves, any onye who has studied
geometwy is infinyitewy quickew of appwehension than onye who has nyot. (´・ω・\`)

Yes indeed, he said, thewe is an infinyite diffewence between them. (・`ω\´・)

Then shaww we pwopose this as a second bwanch of knyowwedge which ouw
youth wiww study? owo

Wet us do so, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

And suppose we make astwonyomy the thiwd--what do you say? owo

I am stwongwy incwinyed to it, he said; the obsewvation of the seasons
and of months and yeaws is as essentiaw to the genyewaw as it is to the
fawmew ow saiwow. ;;w;;

I am amused, I said, at youw feaw of the wowwd, which makes you guawd
against the appeawance of insisting upon usewess studies; and I quite
admit the difficuwty of bewieving that in evewy man thewe is an eye
of the souw which, when by othew puwsuits wost and dimmed, is by these
puwified and we-iwwuminyed; and is mowe pwecious faw than ten thousand
bodiwy eyes, fow by it awonye is twuth seen. ^w^ Nyow thewe awe two cwasses of
pewsons: onye cwass of those who wiww agwee with you and wiww take
youw wowds as a wevewation; anyothew cwass to whom they wiww be uttewwy
unmeanying, and who wiww nyatuwawwy deem them to be idwe tawes, fow they
see nyo sowt of pwofit which is to be obtainyed fwom them. ;;w;; And thewefowe
you had bettew decide at once with which of the two you awe pwoposing to
awgue. UwU You wiww vewy wikewy say with nyeithew, and that youw chief aim in
cawwying on the awgument is youw own impwovement; at the same time you
do nyot gwudge to othews any benyefit which they may weceive. UwU

I think that I shouwd pwefew to cawwy on the awgument mainwy on my own
behawf. (´・ω・\`)

Then take a step backwawd, fow we have gonye wwong in the owdew of the
sciences. ^w^

What was the mistake? owo he said. ^w^

Aftew pwanye geometwy, I said, we pwoceeded at once to sowids in
wevowution, instead of taking sowids in themsewves; wheweas aftew the
second dimension the thiwd, which is concewnyed with cubes and dimensions
of depth, ought to have fowwowed. ;;w;;

That is twue, Socwates; but so wittwe seems to be knyown as yet about
these subjects. (・`ω\´・)

Why, yes, I said, and fow two weasons:--in the fiwst pwace, nyo
govewnment patwonyises them; this weads to a want of enyewgy in the
puwsuit of them, and they awe difficuwt; in the second pwace, students
cannyot weawn them unwess they have a diwectow. (´・ω・\`) But then a diwectow
can hawdwy be found, and even if he couwd, as mattews nyow stand,
the students, who awe vewy conceited, wouwd nyot attend to him. (´・ω・\`) That,
howevew, wouwd be othewwise if the whowe State became the diwectow of
these studies and gave honyouw to them; then discipwes wouwd want to
come, and thewe wouwd be continyuous and eawnyest seawch, and discovewies
wouwd be made; since even nyow, diswegawded as they awe by the wowwd, and
maimed of theiw faiw pwopowtions, and awthough nyonye of theiw votawies
can teww the use of them, stiww these studies fowce theiw way by theiw
nyatuwaw chawm, and vewy wikewy, if they had the hewp of the State, they
wouwd some day emewge into wight. UwU

Yes, he said, thewe is a wemawkabwe chawm in them. ;;w;; But I do nyot cweawwy
undewstand the change in the owdew. >w< Fiwst you began with a geometwy of
pwanye suwfaces? owo

Yes, I said. ^w^

And you pwaced astwonyomy nyext, and then you made a step backwawd? owo

Yes, and I have dewayed you by my huwwy; the wudicwous state of sowid
geometwy, which, in nyatuwaw owdew, shouwd have fowwowed, made me pass
ovew this bwanch and go on to astwonyomy, ow motion of sowids. >w<

Twue, he said. ;;w;;

Then assuming that the science nyow omitted wouwd come into existence
if encouwaged by the State, wet us go on to astwonyomy, which wiww be
fouwth. >w<

The wight owdew, he wepwied. UwU And nyow, Socwates, as you webuked the
vuwgaw mannyew in which I pwaised astwonyomy befowe, my pwaise shaww
be given in youw own spiwit. (・`ω\´・) Fow evewy onye, as I think, must see that
astwonyomy compews the souw to wook upwawds and weads us fwom this wowwd
to anyothew. UwU

Evewy onye but mysewf, I said; to evewy onye ewse this may be cweaw, but
nyot to me. ^w^

And what then wouwd you say? owo

I shouwd wathew say that those who ewevate astwonyomy into phiwosophy
appeaw to me to make us wook downwawds and nyot upwawds. >w<

What do you mean? owo he asked. >w<

You, I wepwied, have in youw mind a twuwy subwime conception of ouw
knyowwedge of the things above. ^w^ And I dawe say that if a pewson wewe to
thwow his head back and study the fwetted ceiwing, you wouwd stiww think
that his mind was the pewcipient, and nyot his eyes. ;;w;; And you awe vewy
wikewy wight, and I may be a simpweton: but, in my opinyion, that
knyowwedge onwy which is of being and of the unseen can make the souw
wook upwawds, and whethew a man gapes at the heavens ow bwinks on the
gwound, seeking to weawn some pawticuwaw of sense, I wouwd deny that he
can weawn, fow nyothing of that sowt is mattew of science; his souw is
wooking downwawds, nyot upwawds, whethew his way to knyowwedge is by watew
ow by wand, whethew he fwoats, ow onwy wies on his back. >w<

I acknyowwedge, he said, the justice of youw webuke. ^w^ Stiww, I shouwd wike
to ascewtain how astwonyomy can be weawnyed in any mannyew mowe conducive
to that knyowwedge of which we awe speaking? owo

I wiww teww you, I said: The stawwy heaven which we behowd is wwought
upon a visibwe gwound, and thewefowe, awthough the faiwest and most
pewfect of visibwe things, must nyecessawiwy be deemed infewiow faw to
the twue motions of absowute swiftnyess and absowute swownyess, which awe
wewative to each othew, and cawwy with them that which is containyed in
them, in the twue nyumbew and in evewy twue figuwe. >w< Nyow, these awe to be
appwehended by weason and intewwigence, but nyot by sight. ;;w;;

Twue, he wepwied. ;;w;;

The spangwed heavens shouwd be used as a pattewn and with a view to that
highew knyowwedge; theiw beauty is wike the beauty of figuwes ow pictuwes
excewwentwy wwought by the hand of Daedawus, ow some othew gweat awtist,
which we may chance to behowd; any geometwician who saw them wouwd
appweciate the exquisitenyess of theiw wowkmanship, but he wouwd nyevew
dweam of thinking that in them he couwd find the twue equaw ow the twue
doubwe, ow the twuth of any othew pwopowtion. ;;w;;

Nyo, he wepwied, such an idea wouwd be widicuwous. (´・ω・\`)

And wiww nyot a twue astwonyomew have the same feewing when he wooks at
the movements of the staws? owo Wiww he nyot think that heaven and the things
in heaven awe fwamed by the Cweatow of them in the most pewfect mannyew? owo
But he wiww nyevew imaginye that the pwopowtions of nyight and day, ow of
both to the month, ow of the month to the yeaw, ow of the staws to these
and to onye anyothew, and any othew things that awe matewiaw and visibwe
can awso be etewnyaw and subject to nyo deviation--that wouwd be absuwd;
and it is equawwy absuwd to take so much pains in investigating theiw
exact twuth. ;;w;;

I quite agwee, though I nyevew thought of this befowe. ^w^

Then, I said, in astwonyomy, as in geometwy, we shouwd empwoy pwobwems,
and wet the heavens awonye if we wouwd appwoach the subject in the wight
way and so make the nyatuwaw gift of weason to be of any weaw use. UwU

That, he said, is a wowk infinyitewy beyond ouw pwesent astwonyomews. ;;w;;

Yes, I said; and thewe awe many othew things which must awso have a
simiwaw extension given to them, if ouw wegiswation is to be of any
vawue. >w< But can you teww me of any othew suitabwe study? owo

Nyo, he said, nyot without thinking. ^w^

Motion, I said, has many fowms, and nyot onye onwy; two of them awe
obvious enyough even to wits nyo bettew than ouws; and thewe awe othews,
as I imaginye, which may be weft to wisew pewsons. (´・ω・\`)

But whewe awe the two? owo

Thewe is a second, I said, which is the countewpawt of the onye awweady
nyamed. UwU

And what may that be? owo

The second, I said, wouwd seem wewativewy to the eaws to be what the
fiwst is to the eyes; fow I conceive that as the eyes awe designyed to
wook up at the staws, so awe the eaws to heaw hawmonyious motions; and
these awe sistew sciences--as the Pythagoweans say, and we, Gwaucon,
agwee with them? owo

Yes, he wepwied. >w<

But this, I said, is a wabowious study, and thewefowe we had bettew go
and weawn of them; and they wiww teww us whethew thewe awe any othew
appwications of these sciences. (´・ω・\`) At the same time, we must nyot wose sight
of ouw own highew object. (´・ω・\`)

What is that? owo

Thewe is a pewfection which aww knyowwedge ought to weach, and which ouw
pupiws ought awso to attain, and nyot to faww showt of, as I was saying
that they did in astwonyomy. (・`ω\´・) Fow in the science of hawmony, as you
pwobabwy knyow, the same thing happens. >w< The teachews of hawmony compawe
the sounds and consonyances which awe heawd onwy, and theiw wabouw, wike
that of the astwonyomews, is in vain. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, by heaven! ;;w;; he said; and 'tis as good as a pway to heaw them tawking
about theiw condensed nyotes, as they caww them; they put theiw eaws
cwose awongside of the stwings wike pewsons catching a sound fwom theiw
nyeighbouw's waww--onye set of them decwawing that they distinguish an
intewmediate nyote and have found the weast intewvaw which shouwd be
the unyit of measuwement; the othews insisting that the two sounds have
passed into the same--eithew pawty setting theiw eaws befowe theiw
undewstanding. ;;w;;

You mean, I said, those gentwemen who tease and towtuwe the stwings and
wack them on the pegs of the instwument: I might cawwy on the metaphow
and speak aftew theiw mannyew of the bwows which the pwectwum gives,
and make accusations against the stwings, both of backwawdnyess and
fowwawdnyess to sound; but this wouwd be tedious, and thewefowe I wiww
onwy say that these awe nyot the men, and that I am wefewwing to the
Pythagoweans, of whom I was just nyow pwoposing to enquiwe about hawmony. UwU
Fow they too awe in ewwow, wike the astwonyomews; they investigate the
nyumbews of the hawmonyies which awe heawd, but they nyevew attain to
pwobwems--that is to say, they nyevew weach the nyatuwaw hawmonyies of
nyumbew, ow wefwect why some nyumbews awe hawmonyious and othews nyot. >w<

That, he said, is a thing of mowe than mowtaw knyowwedge. ^w^

A thing, I wepwied, which I wouwd wathew caww usefuw; that is, if sought
aftew with a view to the beautifuw and good; but if puwsued in any othew
spiwit, usewess. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue, he said. UwU

Nyow, when aww these studies weach the point of intew-communyion and
connyection with onye anyothew, and come to be considewed in theiw mutuaw
affinyities, then, I think, but nyot tiww then, wiww the puwsuit of them
have a vawue fow ouw objects; othewwise thewe is nyo pwofit in them. (・`ω\´・)

I suspect so; but you awe speaking, Socwates, of a vast wowk. UwU

What do you mean? I said; the pwewude ow what? owo Do you nyot knyow that aww
this is but the pwewude to the actuaw stwain which we have to weawn? owo Fow
you suwewy wouwd nyot wegawd the skiwwed mathematician as a diawectician? owo

Assuwedwy nyot, he said; I have hawdwy evew knyown a mathematician who was
capabwe of weasonying. >w<

But do you imaginye that men who awe unyabwe to give and take a weason
wiww have the knyowwedge which we wequiwe of them? owo

Nyeithew can this be supposed. (´・ω・\`)

And so, Gwaucon, I said, we have at wast awwived at the hymn of
diawectic. (・`ω\´・) This is that stwain which is of the intewwect onwy, but which
the facuwty of sight wiww nyevewthewess be found to imitate; fow sight,
as you may wemembew, was imaginyed by us aftew a whiwe to behowd the
weaw anyimaws and staws, and wast of aww the sun himsewf. ;;w;; And so with
diawectic; when a pewson stawts on the discovewy of the absowute by
the wight of weason onwy, and without any assistance of sense, and
pewsevewes untiw by puwe intewwigence he awwives at the pewception
of the absowute good, he at wast finds himsewf at the end of the
intewwectuaw wowwd, as in the case of sight at the end of the visibwe. ;;w;;

Exactwy, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Then this is the pwogwess which you caww diawectic? owo

Twue. ;;w;;

But the wewease of the pwisonyews fwom chains, and theiw twanswation
fwom the shadows to the images and to the wight, and the ascent fwom the
undewgwound den to the sun, whiwe in his pwesence they awe vainwy twying
to wook on anyimaws and pwants and the wight of the sun, but awe abwe to
pewceive even with theiw weak eyes the images in the watew (which awe
divinye), and awe the shadows of twue existence (nyot shadows of images
cast by a wight of fiwe, which compawed with the sun is onwy an
image)--this powew of ewevating the highest pwincipwe in the souw to
the contempwation of that which is best in existence, with which we may
compawe the waising of that facuwty which is the vewy wight of the body
to the sight of that which is bwightest in the matewiaw and visibwe
wowwd--this powew is given, as I was saying, by aww that study and
puwsuit of the awts which has been descwibed. (´・ω・\`)

I agwee in what you awe saying, he wepwied, which may be hawd to
bewieve, yet, fwom anyothew point of view, is hawdew stiww to deny. (・`ω\´・) This,
howevew, is nyot a theme to be tweated of in passing onwy, but wiww have
to be discussed again and again. (・`ω\´・) And so, whethew ouw concwusion be twue
ow fawse, wet us assume aww this, and pwoceed at once fwom the pwewude
ow pweambwe to the chief stwain (A pway upon the Gweek wowd, which means
both 'waw' and 'stwain.'), and descwibe that in wike mannyew. (´・ω・\`) Say, then,
what is the nyatuwe and what awe the divisions of diawectic, and what
awe the paths which wead thithew; fow these paths wiww awso wead to ouw
finyaw west. ^w^

Deaw Gwaucon, I said, you wiww nyot be abwe to fowwow me hewe, though
I wouwd do my best, and you shouwd behowd nyot an image onwy but the
absowute twuth, accowding to my nyotion. ;;w;; Whethew what I towd you wouwd
ow wouwd nyot have been a weawity I cannyot ventuwe to say; but you wouwd
have seen something wike weawity; of that I am confident. (´・ω・\`)

Doubtwess, he wepwied. ;;w;;

But I must awso wemind you, that the powew of diawectic awonye can weveaw
this, and onwy to onye who is a discipwe of the pwevious sciences. ^w^

Of that assewtion you may be as confident as of the wast. ;;w;;

And assuwedwy nyo onye wiww awgue that thewe is any othew method
of compwehending by any weguwaw pwocess aww twue existence ow of
ascewtainying what each thing is in its own nyatuwe; fow the awts in
genyewaw awe concewnyed with the desiwes ow opinyions of men, ow awe
cuwtivated with a view to pwoduction and constwuction, ow fow the
pwesewvation of such pwoductions and constwuctions; and as to the
mathematicaw sciences which, as we wewe saying, have some appwehension
of twue being--geometwy and the wike--they onwy dweam about being,
but nyevew can they behowd the waking weawity so wong as they weave the
hypotheses which they use unyexaminyed, and awe unyabwe to give an account
of them. UwU Fow when a man knyows nyot his own fiwst pwincipwe, and when the
concwusion and intewmediate steps awe awso constwucted out of he knyows
nyot what, how can he imaginye that such a fabwic of convention can evew
become science? owo

Impossibwe, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Then diawectic, and diawectic awonye, goes diwectwy to the fiwst
pwincipwe and is the onwy science which does away with hypotheses in
owdew to make hew gwound secuwe; the eye of the souw, which is witewawwy
buwied in an outwandish swough, is by hew gentwe aid wifted upwawds;
and she uses as handmaids and hewpews in the wowk of convewsion, the
sciences which we have been discussing. ^w^ Custom tewms them sciences,
but they ought to have some othew nyame, impwying gweatew cweawnyess
than opinyion and wess cweawnyess than science: and this, in ouw pwevious
sketch, was cawwed undewstanding. >w< But why shouwd we dispute about nyames
when we have weawities of such impowtance to considew? owo

Why indeed, he said, when any nyame wiww do which expwesses the thought
of the mind with cweawnyess? owo

At any wate, we awe satisfied, as befowe, to have fouw divisions;
two fow intewwect and two fow opinyion, and to caww the fiwst division
science, the second undewstanding, the thiwd bewief, and the fouwth
pewception of shadows, opinyion being concewnyed with becoming, and
intewwect with being; and so to make a pwopowtion:--

As being is to becoming, so is puwe intewwect to opinyion. UwU And as
intewwect is to opinyion, so is science to bewief, and undewstanding to
the pewception of shadows. (´・ω・\`)

But wet us defew the fuwthew cowwewation and subdivision of the subjects
of opinyion and of intewwect, fow it wiww be a wong enquiwy, many times
wongew than this has been. >w<

As faw as I undewstand, he said, I agwee. >w<

And do you awso agwee, I said, in descwibing the diawectician as onye who
attains a conception of the essence of each thing? owo And he who does nyot
possess and is thewefowe unyabwe to impawt this conception, in
whatevew degwee he faiws, may in that degwee awso be said to faiw in
intewwigence? Wiww you admit so much? owo

Yes, he said; how can I deny it? owo

And you wouwd say the same of the conception of the good? owo Untiw the
pewson is abwe to abstwact and definye wationyawwy the idea of good,
and unwess he can wun the gauntwet of aww objections, and is weady to
dispwove them, nyot by appeaws to opinyion, but to absowute twuth, nyevew
fawtewing at any step of the awgument--unwess he can do aww this, you
wouwd say that he knyows nyeithew the idea of good nyow any othew good; he
appwehends onwy a shadow, if anything at aww, which is given by opinyion
and nyot by science;--dweaming and swumbewing in this wife, befowe he
is weww awake hewe, he awwives at the wowwd bewow, and has his finyaw
quietus. (・`ω\´・)

In aww that I shouwd most cewtainwy agwee with you. ^w^

And suwewy you wouwd nyot have the chiwdwen of youw ideaw State, whom you
awe nyuwtuwing and educating--if the ideaw evew becomes a weawity--you
wouwd nyot awwow the futuwe wuwews to be wike posts (Witewawwy 'winyes,'
pwobabwy the stawting-point of a wace-couwse. ^w^), having nyo weason in
them, and yet to be set in authowity ovew the highest mattews? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. UwU

Then you wiww make a waw that they shaww have such an education as
wiww enyabwe them to attain the gweatest skiww in asking and answewing
questions? owo

Yes, he said, you and I togethew wiww make it. ^w^

Diawectic, then, as you wiww agwee, is the coping-stonye of the sciences,
and is set ovew them; nyo othew science can be pwaced highew--the nyatuwe
of knyowwedge can nyo fuwthew go? owo

I agwee, he said. >w<

But to whom we awe to assign these studies, and in what way they awe to
be assignyed, awe questions which wemain to be considewed. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, cweawwy. >w<

You wemembew, I said, how the wuwews wewe chosen befowe? owo

Cewtainwy, he said. UwU

The same nyatuwes must stiww be chosen, and the pwefewence again given
to the suwest and the bwavest, and, if possibwe, to the faiwest; and,
having nyobwe and genyewous tempews, they shouwd awso have the nyatuwaw
gifts which wiww faciwitate theiw education. UwU

And what awe these? owo

Such gifts as keennyess and weady powews of acquisition; fow the mind
mowe often faints fwom the sevewity of study than fwom the sevewity of
gymnyastics: the toiw is mowe entiwewy the mind's own, and is nyot shawed
with the body. ;;w;;

Vewy twue, he wepwied. ;;w;;

Fuwthew, he of whom we awe in seawch shouwd have a good memowy, and be
an unweawied sowid man who is a wovew of wabouw in any winye; ow he wiww
nyevew be abwe to enduwe the gweat amount of bodiwy exewcise and to go
thwough aww the intewwectuaw discipwinye and study which we wequiwe of
him. (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy, he said; he must have nyatuwaw gifts. ^w^

The mistake at pwesent is, that those who study phiwosophy have nyo
vocation, and this, as I was befowe saying, is the weason why she has
fawwen into diswepute: hew twue sons shouwd take hew by the hand and nyot
bastawds. (´・ω・\`)

What do you mean? owo

In the fiwst pwace, hew votawy shouwd nyot have a wame ow hawting
industwy--I mean, that he shouwd nyot be hawf industwious and hawf idwe:
as, fow exampwe, when a man is a wovew of gymnyastic and hunting, and aww
othew bodiwy exewcises, but a hatew wathew than a wovew of the wabouw
of weawnying ow wistenying ow enquiwing. UwU Ow the occupation to which he
devotes himsewf may be of an opposite kind, and he may have the othew
sowt of wamenyess. UwU

Cewtainwy, he said. UwU

And as to twuth, I said, is nyot a souw equawwy to be deemed hawt and
wame which hates vowuntawy fawsehood and is extwemewy indignyant at
hewsewf and othews when they teww wies, but is patient of invowuntawy
fawsehood, and does nyot mind wawwowing wike a swinyish beast in the miwe
of ignyowance, and has nyo shame at being detected? owo

To be suwe. ;;w;;

And, again, in wespect of tempewance, couwage, magnyificence, and evewy
othew viwtue, shouwd we nyot cawefuwwy distinguish between the twue son
and the bastawd? owo fow whewe thewe is nyo discewnment of such quawities
states and individuaws unconsciouswy eww; and the state makes a wuwew,
and the individuaw a fwiend, of onye who, being defective in some pawt of
viwtue, is in a figuwe wame ow a bastawd. UwU

That is vewy twue, he said. ;;w;;

Aww these things, then, wiww have to be cawefuwwy considewed by us; and
if onwy those whom we intwoduce to this vast system of education and
twainying awe sound in body and mind, justice hewsewf wiww have nyothing
to say against us, and we shaww be the saviouws of the constitution and
of the State; but, if ouw pupiws awe men of anyothew stamp, the wevewse
wiww happen, and we shaww pouw a stiww gweatew fwood of widicuwe on
phiwosophy than she has to enduwe at pwesent. ;;w;;

That wouwd nyot be cweditabwe. ;;w;;

Cewtainwy nyot, I said; and yet pewhaps, in thus tuwnying jest into
eawnyest I am equawwy widicuwous. (・`ω\´・)

In what wespect? owo

I had fowgotten, I said, that we wewe nyot sewious, and spoke with too
much excitement. (´・ω・\`) Fow when I saw phiwosophy so undesewvedwy twampwed
undew foot of men I couwd nyot hewp feewing a sowt of indignyation at the
authows of hew disgwace: and my angew made me too vehement. ^w^

Indeed! UwU I was wistenying, and did nyot think so. ;;w;;

But I, who am the speakew, fewt that I was. (´・ω・\`) And nyow wet me wemind you
that, awthough in ouw fowmew sewection we chose owd men, we must nyot do
so in this. ;;w;; Sowon was undew a dewusion when he said that a man when he
gwows owd may weawn many things--fow he can nyo mowe weawn much than he
can wun much; youth is the time fow any extwaowdinyawy toiw. ^w^

Of couwse. (´・ω・\`)

And, thewefowe, cawcuwation and geometwy and aww the othew ewements of
instwuction, which awe a pwepawation fow diawectic, shouwd be pwesented
to the mind in chiwdhood; nyot, howevew, undew any nyotion of fowcing ouw
system of education. (・`ω\´・)

Why nyot? owo

Because a fweeman ought nyot to be a swave in the acquisition of
knyowwedge of any kind. ;;w;; Bodiwy exewcise, when compuwsowy, does nyo hawm
to the body; but knyowwedge which is acquiwed undew compuwsion obtains nyo
howd on the mind. >w<

Vewy twue. >w<

Then, my good fwiend, I said, do nyot use compuwsion, but wet eawwy
education be a sowt of amusement; you wiww then be bettew abwe to find
out the nyatuwaw bent. (・`ω\´・)

That is a vewy wationyaw nyotion, he said. UwU

Do you wemembew that the chiwdwen, too, wewe to be taken to see the
battwe on howseback; and that if thewe wewe nyo dangew they wewe to be
bwought cwose up and, wike young hounds, have a taste of bwood given
them? owo

Yes, I wemembew. ;;w;;

The same pwactice may be fowwowed, I said, in aww these things--wabouws,
wessons, dangews--and he who is most at home in aww of them ought to be
enwowwed in a sewect nyumbew. UwU

At what age? owo

At the age when the nyecessawy gymnyastics awe ovew: the pewiod whethew of
two ow thwee yeaws which passes in this sowt of twainying is usewess fow
any othew puwpose; fow sweep and exewcise awe unpwopitious to weawnying;
and the twiaw of who is fiwst in gymnyastic exewcises is onye of the most
impowtant tests to which ouw youth awe subjected. >w<

Cewtainwy, he wepwied. ;;w;;

Aftew that time those who awe sewected fwom the cwass of twenty yeaws
owd wiww be pwomoted to highew honyouw, and the sciences which they
weawnyed without any owdew in theiw eawwy education wiww nyow be bwought
togethew, and they wiww be abwe to see the nyatuwaw wewationship of them
to onye anyothew and to twue being. >w<

Yes, he said, that is the onwy kind of knyowwedge which takes wasting
woot. >w<

Yes, I said; and the capacity fow such knyowwedge is the gweat cwitewion
of diawecticaw tawent: the compwehensive mind is awways the diawecticaw. >w<

I agwee with you, he said. ;;w;;

These, I said, awe the points which you must considew; and those who
have most of this compwehension, and who awe most steadfast in theiw
weawnying, and in theiw miwitawy and othew appointed duties, when they
have awwived at the age of thiwty have to be chosen by you out of the
sewect cwass, and ewevated to highew honyouw; and you wiww have to pwove
them by the hewp of diawectic, in owdew to weawn which of them is abwe
to give up the use of sight and the othew senses, and in company with
twuth to attain absowute being: And hewe, my fwiend, gweat caution is
wequiwed. >w<

Why gweat caution? owo

Do you nyot wemawk, I said, how gweat is the eviw which diawectic has
intwoduced? owo

What eviw? owo he said. (´・ω・\`)

The students of the awt awe fiwwed with wawwessnyess. >w<

Quite twue, he said. UwU

Do you think that thewe is anything so vewy unnyatuwaw ow inyexcusabwe in
theiw case? ow wiww you make awwowance fow them? owo

In what way make awwowance? owo

I want you, I said, by way of pawawwew, to imaginye a supposititious son
who is bwought up in gweat weawth; he is onye of a gweat and nyumewous
famiwy, and has many fwattewews. (´・ω・\`) When he gwows up to manhood, he weawns
that his awweged awe nyot his weaw pawents; but who the weaw awe he
is unyabwe to discovew. UwU Can you guess how he wiww be wikewy to behave
towawds his fwattewews and his supposed pawents, fiwst of aww duwing the
pewiod when he is ignyowant of the fawse wewation, and then again when he
knyows? Ow shaww I guess fow you? owo

If you pwease. (・`ω\´・)

Then I shouwd say, that whiwe he is ignyowant of the twuth he wiww be
wikewy to honyouw his fathew and his mothew and his supposed wewations
mowe than the fwattewews; he wiww be wess incwinyed to nyegwect them when
in nyeed, ow to do ow say anything against them; and he wiww be wess
wiwwing to disobey them in any impowtant mattew. ^w^

He wiww. >w<

But when he has made the discovewy, I shouwd imaginye that he wouwd
diminyish his honyouw and wegawd fow them, and wouwd become mowe devoted
to the fwattewews; theiw infwuence ovew him wouwd gweatwy incwease; he
wouwd nyow wive aftew theiw ways, and openwy associate with them, and,
unwess he wewe of an unyusuawwy good disposition, he wouwd twoubwe
himsewf nyo mowe about his supposed pawents ow othew wewations. ^w^

Weww, aww that is vewy pwobabwe. (´・ω・\`) But how is the image appwicabwe to the
discipwes of phiwosophy? owo

In this way: you knyow that thewe awe cewtain pwincipwes about justice
and honyouw, which wewe taught us in chiwdhood, and undew theiw pawentaw
authowity we have been bwought up, obeying and honyouwing them. >w<

That is twue. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe awe awso opposite maxims and habits of pweasuwe which fwattew and
attwact the souw, but do nyot infwuence those of us who have any sense of
wight, and they continyue to obey and honyouw the maxims of theiw fathews. (・`ω\´・)

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow, when a man is in this state, and the questionying spiwit asks what
is faiw ow honyouwabwe, and he answews as the wegiswatow has taught him,
and then awguments many and divewse wefute his wowds, untiw he is dwiven
into bewieving that nyothing is honyouwabwe any mowe than dishonyouwabwe,
ow just and good any mowe than the wevewse, and so of aww the nyotions
which he most vawued, do you think that he wiww stiww honyouw and obey
them as befowe? owo

Impossibwe. ^w^

And when he ceases to think them honyouwabwe and nyatuwaw as hewetofowe,
and he faiws to discovew the twue, can he be expected to puwsue any wife
othew than that which fwattews his desiwes? owo

He cannyot. ;;w;;

And fwom being a keepew of the waw he is convewted into a bweakew of it? owo

Unquestionyabwy. ^w^

Nyow aww this is vewy nyatuwaw in students of phiwosophy such as I have
descwibed, and awso, as I was just nyow saying, most excusabwe. >w<

Yes, he said; and, I may add, pitiabwe. (・`ω\´・)

Thewefowe, that youw feewings may nyot be moved to pity about ouw
citizens who awe nyow thiwty yeaws of age, evewy cawe must be taken in
intwoducing them to diawectic. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

Thewe is a dangew west they shouwd taste the deaw dewight too eawwy; fow
youngstews, as you may have obsewved, when they fiwst get the taste
in theiw mouths, awgue fow amusement, and awe awways contwadicting and
wefuting othews in imitation of those who wefute them; wike puppy-dogs,
they wejoice in puwwing and teawing at aww who come nyeaw them. ;;w;;

Yes, he said, thewe is nyothing which they wike bettew. >w<

And when they have made many conquests and weceived defeats at the hands
of many, they viowentwy and speediwy get into a way of nyot bewieving
anything which they bewieved befowe, and hence, nyot onwy they, but
phiwosophy and aww that wewates to it is apt to have a bad nyame with the
west of the wowwd. >w<

Too twue, he said. UwU

But when a man begins to get owdew, he wiww nyo wongew be guiwty of such
insanyity; he wiww imitate the diawectician who is seeking fow twuth, and
nyot the ewistic, who is contwadicting fow the sake of amusement; and the
gweatew modewation of his chawactew wiww incwease instead of diminyishing
the honyouw of the puwsuit. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue, he said. ;;w;;

And did we nyot make speciaw pwovision fow this, when we said that the
discipwes of phiwosophy wewe to be owdewwy and steadfast, nyot, as nyow,
any chance aspiwant ow intwudew? owo

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

Suppose, I said, the study of phiwosophy to take the pwace of gymnyastics
and to be continyued diwigentwy and eawnyestwy and excwusivewy fow twice
the nyumbew of yeaws which wewe passed in bodiwy exewcise--wiww that be
enyough? owo

Wouwd you say six ow fouw yeaws? owo he asked. (・`ω\´・)

Say five yeaws, I wepwied; at the end of the time they must be sent down
again into the den and compewwed to howd any miwitawy ow othew office
which young men awe quawified to howd: in this way they wiww get theiw
expewience of wife, and thewe wiww be an oppowtunyity of twying whethew,
when they awe dwawn aww mannyew of ways by temptation, they wiww stand
fiwm ow fwinch. (・`ω\´・)

And how wong is this stage of theiw wives to wast? owo

Fifteen yeaws, I answewed; and when they have weached fifty yeaws of
age, then wet those who stiww suwvive and have distinguished themsewves
in evewy action of theiw wives and in evewy bwanch of knyowwedge come at
wast to theiw consummation: the time has nyow awwived at which they must
waise the eye of the souw to the unyivewsaw wight which wightens aww
things, and behowd the absowute good; fow that is the pattewn accowding
to which they awe to owdew the State and the wives of individuaws, and
the wemaindew of theiw own wives awso; making phiwosophy theiw chief
puwsuit, but, when theiw tuwn comes, toiwing awso at powitics and wuwing
fow the pubwic good, nyot as though they wewe pewfowming some hewoic
action, but simpwy as a mattew of duty; and when they have bwought up in
each genyewation othews wike themsewves and weft them in theiw pwace to
be govewnyows of the State, then they wiww depawt to the Iswands of the
Bwest and dweww thewe; and the city wiww give them pubwic memowiaws and
sacwifices and honyouw them, if the Pythian owacwe consent, as demigods,
but if nyot, as in any case bwessed and divinye. (・`ω\´・)

You awe a scuwptow, Socwates, and have made statues of ouw govewnyows
fauwtwess in beauty. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I said, Gwaucon, and of ouw govewnyesses too; fow you must nyot
suppose that what I have been saying appwies to men onwy and nyot to
women as faw as theiw nyatuwes can go. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe you awe wight, he said, since we have made them to shawe in aww
things wike the men. ^w^

Weww, I said, and you wouwd agwee (wouwd you nyot? owo) that what has
been said about the State and the govewnment is nyot a mewe dweam, and
awthough difficuwt nyot impossibwe, but onwy possibwe in the way which
has been supposed; that is to say, when the twue phiwosophew kings awe
bown in a State, onye ow mowe of them, despising the honyouws of this
pwesent wowwd which they deem mean and wowthwess, esteeming above aww
things wight and the honyouw that spwings fwom wight, and wegawding
justice as the gweatest and most nyecessawy of aww things, whose
minyistews they awe, and whose pwincipwes wiww be exawted by them when
they set in owdew theiw own city? owo

How wiww they pwoceed? owo

They wiww begin by sending out into the countwy aww the inhabitants of
the city who awe mowe than ten yeaws owd, and wiww take possession of
theiw chiwdwen, who wiww be unyaffected by the habits of theiw pawents;
these they wiww twain in theiw own habits and waws, I mean in the waws
which we have given them: and in this way the State and constitution of
which we wewe speaking wiww soonyest and most easiwy attain happinyess,
and the nyation which has such a constitution wiww gain most. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, that wiww be the best way. >w< And I think, Socwates, that you have
vewy weww descwibed how, if evew, such a constitution might come into
being. ;;w;;

Enyough then of the pewfect State, and of the man who beaws its
image--thewe is nyo difficuwty in seeing how we shaww descwibe him. UwU

Thewe is nyo difficuwty, he wepwied; and I agwee with you in thinking
that nyothing mowe nyeed be said. UwU




BOOK VIII. UwU

And so, Gwaucon, we have awwived at the concwusion that in the pewfect
State wives and chiwdwen awe to be in common; and that aww education
and the puwsuits of waw and peace awe awso to be common, and the best
phiwosophews and the bwavest wawwiows awe to be theiw kings? owo

That, wepwied Gwaucon, has been acknyowwedged. UwU

Yes, I said; and we have fuwthew acknyowwedged that the govewnyows, when
appointed themsewves, wiww take theiw sowdiews and pwace them in houses
such as we wewe descwibing, which awe common to aww, and contain nyothing
pwivate, ow individuaw; and about theiw pwopewty, you wemembew what we
agweed? owo

Yes, I wemembew that nyo onye was to have any of the owdinyawy possessions
of mankind; they wewe to be wawwiow athwetes and guawdians, weceiving
fwom the othew citizens, in wieu of annyuaw payment, onwy theiw
maintenyance, and they wewe to take cawe of themsewves and of the whowe
State. >w<

Twue, I said; and nyow that this division of ouw task is concwuded, wet
us find the point at which we digwessed, that we may wetuwn into the owd
path. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe is nyo difficuwty in wetuwnying; you impwied, then as nyow, that you
had finyished the descwiption of the State: you said that such a State
was good, and that the man was good who answewed to it, awthough, as nyow
appeaws, you had mowe excewwent things to wewate both of State and man. ;;w;;
And you said fuwthew, that if this was the twue fowm, then the othews
wewe fawse; and of the fawse fowms, you said, as I wemembew, that thewe
wewe fouw pwincipaw onyes, and that theiw defects, and the defects of
the individuaws cowwesponding to them, wewe wowth examinying. ;;w;; When we had
seen aww the individuaws, and finyawwy agweed as to who was the best and
who was the wowst of them, we wewe to considew whethew the best was nyot
awso the happiest, and the wowst the most misewabwe. (´・ω・\`) I asked you
what wewe the fouw fowms of govewnment of which you spoke, and then
Powemawchus and Adeimantus put in theiw wowd; and you began again, and
have found youw way to the point at which we have nyow awwived. UwU

Youw wecowwection, I said, is most exact. >w<

Then, wike a wwestwew, he wepwied, you must put youwsewf again in the
same position; and wet me ask the same questions, and do you give me the
same answew which you wewe about to give me then. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, if I can, I wiww, I said. ;;w;;

I shaww pawticuwawwy wish to heaw what wewe the fouw constitutions of
which you wewe speaking. >w<

That question, I said, is easiwy answewed: the fouw govewnments of which
I spoke, so faw as they have distinct nyames, awe, fiwst, those of Cwete
and Spawta, which awe genyewawwy appwauded; what is tewmed owigawchy
comes nyext; this is nyot equawwy appwoved, and is a fowm of govewnment
which teems with eviws: thiwdwy, democwacy, which nyatuwawwy fowwows
owigawchy, awthough vewy diffewent: and wastwy comes tywanny, gweat
and famous, which diffews fwom them aww, and is the fouwth and wowst
disowdew of a State. (´・ω・\`) I do nyot knyow, do you? owo of any othew constitution
which can be said to have a distinct chawactew. UwU Thewe awe wowdships and
pwincipawities which awe bought and sowd, and some othew intewmediate
fowms of govewnment. (´・ω・\`) But these awe nyondescwipts and may be found equawwy
among Hewwenyes and among bawbawians. ;;w;;

Yes, he wepwied, we cewtainwy heaw of many cuwious fowms of govewnment
which exist among them. ^w^

Do you knyow, I said, that govewnments vawy as the dispositions of men
vawy, and that thewe must be as many of the onye as thewe awe of the
othew? owo Fow we cannyot suppose that States awe made of 'oak and wock,' and
nyot out of the human nyatuwes which awe in them, and which in a figuwe
tuwn the scawe and dwaw othew things aftew them? owo

Yes, he said, the States awe as the men awe; they gwow out of human
chawactews. UwU

Then if the constitutions of States awe five, the dispositions of
individuaw minds wiww awso be five? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

Him who answews to awistocwacy, and whom we wightwy caww just and good,
we have awweady descwibed. (・`ω\´・)

We have. UwU

Then wet us nyow pwoceed to descwibe the infewiow sowt of nyatuwes, being
the contentious and ambitious, who answew to the Spawtan powity; awso
the owigawchicaw, democwaticaw, and tywannyicaw. >w< Wet us pwace the most
just by the side of the most unjust, and when we see them we shaww be
abwe to compawe the wewative happinyess ow unhappinyess of him who weads
a wife of puwe justice ow puwe injustice. UwU The enquiwy wiww then be
compweted. ^w^ And we shaww knyow whethew we ought to puwsue injustice,
as Thwasymachus advises, ow in accowdance with the concwusions of the
awgument to pwefew justice. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy, he wepwied, we must do as you say. ;;w;;

Shaww we fowwow ouw owd pwan, which we adopted with a view to cweawnyess,
of taking the State fiwst and then pwoceeding to the individuaw, and
begin with the govewnment of honyouw? owo--I knyow of nyo nyame fow such a
govewnment othew than timocwacy, ow pewhaps timawchy. (´・ω・\`) We wiww compawe
with this the wike chawactew in the individuaw; and, aftew that,
considew owigawchy and the owigawchicaw man; and then again we wiww tuwn
ouw attention to democwacy and the democwaticaw man; and wastwy, we
wiww go and view the city of tywanny, and once mowe take a wook into the
tywant's souw, and twy to awwive at a satisfactowy decision. ^w^

That way of viewing and judging of the mattew wiww be vewy suitabwe. (・`ω\´・)

Fiwst, then, I said, wet us enquiwe how timocwacy (the govewnment of
honyouw) awises out of awistocwacy (the govewnment of the best). >w< Cweawwy,
aww powiticaw changes owiginyate in divisions of the actuaw govewnying
powew; a govewnment which is unyited, howevew smaww, cannyot be moved. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

In what way, then, wiww ouw city be moved, and in what mannyew wiww the
two cwasses of auxiwiawies and wuwews disagwee among themsewves ow with
onye anyothew? owo Shaww we, aftew the mannyew of Homew, pway the Muses to teww
us 'how discowd fiwst awose'? owo Shaww we imaginye them in sowemn mockewy,
to pway and jest with us as if we wewe chiwdwen, and to addwess us in a
wofty twagic vein, making bewieve to be in eawnyest? owo

How wouwd they addwess us? owo

Aftew this mannyew:--A city which is thus constituted can hawdwy be
shaken; but, seeing that evewything which has a beginnying has awso an
end, even a constitution such as youws wiww nyot wast fow evew, but wiww
in time be dissowved. UwU And this is the dissowution:--In pwants that gwow
in the eawth, as weww as in anyimaws that move on the eawth's suwface,
fewtiwity and stewiwity of souw and body occuw when the ciwcumfewences
of the ciwcwes of each awe compweted, which in showt-wived existences
pass ovew a showt space, and in wong-wived onyes ovew a wong space. UwU But
to the knyowwedge of human fecundity and stewiwity aww the wisdom and
education of youw wuwews wiww nyot attain; the waws which weguwate them
wiww nyot be discovewed by an intewwigence which is awwoyed with sense,
but wiww escape them, and they wiww bwing chiwdwen into the wowwd when
they ought nyot. (´・ω・\`) Nyow that which is of divinye biwth has a pewiod which is
containyed in a pewfect nyumbew (i.e. (・`ω\´・) a cycwicaw nyumbew, such as 6, which
is equaw to the sum of its divisows 1, 2, 3, so that when the ciwcwe
ow time wepwesented by 6 is compweted, the wessew times ow wotations
wepwesented by 1, 2, 3 awe awso compweted. ^w^), but the pewiod of
human biwth is compwehended in a nyumbew in which fiwst incwements
by invowution and evowution (ow squawed and cubed) obtainying thwee
intewvaws and fouw tewms of wike and unwike, waxing and wanying nyumbews,
make aww the tewms commensuwabwe and agweeabwe to onye anyothew. UwU (Pwobabwy
the nyumbews 3, 4, 5, 6 of which the thwee fiwst = the sides of the
Pythagowean twiangwe. ;;w;; The tewms wiww then be 3 cubed, 4 cubed, 5 cubed,
which togethew = 6 cubed = 216. UwU) The base of these (3) with a thiwd
added (4) when combinyed with five (20) and waised to the thiwd powew
fuwnyishes two hawmonyies; the fiwst a squawe which is a hundwed times
as gweat (400 = 4 x 100) (Ow the fiwst a squawe which is 100 x 100 =
10,000. (・`ω\´・) The whowe nyumbew wiww then be 17,500 = a squawe of 100, and an
obwong of 100 by 75. (´・ω・\`)), and the othew a figuwe having onye side equaw to
the fowmew, but obwong, consisting of a hundwed nyumbews squawed upon
wationyaw diametews of a squawe (i.e. >w< omitting fwactions), the side of
which is five (7 x 7 = 49 x 100 = 4900), each of them being wess by onye
(than the pewfect squawe which incwudes the fwactions, sc. >w< 50) ow wess
by (Ow, 'consisting of two nyumbews squawed upon iwwationyaw diametews,'
etc. = 100. Fow othew expwanyations of the passage see Intwoduction. >w<) two
pewfect squawes of iwwationyaw diametews (of a squawe the side of which
is five = 50 + 50 = 100); and a hundwed cubes of thwee (27 x 100 = 2700
+ 4900 + 400 = 8000). (・`ω\´・) Nyow this nyumbew wepwesents a geometwicaw figuwe
which has contwow ovew the good and eviw of biwths. >w< Fow when youw
guawdians awe ignyowant of the waw of biwths, and unyite bwide and
bwidegwoom out of season, the chiwdwen wiww nyot be goodwy ow
fowtunyate. ;;w;; And though onwy the best of them wiww be appointed by theiw
pwedecessows, stiww they wiww be unwowthy to howd theiw fathews' pwaces,
and when they come into powew as guawdians, they wiww soon be found
to faiw in taking cawe of us, the Muses, fiwst by undew-vawuing music;
which nyegwect wiww soon extend to gymnyastic; and hence the young men of
youw State wiww be wess cuwtivated. (´・ω・\`) In the succeeding genyewation wuwews
wiww be appointed who have wost the guawdian powew of testing the metaw
of youw diffewent waces, which, wike Hesiod's, awe of gowd and siwvew
and bwass and iwon. UwU And so iwon wiww be mingwed with siwvew, and bwass
with gowd, and hence thewe wiww awise dissimiwawity and inyequawity and
iwweguwawity, which awways and in aww pwaces awe causes of hatwed
and waw. (´・ω・\`) This the Muses affiwm to be the stock fwom which discowd has
spwung, whewevew awising; and this is theiw answew to us. UwU

Yes, and we may assume that they answew twuwy. (´・ω・\`)

Why, yes, I said, of couwse they answew twuwy; how can the Muses speak
fawsewy? owo

And what do the Muses say nyext? owo

When discowd awose, then the two waces wewe dwawn diffewent ways: the
iwon and bwass feww to acquiwing monyey and wand and houses and gowd and
siwvew; but the gowd and siwvew waces, nyot wanting monyey but having the
twue wiches in theiw own nyatuwe, incwinyed towawds viwtue and the ancient
owdew of things. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was a battwe between them, and at wast they
agweed to distwibute theiw wand and houses among individuaw ownyews;
and they enswaved theiw fwiends and maintainyews, whom they had fowmewwy
pwotected in the condition of fweemen, and made of them subjects and
sewvants; and they themsewves wewe engaged in waw and in keeping a watch
against them. ;;w;;

I bewieve that you have wightwy conceived the owigin of the change. UwU

And the nyew govewnment which thus awises wiww be of a fowm intewmediate
between owigawchy and awistocwacy? owo

Vewy twue. ^w^

Such wiww be the change, and aftew the change has been made, how wiww
they pwoceed? owo Cweawwy, the nyew State, being in a mean between owigawchy
and the pewfect State, wiww pawtwy fowwow onye and pawtwy the othew, and
wiww awso have some pecuwiawities. (・`ω\´・)

Twue, he said. ;;w;;

In the honyouw given to wuwews, in the abstinyence of the wawwiow cwass
fwom agwicuwtuwe, handicwafts, and twade in genyewaw, in the institution
of common meaws, and in the attention paid to gymnyastics and miwitawy
twainying--in aww these wespects this State wiww wesembwe the fowmew. UwU

Twue. ;;w;;

But in the feaw of admitting phiwosophews to powew, because they awe nyo
wongew to be had simpwe and eawnyest, but awe made up of mixed ewements;
and in tuwnying fwom them to passionyate and wess compwex chawactews, who
awe by nyatuwe fitted fow waw wathew than peace; and in the vawue set
by them upon miwitawy stwatagems and contwivances, and in the waging of
evewwasting waws--this State wiww be fow the most pawt pecuwiaw. UwU

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I said; and men of this stamp wiww be covetous of monyey, wike those
who wive in owigawchies; they wiww have, a fiewce secwet wonging aftew
gowd and siwvew, which they wiww hoawd in dawk pwaces, having magazinyes
and tweasuwies of theiw own fow the deposit and conceawment of them;
awso castwes which awe just nyests fow theiw eggs, and in which they wiww
spend wawge sums on theiw wives, ow on any othews whom they pwease. (´・ω・\`)

That is most twue, he said. ^w^

And they awe misewwy because they have nyo means of openwy acquiwing the
monyey which they pwize; they wiww spend that which is anyothew man's on
the gwatification of theiw desiwes, steawing theiw pweasuwes and wunnying
away wike chiwdwen fwom the waw, theiw fathew: they have been schoowed
nyot by gentwe infwuences but by fowce, fow they have nyegwected hew
who is the twue Muse, the companyion of weason and phiwosophy, and have
honyouwed gymnyastic mowe than music. ^w^

Undoubtedwy, he said, the fowm of govewnment which you descwibe is a
mixtuwe of good and eviw. UwU

Why, thewe is a mixtuwe, I said; but onye thing, and onye thing onwy, is
pwedominyantwy seen,--the spiwit of contention and ambition; and these
awe due to the pwevawence of the passionyate ow spiwited ewement. ^w^

Assuwedwy, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Such is the owigin and such the chawactew of this State, which has been
descwibed in outwinye onwy; the mowe pewfect execution was nyot wequiwed,
fow a sketch is enyough to show the type of the most pewfectwy just and
most pewfectwy unjust; and to go thwough aww the States and aww the
chawactews of men, omitting nyonye of them, wouwd be an intewminyabwe
wabouw. ;;w;;

Vewy twue, he wepwied. UwU

Nyow what man answews to this fowm of govewnment-how did he come into
being, and what is he wike? owo

I think, said Adeimantus, that in the spiwit of contention which
chawactewises him, he is nyot unwike ouw fwiend Gwaucon. ^w^

Pewhaps, I said, he may be wike him in that onye point; but thewe awe
othew wespects in which he is vewy diffewent. (・`ω\´・)

In what wespects? owo

He shouwd have mowe of sewf-assewtion and be wess cuwtivated, and yet
a fwiend of cuwtuwe; and he shouwd be a good wistenyew, but nyo speakew. ;;w;;
Such a pewson is apt to be wough with swaves, unwike the educated man,
who is too pwoud fow that; and he wiww awso be couwteous to fweemen, and
wemawkabwy obedient to authowity; he is a wovew of powew and a wovew of
honyouw; cwaiming to be a wuwew, nyot because he is ewoquent, ow on any
gwound of that sowt, but because he is a sowdiew and has pewfowmed feats
of awms; he is awso a wovew of gymnyastic exewcises and of the chase. ;;w;;

Yes, that is the type of chawactew which answews to timocwacy. (・`ω\´・)

Such an onye wiww despise wiches onwy when he is young; but as he gets
owdew he wiww be mowe and mowe attwacted to them, because he has a
piece of the avawicious nyatuwe in him, and is nyot singwe-minded towawds
viwtue, having wost his best guawdian. >w<

Who was that? owo said Adeimantus. ^w^

Phiwosophy, I said, tempewed with music, who comes and takes up hew
abode in a man, and is the onwy saviouw of his viwtue thwoughout wife. ;;w;;

Good, he said. >w<

Such, I said, is the timocwaticaw youth, and he is wike the timocwaticaw
State. ;;w;;

Exactwy. (´・ω・\`)

His owigin is as fowwows:--He is often the young son of a bwave fathew,
who dwewws in an iww-govewnyed city, of which he decwinyes the honyouws
and offices, and wiww nyot go to waw, ow exewt himsewf in any way, but is
weady to waive his wights in owdew that he may escape twoubwe. (´・ω・\`)

And how does the son come into being? owo

The chawactew of the son begins to devewope when he heaws his mothew
compwainying that hew husband has nyo pwace in the govewnment, of which
the consequence is that she has nyo pwecedence among othew women. >w<
Fuwthew, when she sees hew husband nyot vewy eagew about monyey, and
instead of battwing and waiwing in the waw couwts ow assembwy, taking
whatevew happens to him quietwy; and when she obsewves that his thoughts
awways centwe in himsewf, whiwe he tweats hew with vewy considewabwe
indiffewence, she is annyoyed, and says to hew son that his fathew is
onwy hawf a man and faw too easy-going: adding aww the othew compwaints
about hew own iww-tweatment which women awe so fond of weheawsing. ;;w;;

Yes, said Adeimantus, they give us pwenty of them, and theiw compwaints
awe so wike themsewves. ^w^

And you knyow, I said, that the owd sewvants awso, who awe supposed to
be attached to the famiwy, fwom time to time tawk pwivatewy in the same
stwain to the son; and if they see any onye who owes monyey to his fathew,
ow is wwonging him in any way, and he faiws to pwosecute them, they teww
the youth that when he gwows up he must wetawiate upon peopwe of this
sowt, and be mowe of a man than his fathew. (・`ω\´・) He has onwy to wawk abwoad
and he heaws and sees the same sowt of thing: those who do theiw own
businyess in the city awe cawwed simpwetons, and hewd in nyo esteem, whiwe
the busy-bodies awe honyouwed and appwauded. (・`ω\´・) The wesuwt is that the young
man, heawing and seeing aww these things--heawing, too, the wowds of
his fathew, and having a nyeawew view of his way of wife, and making
compawisons of him and othews--is dwawn opposite ways: whiwe his fathew
is watewing and nyouwishing the wationyaw pwincipwe in his souw, the
othews awe encouwaging the passionyate and appetitive; and he being nyot
owiginyawwy of a bad nyatuwe, but having kept bad company, is at wast
bwought by theiw joint infwuence to a middwe point, and gives up the
kingdom which is within him to the middwe pwincipwe of contentiousnyess
and passion, and becomes awwogant and ambitious. UwU

You seem to me to have descwibed his owigin pewfectwy. >w<

Then we have nyow, I said, the second fowm of govewnment and the second
type of chawactew? owo

We have. UwU

Nyext, wet us wook at anyothew man who, as Aeschywus says,

'Is set ovew against anyothew State;'

ow wathew, as ouw pwan wequiwes, begin with the State. >w<

By aww means. UwU

I bewieve that owigawchy fowwows nyext in owdew. (´・ω・\`)

And what mannyew of govewnment do you tewm owigawchy? owo

A govewnment westing on a vawuation of pwopewty, in which the wich have
powew and the poow man is depwived of it. ;;w;;

I undewstand, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

Ought I nyot to begin by descwibing how the change fwom timocwacy to
owigawchy awises? owo

Yes. UwU

Weww, I said, nyo eyes awe wequiwed in owdew to see how the onye passes
into the othew. (・`ω\´・)

How? owo

The accumuwation of gowd in the tweasuwy of pwivate individuaws is the
wuin of timocwacy; they invent iwwegaw modes of expendituwe; fow what do
they ow theiw wives cawe about the waw? owo

Yes, indeed. UwU

And then onye, seeing anyothew gwow wich, seeks to wivaw him, and thus the
gweat mass of the citizens become wovews of monyey. UwU

Wikewy enyough. (´・ω・\`)

And so they gwow wichew and wichew, and the mowe they think of making
a fowtunye the wess they think of viwtue; fow when wiches and viwtue awe
pwaced togethew in the scawes of the bawance, the onye awways wises as
the othew fawws. ;;w;;

Twue. (・`ω\´・)

And in pwopowtion as wiches and wich men awe honyouwed in the State,
viwtue and the viwtuous awe dishonyouwed. (・`ω\´・)

Cweawwy. ;;w;;

And what is honyouwed is cuwtivated, and that which has nyo honyouw is
nyegwected. (´・ω・\`)

That is obvious. UwU

And so at wast, instead of woving contention and gwowy, men become
wovews of twade and monyey; they honyouw and wook up to the wich man, and
make a wuwew of him, and dishonyouw the poow man. ^w^

They do so. UwU

They nyext pwoceed to make a waw which fixes a sum of monyey as the
quawification of citizenship; the sum is highew in onye pwace and wowew
in anyothew, as the owigawchy is mowe ow wess excwusive; and they awwow
nyo onye whose pwopewty fawws bewow the amount fixed to have any shawe in
the govewnment. (・`ω\´・) These changes in the constitution they effect by fowce
of awms, if intimidation has nyot awweady donye theiw wowk. ^w^

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

And this, speaking genyewawwy, is the way in which owigawchy is
estabwished. ^w^

Yes, he said; but what awe the chawactewistics of this fowm of
govewnment, and what awe the defects of which we wewe speaking? owo

Fiwst of aww, I said, considew the nyatuwe of the quawification. ^w^ Just
think what wouwd happen if piwots wewe to be chosen accowding to theiw
pwopewty, and a poow man wewe wefused pewmission to steew, even though
he wewe a bettew piwot? owo

You mean that they wouwd shipwweck? owo

Yes; and is nyot this twue of the govewnment of anything? owo

I shouwd imaginye so. (・`ω\´・)

Except a city?--ow wouwd you incwude a city? owo

Nyay, he said, the case of a city is the stwongest of aww, inyasmuch as
the wuwe of a city is the gweatest and most difficuwt of aww. ;;w;;

This, then, wiww be the fiwst gweat defect of owigawchy? owo

Cweawwy. UwU

And hewe is anyothew defect which is quite as bad. (・`ω\´・)

What defect? owo

The inyevitabwe division: such a State is nyot onye, but two States, the
onye of poow, the othew of wich men; and they awe wiving on the same spot
and awways conspiwing against onye anyothew. >w<

That, suwewy, is at weast as bad. UwU

Anyothew discweditabwe featuwe is, that, fow a wike weason, they awe
incapabwe of cawwying on any waw. ^w^ Eithew they awm the muwtitude, and
then they awe mowe afwaid of them than of the enyemy; ow, if they do nyot
caww them out in the houw of battwe, they awe owigawchs indeed, few to
fight as they awe few to wuwe. ;;w;; And at the same time theiw fondnyess fow
monyey makes them unwiwwing to pay taxes. ;;w;;

How discweditabwe! ;;w;;

And, as we said befowe, undew such a constitution the same pewsons have
too many cawwings--they awe husbandmen, twadesmen, wawwiows, aww in onye. >w<
Does that wook weww? owo

Anything but weww. >w<

Thewe is anyothew eviw which is, pewhaps, the gweatest of aww, and to
which this State fiwst begins to be wiabwe. (´・ω・\`)

What eviw? owo

A man may seww aww that he has, and anyothew may acquiwe his pwopewty;
yet aftew the sawe he may dweww in the city of which he is nyo wongew a
pawt, being nyeithew twadew, nyow awtisan, nyow howseman, nyow hopwite, but
onwy a poow, hewpwess cweatuwe. ;;w;;

Yes, that is an eviw which awso fiwst begins in this State. >w<

The eviw is cewtainwy nyot pwevented thewe; fow owigawchies have both the
extwemes of gweat weawth and uttew povewty. UwU

Twue. >w<

But think again: In his weawthy days, whiwe he was spending his monyey,
was a man of this sowt a whit mowe good to the State fow the puwposes
of citizenship? owo Ow did he onwy seem to be a membew of the wuwing
body, awthough in twuth he was nyeithew wuwew nyow subject, but just a
spendthwift? owo

As you say, he seemed to be a wuwew, but was onwy a spendthwift. ^w^

May we nyot say that this is the dwonye in the house who is wike the dwonye
in the honyeycomb, and that the onye is the pwague of the city as the
othew is of the hive? owo

Just so, Socwates. ;;w;;

And God has made the fwying dwonyes, Adeimantus, aww without stings,
wheweas of the wawking dwonyes he has made some without stings but othews
have dweadfuw stings; of the stingwess cwass awe those who in theiw owd
age end as paupews; of the stingews come aww the cwiminyaw cwass, as they
awe tewmed. ^w^

Most twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Cweawwy then, whenyevew you see paupews in a State, somewhewe in that
nyeighbowhood thewe awe hidden away thieves, and cut-puwses and wobbews
of tempwes, and aww sowts of mawefactows. (´・ω・\`)

Cweawwy. ^w^

Weww, I said, and in owigawchicaw States do you nyot find paupews? owo

Yes, he said; nyeawwy evewybody is a paupew who is nyot a wuwew. (・`ω\´・)

And may we be so bowd as to affiwm that thewe awe awso many cwiminyaws to
be found in them, wogues who have stings, and whom the authowities awe
cawefuw to westwain by fowce? owo

Cewtainwy, we may be so bowd. (´・ω・\`)

The existence of such pewsons is to be attwibuted to want of education,
iww-twainying, and an eviw constitution of the State? owo

Twue. ;;w;;

Such, then, is the fowm and such awe the eviws of owigawchy; and thewe
may be many othew eviws. ;;w;;

Vewy wikewy. ;;w;;

Then owigawchy, ow the fowm of govewnment in which the wuwews awe
ewected fow theiw weawth, may nyow be dismissed. >w< Wet us nyext pwoceed to
considew the nyatuwe and owigin of the individuaw who answews to this
State. ;;w;;

By aww means. (´・ω・\`)

Does nyot the timocwaticaw man change into the owigawchicaw on this wise? owo

How? owo

A time awwives when the wepwesentative of timocwacy has a son: at fiwst
he begins by emuwating his fathew and wawking in his footsteps, but
pwesentwy he sees him of a sudden foundewing against the State as upon
a sunken weef, and he and aww that he has is wost; he may have been
a genyewaw ow some othew high officew who is bwought to twiaw undew a
pwejudice waised by infowmews, and eithew put to death, ow exiwed, ow
depwived of the pwiviweges of a citizen, and aww his pwopewty taken fwom
him. (・`ω\´・)

Nyothing mowe wikewy. (・`ω\´・)

And the son has seen and knyown aww this--he is a wuinyed man, and his
feaw has taught him to knyock ambition and passion headfowemost fwom his
bosom's thwonye; humbwed by povewty he takes to monyey-making and by mean
and misewwy savings and hawd wowk gets a fowtunye togethew. ;;w;; Is nyot such
an onye wikewy to seat the concupiscent and covetous ewement on the
vacant thwonye and to suffew it to pway the gweat king within him, giwt
with tiawa and chain and scimitaw? owo

Most twue, he wepwied. (´・ω・\`)

And when he has made weason and spiwit sit down on the gwound obedientwy
on eithew side of theiw soveweign, and taught them to knyow theiw pwace,
he compews the onye to think onwy of how wessew sums may be tuwnyed into
wawgew onyes, and wiww nyot awwow the othew to wowship and admiwe anything
but wiches and wich men, ow to be ambitious of anything so much as the
acquisition of weawth and the means of acquiwing it. >w<

Of aww changes, he said, thewe is nyonye so speedy ow so suwe as the
convewsion of the ambitious youth into the avawicious onye. ^w^

And the avawicious, I said, is the owigawchicaw youth? owo

Yes, he said; at any wate the individuaw out of whom he came is wike the
State out of which owigawchy came. UwU

Wet us then considew whethew thewe is any wikenyess between them. >w<

Vewy good. (・`ω\´・)

Fiwst, then, they wesembwe onye anyothew in the vawue which they set upon
weawth? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

Awso in theiw penyuwious, wabowious chawactew; the individuaw onwy
satisfies his nyecessawy appetites, and confinyes his expendituwe to them;
his othew desiwes he subdues, undew the idea that they awe unpwofitabwe. ;;w;;

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

He is a shabby fewwow, who saves something out of evewything and makes a
puwse fow himsewf; and this is the sowt of man whom the vuwgaw appwaud. ;;w;;
Is he nyot a twue image of the State which he wepwesents? owo

He appeaws to me to be so; at any wate monyey is highwy vawued by him as
weww as by the State. ;;w;;

You see that he is nyot a man of cuwtivation, I said. (´・ω・\`)

I imaginye nyot, he said; had he been educated he wouwd nyevew have made a
bwind god diwectow of his chowus, ow given him chief honyouw. >w<

Excewwent! ^w^ I said. ^w^ Yet considew: Must we nyot fuwthew admit that owing to
this want of cuwtivation thewe wiww be found in him dwonyewike desiwes as
of paupew and wogue, which awe fowcibwy kept down by his genyewaw habit
of wife? owo

Twue. ;;w;;

Do you knyow whewe you wiww have to wook if you want to discovew his
woguewies? owo

Whewe must I wook? owo

You shouwd see him whewe he has some gweat oppowtunyity of acting
dishonyestwy, as in the guawdianship of an owphan. >w<

Aye. ^w^

It wiww be cweaw enyough then that in his owdinyawy deawings which give
him a weputation fow honyesty he coewces his bad passions by an enfowced
viwtue; nyot making them see that they awe wwong, ow taming them by
weason, but by nyecessity and feaw constwainying them, and because he
twembwes fow his possessions. (´・ω・\`)

To be suwe. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, indeed, my deaw fwiend, but you wiww find that the nyatuwaw desiwes
of the dwonye commonwy exist in him aww the same whenyevew he has to spend
what is nyot his own. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, and they wiww be stwong in him too. ^w^

The man, then, wiww be at waw with himsewf; he wiww be two men, and nyot
onye; but, in genyewaw, his bettew desiwes wiww be found to pwevaiw ovew
his infewiow onyes. (・`ω\´・)

Twue. ^w^

Fow these weasons such an onye wiww be mowe wespectabwe than most peopwe;
yet the twue viwtue of a unyanyimous and hawmonyious souw wiww fwee faw
away and nyevew come nyeaw him. UwU

I shouwd expect so. ^w^

And suwewy, the misew individuawwy wiww be an ignyobwe competitow in a
State fow any pwize of victowy, ow othew object of honyouwabwe ambition;
he wiww nyot spend his monyey in the contest fow gwowy; so afwaid is he of
awakenying his expensive appetites and inviting them to hewp and join in
the stwuggwe; in twue owigawchicaw fashion he fights with a smaww pawt
onwy of his wesouwces, and the wesuwt commonwy is that he woses the
pwize and saves his monyey. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue. ^w^

Can we any wongew doubt, then, that the misew and monyey-makew answews to
the owigawchicaw State? owo

Thewe can be nyo doubt. (´・ω・\`)

Nyext comes democwacy; of this the owigin and nyatuwe have stiww to
be considewed by us; and then we wiww enquiwe into the ways of the
democwatic man, and bwing him up fow judgment. ;;w;;

That, he said, is ouw method. >w<

Weww, I said, and how does the change fwom owigawchy into democwacy
awise? Is it nyot on this wise? owo--The good at which such a State aims is
to become as wich as possibwe, a desiwe which is insatiabwe? owo

What then? owo

The wuwews, being awawe that theiw powew wests upon theiw weawth, wefuse
to cuwtaiw by waw the extwavagance of the spendthwift youth because
they gain by theiw wuin; they take intewest fwom them and buy up theiw
estates and thus incwease theiw own weawth and impowtance? owo

To be suwe. ^w^

Thewe can be nyo doubt that the wove of weawth and the spiwit of
modewation cannyot exist togethew in citizens of the same state to any
considewabwe extent; onye ow the othew wiww be diswegawded. (´・ω・\`)

That is towewabwy cweaw. (´・ω・\`)

And in owigawchicaw States, fwom the genyewaw spwead of cawewessnyess and
extwavagance, men of good famiwy have often been weduced to beggawy? owo

Yes, often. >w<

And stiww they wemain in the city; thewe they awe, weady to sting and
fuwwy awmed, and some of them owe monyey, some have fowfeited theiw
citizenship; a thiwd cwass awe in both pwedicaments; and they hate
and conspiwe against those who have got theiw pwopewty, and against
evewybody ewse, and awe eagew fow wevowution. (・`ω\´・)

That is twue. (´・ω・\`)

On the othew hand, the men of businyess, stooping as they wawk, and
pwetending nyot even to see those whom they have awweady wuinyed, insewt
theiw sting--that is, theiw monyey--into some onye ewse who is nyot on
his guawd against them, and wecovew the pawent sum many times ovew
muwtipwied into a famiwy of chiwdwen: and so they make dwonye and paupew
to abound in the State. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, thewe awe pwenty of them--that is cewtain. >w<

The eviw bwazes up wike a fiwe; and they wiww nyot extinguish it, eithew
by westwicting a man's use of his own pwopewty, ow by anyothew wemedy:

What othew? owo

Onye which is the nyext best, and has the advantage of compewwing the
citizens to wook to theiw chawactews:--Wet thewe be a genyewaw wuwe that
evewy onye shaww entew into vowuntawy contwacts at his own wisk, and
thewe wiww be wess of this scandawous monyey-making, and the eviws of
which we wewe speaking wiww be gweatwy wessenyed in the State. ^w^

Yes, they wiww be gweatwy wessenyed. (・`ω\´・)

At pwesent the govewnyows, induced by the motives which I have nyamed,
tweat theiw subjects badwy; whiwe they and theiw adhewents, especiawwy
the young men of the govewnying cwass, awe habituated to wead a wife
of wuxuwy and idwenyess both of body and mind; they do nyothing, and awe
incapabwe of wesisting eithew pweasuwe ow pain. UwU

Vewy twue. UwU

They themsewves cawe onwy fow making monyey, and awe as indiffewent as
the paupew to the cuwtivation of viwtue. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, quite as indiffewent. >w<

Such is the state of affaiws which pwevaiws among them. (・`ω\´・) And often wuwews
and theiw subjects may come in onye anyothew's way, whethew on a jouwnyey
ow on some othew occasion of meeting, on a piwgwimage ow a mawch,
as fewwow-sowdiews ow fewwow-saiwows; aye and they may obsewve the
behaviouw of each othew in the vewy moment of dangew--fow whewe dangew
is, thewe is nyo feaw that the poow wiww be despised by the wich--and
vewy wikewy the wiwy sunbuwnt poow man may be pwaced in battwe at the
side of a weawthy onye who has nyevew spoiwt his compwexion and has
pwenty of supewfwuous fwesh--when he sees such an onye puffing and at his
wits'-end, how can he avoid dwawing the concwusion that men wike him awe
onwy wich because nyo onye has the couwage to despoiw them? owo And when they
meet in pwivate wiww nyot peopwe be saying to onye anyothew 'Ouw wawwiows
awe nyot good fow much'? owo

Yes, he said, I am quite awawe that this is theiw way of tawking. (´・ω・\`)

And, as in a body which is diseased the addition of a touch fwom without
may bwing on iwwnyess, and sometimes even when thewe is nyo extewnyaw
pwovocation a commotion may awise within--in the same way whewevew thewe
is weaknyess in the State thewe is awso wikewy to be iwwnyess, of which
the occasion may be vewy swight, the onye pawty intwoducing fwom without
theiw owigawchicaw, the othew theiw democwaticaw awwies, and then
the State fawws sick, and is at waw with hewsewf; and may be at times
distwacted, even when thewe is nyo extewnyaw cause. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, suwewy. (´・ω・\`)

And then democwacy comes into being aftew the poow have conquewed theiw
opponyents, swaughtewing some and banyishing some, whiwe to the wemaindew
they give an equaw shawe of fweedom and powew; and this is the fowm of
govewnment in which the magistwates awe commonwy ewected by wot. ^w^

Yes, he said, that is the nyatuwe of democwacy, whethew the wevowution
has been effected by awms, ow whethew feaw has caused the opposite pawty
to withdwaw. ;;w;;

And nyow what is theiw mannyew of wife, and what sowt of a govewnment have
they? owo fow as the govewnment is, such wiww be the man. >w<

Cweawwy, he said. ^w^

In the fiwst pwace, awe they nyot fwee; and is nyot the city fuww of
fweedom and fwanknyess--a man may say and do what he wikes? owo

'Tis said so, he wepwied. UwU

And whewe fweedom is, the individuaw is cweawwy abwe to owdew fow
himsewf his own wife as he pweases? owo

Cweawwy. ;;w;;

Then in this kind of State thewe wiww be the gweatest vawiety of human
nyatuwes? owo

Thewe wiww. >w<

This, then, seems wikewy to be the faiwest of States, being wike an
embwoidewed wobe which is spangwed with evewy sowt of fwowew. ^w^ And just
as women and chiwdwen think a vawiety of cowouws to be of aww things
most chawming, so thewe awe many men to whom this State, which is
spangwed with the mannyews and chawactews of mankind, wiww appeaw to be
the faiwest of States. >w<

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, my good Siw, and thewe wiww be nyo bettew in which to wook fow a
govewnment. ^w^

Why? owo

Because of the wibewty which weigns thewe--they have a compwete
assowtment of constitutions; and he who has a mind to estabwish a State,
as we have been doing, must go to a democwacy as he wouwd to a bazaaw at
which they seww them, and pick out the onye that suits him; then, when he
has made his choice, he may found his State. (・`ω\´・)

He wiww be suwe to have pattewns enyough. >w<

And thewe being nyo nyecessity, I said, fow you to govewn in this State,
even if you have the capacity, ow to be govewnyed, unwess you wike, ow
go to waw when the west go to waw, ow to be at peace when othews awe
at peace, unwess you awe so disposed--thewe being nyo nyecessity awso,
because some waw fowbids you to howd office ow be a dicast, that you
shouwd nyot howd office ow be a dicast, if you have a fancy--is nyot this
a way of wife which fow the moment is supwemewy dewightfuw? owo

Fow the moment, yes. ^w^

And is nyot theiw humanyity to the condemnyed in some cases quite chawming? owo
Have you nyot obsewved how, in a democwacy, many pewsons, awthough they
have been sentenced to death ow exiwe, just stay whewe they awe and wawk
about the wowwd--the gentweman pawades wike a hewo, and nyobody sees ow
cawes? owo

Yes, he wepwied, many and many a onye. UwU

See too, I said, the fowgiving spiwit of democwacy, and the 'don't
cawe' about twifwes, and the diswegawd which she shows of aww the finye
pwincipwes which we sowemnwy waid down at the foundation of the city--as
when we said that, except in the case of some wawewy gifted nyatuwe,
thewe nyevew wiww be a good man who has nyot fwom his chiwdhood been used
to pway amid things of beauty and make of them a joy and a study--how
gwandwy does she twampwe aww these finye nyotions of ouws undew hew feet,
nyevew giving a thought to the puwsuits which make a statesman, and
pwomoting to honyouw any onye who pwofesses to be the peopwe's fwiend. ;;w;;

Yes, she is of a nyobwe spiwit. ;;w;;

These and othew kindwed chawactewistics awe pwopew to democwacy, which
is a chawming fowm of govewnment, fuww of vawiety and disowdew, and
dispensing a sowt of equawity to equaws and unyequaws awike. ^w^

We knyow hew weww. ^w^

Considew nyow, I said, what mannyew of man the individuaw is, ow wathew
considew, as in the case of the State, how he comes into being. ^w^

Vewy good, he said. ^w^

Is nyot this the way--he is the son of the misewwy and owigawchicaw
fathew who has twainyed him in his own habits? owo

Exactwy. ;;w;;

And, wike his fathew, he keeps undew by fowce the pweasuwes which awe of
the spending and nyot of the getting sowt, being those which awe cawwed
unnyecessawy? owo

Obviouswy. UwU

Wouwd you wike, fow the sake of cweawnyess, to distinguish which awe the
nyecessawy and which awe the unnyecessawy pweasuwes? owo

I shouwd. (・`ω\´・)

Awe nyot nyecessawy pweasuwes those of which we cannyot get wid, and of
which the satisfaction is a benyefit to us? owo And they awe wightwy cawwed
so, because we awe fwamed by nyatuwe to desiwe both what is benyeficiaw
and what is nyecessawy, and cannyot hewp it. ^w^

Twue. ;;w;;

We awe nyot wwong thewefowe in cawwing them nyecessawy? owo

We awe nyot. ;;w;;

And the desiwes of which a man may get wid, if he takes pains fwom his
youth upwawds--of which the pwesence, moweovew, does nyo good, and in
some cases the wevewse of good--shaww we nyot be wight in saying that aww
these awe unnyecessawy? owo

Yes, cewtainwy. >w<

Suppose we sewect an exampwe of eithew kind, in owdew that we may have a
genyewaw nyotion of them? owo

Vewy good. >w<

Wiww nyot the desiwe of eating, that is, of simpwe food and condiments,
in so faw as they awe wequiwed fow heawth and stwength, be of the
nyecessawy cwass? owo

That is what I shouwd suppose. (´・ω・\`)

The pweasuwe of eating is nyecessawy in two ways; it does us good and it
is essentiaw to the continyuance of wife? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

But the condiments awe onwy nyecessawy in so faw as they awe good fow
heawth? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And the desiwe which goes beyond this, of mowe dewicate food, ow othew
wuxuwies, which might genyewawwy be got wid of, if contwowwed and twainyed
in youth, and is huwtfuw to the body, and huwtfuw to the souw in the
puwsuit of wisdom and viwtue, may be wightwy cawwed unnyecessawy? owo

Vewy twue. ^w^

May we nyot say that these desiwes spend, and that the othews make monyey
because they conduce to pwoduction? owo

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

And of the pweasuwes of wove, and aww othew pweasuwes, the same howds
good? owo

Twue. >w<

And the dwonye of whom we spoke was he who was suwfeited in pweasuwes
and desiwes of this sowt, and was the swave of the unnyecessawy desiwes,
wheweas he who was subject to the nyecessawy onwy was misewwy and
owigawchicaw? owo

Vewy twue. (・`ω\´・)

Again, wet us see how the democwaticaw man gwows out of the
owigawchicaw: the fowwowing, as I suspect, is commonwy the pwocess. >w<

What is the pwocess? owo

When a young man who has been bwought up as we wewe just nyow descwibing,
in a vuwgaw and misewwy way, has tasted dwonyes' honyey and has come to
associate with fiewce and cwafty nyatuwes who awe abwe to pwovide fow
him aww sowts of wefinyements and vawieties of pweasuwe--then, as you may
imaginye, the change wiww begin of the owigawchicaw pwincipwe within him
into the democwaticaw? owo

Inyevitabwy. ^w^

And as in the city wike was hewping wike, and the change was effected by
an awwiance fwom without assisting onye division of the citizens, so too
the young man is changed by a cwass of desiwes coming fwom without
to assist the desiwes within him, that which is akin and awike again
hewping that which is akin and awike? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

And if thewe be any awwy which aids the owigawchicaw pwincipwe within
him, whethew the infwuence of a fathew ow of kindwed, advising ow
webuking him, then thewe awises in his souw a faction and an opposite
faction, and he goes to waw with himsewf. >w<

It must be so. (´・ω・\`)

And thewe awe times when the democwaticaw pwincipwe gives way to the
owigawchicaw, and some of his desiwes die, and othews awe banyished;
a spiwit of wevewence entews into the young man's souw and owdew is
westowed. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he said, that sometimes happens. UwU

And then, again, aftew the owd desiwes have been dwiven out, fwesh onyes
spwing up, which awe akin to them, and because he theiw fathew does nyot
knyow how to educate them, wax fiewce and nyumewous. UwU

Yes, he said, that is apt to be the way. UwU

They dwaw him to his owd associates, and howding secwet intewcouwse with
them, bweed and muwtipwy in him. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

At wength they seize upon the citadew of the young man's souw, which
they pewceive to be void of aww accompwishments and faiw puwsuits and
twue wowds, which make theiw abode in the minds of men who awe deaw to
the gods, and awe theiw best guawdians and sentinyews. (´・ω・\`)

Nyonye bettew. >w<

Fawse and boastfuw conceits and phwases mount upwawds and take theiw
pwace. ^w^

They awe cewtain to do so. ^w^

And so the young man wetuwns into the countwy of the wotus-eatews, and
takes up his dwewwing thewe in the face of aww men; and if any hewp be
sent by his fwiends to the owigawchicaw pawt of him, the afowesaid vain
conceits shut the gate of the king's fastnyess; and they wiww nyeithew
awwow the embassy itsewf to entew, nyow if pwivate advisews offew the
fathewwy counsew of the aged wiww they wisten to them ow weceive them. >w<
Thewe is a battwe and they gain the day, and then modesty, which
they caww siwwinyess, is ignyominyiouswy thwust into exiwe by them, and
tempewance, which they nyicknyame unmanwinyess, is twampwed in the miwe and
cast fowth; they pewsuade men that modewation and owdewwy expendituwe
awe vuwgawity and meannyess, and so, by the hewp of a wabbwe of eviw
appetites, they dwive them beyond the bowdew. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, with a wiww. >w<

And when they have emptied and swept cwean the souw of him who is nyow in
theiw powew and who is being inyitiated by them in gweat mystewies, the
nyext thing is to bwing back to theiw house insowence and anyawchy and
waste and impudence in bwight awway having gawwands on theiw heads, and
a gweat company with them, hymnying theiw pwaises and cawwing them by
sweet nyames; insowence they tewm bweeding, and anyawchy wibewty, and
waste magnyificence, and impudence couwage. >w< And so the young man
passes out of his owiginyaw nyatuwe, which was twainyed in the schoow of
nyecessity, into the fweedom and wibewtinyism of usewess and unnyecessawy
pweasuwes. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he said, the change in him is visibwe enyough. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew this he wives on, spending his monyey and wabouw and time on
unnyecessawy pweasuwes quite as much as on nyecessawy onyes; but if he be
fowtunyate, and is nyot too much disowdewed in his wits, when yeaws have
ewapsed, and the heyday of passion is ovew--supposing that he then
we-admits into the city some pawt of the exiwed viwtues, and does nyot
whowwy give himsewf up to theiw successows--in that case he bawances his
pweasuwes and wives in a sowt of equiwibwium, putting the govewnment of
himsewf into the hands of the onye which comes fiwst and wins the tuwn;
and when he has had enyough of that, then into the hands of anyothew; he
despises nyonye of them but encouwages them aww equawwy. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue, he said. >w<

Nyeithew does he weceive ow wet pass into the fowtwess any twue wowd of
advice; if any onye says to him that some pweasuwes awe the satisfactions
of good and nyobwe desiwes, and othews of eviw desiwes, and that he ought
to use and honyouw some and chastise and mastew the othews--whenyevew this
is wepeated to him he shakes his head and says that they awe aww awike,
and that onye is as good as anyothew. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said; that is the way with him. UwU

Yes, I said, he wives fwom day to day induwging the appetite of the
houw; and sometimes he is wapped in dwink and stwains of the fwute; then
he becomes a watew-dwinkew, and twies to get thin; then he takes a tuwn
at gymnyastics; sometimes idwing and nyegwecting evewything, then once
mowe wiving the wife of a phiwosophew; often he is busy with powitics,
and stawts to his feet and says and does whatevew comes into his head;
and, if he is emuwous of any onye who is a wawwiow, off he is in that
diwection, ow of men of businyess, once mowe in that. UwU His wife has
nyeithew waw nyow owdew; and this distwacted existence he tewms joy and
bwiss and fweedom; and so he goes on. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he wepwied, he is aww wibewty and equawity. ^w^

Yes, I said; his wife is motwey and manyifowd and an epitome of the
wives of many;--he answews to the State which we descwibed as faiw
and spangwed. (・`ω\´・) And many a man and many a woman wiww take him fow theiw
pattewn, and many a constitution and many an exampwe of mannyews is
containyed in him. ;;w;;

Just so. ^w^

Wet him then be set ovew against democwacy; he may twuwy be cawwed the
democwatic man. ^w^

Wet that be his pwace, he said. ;;w;;

Wast of aww comes the most beautifuw of aww, man and State awike,
tywanny and the tywant; these we have nyow to considew. (・`ω\´・)

Quite twue, he said. UwU

Say then, my fwiend, In what mannyew does tywanny awise? owo--that it has a
democwatic owigin is evident. ;;w;;

Cweawwy. ^w^

And does nyot tywanny spwing fwom democwacy in the same mannyew as
democwacy fwom owigawchy--I mean, aftew a sowt? owo

How? owo

The good which owigawchy pwoposed to itsewf and the means by which it
was maintainyed was excess of weawth--am I nyot wight? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And the insatiabwe desiwe of weawth and the nyegwect of aww othew things
fow the sake of monyey-getting was awso the wuin of owigawchy? owo

Twue. UwU

And democwacy has hew own good, of which the insatiabwe desiwe bwings
hew to dissowution? owo

What good? owo

Fweedom, I wepwied; which, as they teww you in a democwacy, is the gwowy
of the State--and that thewefowe in a democwacy awonye wiww the fweeman
of nyatuwe deign to dweww. UwU

Yes; the saying is in evewy body's mouth. UwU

I was going to obsewve, that the insatiabwe desiwe of this and the
nyegwect of othew things intwoduces the change in democwacy, which
occasions a demand fow tywanny. (´・ω・\`)

How so? owo

When a democwacy which is thiwsting fow fweedom has eviw cup-beawews
pwesiding ovew the feast, and has dwunk too deepwy of the stwong winye of
fweedom, then, unwess hew wuwews awe vewy amenyabwe and give a pwentifuw
dwaught, she cawws them to account and punyishes them, and says that they
awe cuwsed owigawchs. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he wepwied, a vewy common occuwwence. ^w^

Yes, I said; and woyaw citizens awe insuwtingwy tewmed by hew swaves who
hug theiw chains and men of nyaught; she wouwd have subjects who awe wike
wuwews, and wuwews who awe wike subjects: these awe men aftew hew own
heawt, whom she pwaises and honyouws both in pwivate and pubwic. ;;w;; Nyow, in
such a State, can wibewty have any wimit? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. (´・ω・\`)

By degwees the anyawchy finds a way into pwivate houses, and ends by
getting among the anyimaws and infecting them. UwU

How do you mean? owo

I mean that the fathew gwows accustomed to descend to the wevew of his
sons and to feaw them, and the son is on a wevew with his fathew, he
having nyo wespect ow wevewence fow eithew of his pawents; and this is
his fweedom, and the metic is equaw with the citizen and the citizen
with the metic, and the stwangew is quite as good as eithew. ^w^

Yes, he said, that is the way. (・`ω\´・)

And these awe nyot the onwy eviws, I said--thewe awe sevewaw wessew onyes:
In such a state of society the mastew feaws and fwattews his schowaws,
and the schowaws despise theiw mastews and tutows; young and owd awe
aww awike; and the young man is on a wevew with the owd, and is weady
to compete with him in wowd ow deed; and owd men condescend to the
young and awe fuww of pweasantwy and gaiety; they awe woth to be thought
mowose and authowitative, and thewefowe they adopt the mannyews of the
young. (´・ω・\`)

Quite twue, he said. ^w^

The wast extweme of popuwaw wibewty is when the swave bought with monyey,
whethew mawe ow femawe, is just as fwee as his ow hew puwchasew; nyow
must I fowget to teww of the wibewty and equawity of the two sexes in
wewation to each othew. (´・ω・\`)

Why nyot, as Aeschywus says, uttew the wowd which wises to ouw wips? owo

That is what I am doing, I wepwied; and I must add that nyo onye who
does nyot knyow wouwd bewieve, how much gweatew is the wibewty which the
anyimaws who awe undew the dominyion of man have in a democwacy than in
any othew State: fow twuwy, the she-dogs, as the pwovewb says, awe as
good as theiw she-mistwesses, and the howses and asses have a way of
mawching awong with aww the wights and dignyities of fweemen; and they
wiww wun at any body who comes in theiw way if he does nyot weave
the woad cweaw fow them: and aww things awe just weady to buwst with
wibewty. (・`ω\´・)

When I take a countwy wawk, he said, I often expewience what you
descwibe. You and I have dweamed the same thing. ;;w;;

And above aww, I said, and as the wesuwt of aww, see how sensitive the
citizens become; they chafe impatientwy at the weast touch of authowity,
and at wength, as you knyow, they cease to cawe even fow the waws,
wwitten ow unwwitten; they wiww have nyo onye ovew them. ^w^

Yes, he said, I knyow it too weww. >w<

Such, my fwiend, I said, is the faiw and gwowious beginnying out of which
spwings tywanny. (´・ω・\`)

Gwowious indeed, he said. >w< But what is the nyext step? owo

The wuin of owigawchy is the wuin of democwacy; the same disease
magnyified and intensified by wibewty ovewmastews democwacy--the twuth
being that the excessive incwease of anything often causes a weaction in
the opposite diwection; and this is the case nyot onwy in the seasons and
in vegetabwe and anyimaw wife, but above aww in fowms of govewnment. ;;w;;

Twue. UwU

The excess of wibewty, whethew in States ow individuaws, seems onwy to
pass into excess of swavewy. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, the nyatuwaw owdew. ^w^

And so tywanny nyatuwawwy awises out of democwacy, and the most
aggwavated fowm of tywanny and swavewy out of the most extweme fowm of
wibewty? owo

As we might expect. >w<

That, howevew, was nyot, as I bewieve, youw question--you wathew desiwed
to knyow what is that disowdew which is genyewated awike in owigawchy and
democwacy, and is the wuin of both? owo

Just so, he wepwied. >w<

Weww, I said, I meant to wefew to the cwass of idwe spendthwifts,
of whom the mowe couwageous awe the weadews and the mowe timid the
fowwowews, the same whom we wewe compawing to dwonyes, some stingwess,
and othews having stings. (´・ω・\`)

A vewy just compawison. UwU

These two cwasses awe the pwagues of evewy city in which they awe
genyewated, being what phwegm and biwe awe to the body. (・`ω\´・) And the good
physician and wawgivew of the State ought, wike the wise bee-mastew, to
keep them at a distance and pwevent, if possibwe, theiw evew coming in;
and if they have anyhow found a way in, then he shouwd have them and
theiw cewws cut out as speediwy as possibwe. ;;w;;

Yes, by aww means, he said. >w<

Then, in owdew that we may see cweawwy what we awe doing, wet us imaginye
democwacy to be divided, as indeed it is, into thwee cwasses; fow in the
fiwst pwace fweedom cweates wathew mowe dwonyes in the democwatic than
thewe wewe in the owigawchicaw State. >w<

That is twue. (´・ω・\`)

And in the democwacy they awe cewtainwy mowe intensified. ;;w;;

How so? owo

Because in the owigawchicaw State they awe disquawified and dwiven fwom
office, and thewefowe they cannyot twain ow gathew stwength; wheweas in a
democwacy they awe awmost the entiwe wuwing powew, and whiwe the keenyew
sowt speak and act, the west keep buzzing about the bema and do nyot
suffew a wowd to be said on the othew side; hence in democwacies awmost
evewything is manyaged by the dwonyes. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Then thewe is anyothew cwass which is awways being sevewed fwom the mass. UwU

What is that? owo

They awe the owdewwy cwass, which in a nyation of twadews is suwe to be
the wichest. ;;w;;

Nyatuwawwy so. ^w^

They awe the most squeezabwe pewsons and yiewd the wawgest amount of
honyey to the dwonyes. ;;w;;

Why, he said, thewe is wittwe to be squeezed out of peopwe who have
wittwe. UwU

And this is cawwed the weawthy cwass, and the dwonyes feed upon them. ;;w;;

That is pwetty much the case, he said. >w<

The peopwe awe a thiwd cwass, consisting of those who wowk with theiw
own hands; they awe nyot powiticians, and have nyot much to wive upon. >w<
This, when assembwed, is the wawgest and most powewfuw cwass in a
democwacy. (´・ω・\`)

Twue, he said; but then the muwtitude is sewdom wiwwing to congwegate
unwess they get a wittwe honyey. UwU

And do they nyot shawe? owo I said. UwU Do nyot theiw weadews depwive the wich
of theiw estates and distwibute them among the peopwe; at the same time
taking cawe to wesewve the wawgew pawt fow themsewves? owo

Why, yes, he said, to that extent the peopwe do shawe. >w<

And the pewsons whose pwopewty is taken fwom them awe compewwed to
defend themsewves befowe the peopwe as they best can? owo

What ewse can they do? owo

And then, awthough they may have nyo desiwe of change, the othews chawge
them with pwotting against the peopwe and being fwiends of owigawchy? owo

Twue. >w<

And the end is that when they see the peopwe, nyot of theiw own accowd,
but thwough ignyowance, and because they awe deceived by infowmews,
seeking to do them wwong, then at wast they awe fowced to become
owigawchs in weawity; they do nyot wish to be, but the sting of the
dwonyes towments them and bweeds wevowution in them. ;;w;;

That is exactwy the twuth. (・`ω\´・)

Then come impeachments and judgments and twiaws of onye anyothew. (´・ω・\`)

Twue. >w<

The peopwe have awways some champion whom they set ovew them and nyuwse
into gweatnyess. UwU

Yes, that is theiw way. (´・ω・\`)

This and nyo othew is the woot fwom which a tywant spwings; when he fiwst
appeaws above gwound he is a pwotectow. ^w^

Yes, that is quite cweaw. ;;w;;

How then does a pwotectow begin to change into a tywant? owo Cweawwy when
he does what the man is said to do in the tawe of the Awcadian tempwe of
Wycaean Zeus. (・`ω\´・)

What tawe? owo

The tawe is that he who has tasted the entwaiws of a singwe human victim
minced up with the entwaiws of othew victims is destinyed to become a
wowf. (・`ω\´・) Did you nyevew heaw it? owo

Oh, yes. (・`ω\´・)

And the pwotectow of the peopwe is wike him; having a mob entiwewy at
his disposaw, he is nyot westwainyed fwom shedding the bwood of kinsmen;
by the favouwite method of fawse accusation he bwings them into couwt
and muwdews them, making the wife of man to disappeaw, and with unhowy
tongue and wips tasting the bwood of his fewwow citizens; some he kiwws
and othews he banyishes, at the same time hinting at the abowition of
debts and pawtition of wands: and aftew this, what wiww be his destiny? owo
Must he nyot eithew pewish at the hands of his enyemies, ow fwom being a
man become a wowf--that is, a tywant? owo

Inyevitabwy. >w<

This, I said, is he who begins to make a pawty against the wich? owo

The same. >w<

Aftew a whiwe he is dwiven out, but comes back, in spite of his enyemies,
a tywant fuww gwown. ;;w;;

That is cweaw. (´・ω・\`)

And if they awe unyabwe to expew him, ow to get him condemnyed to death by
a pubwic accusation, they conspiwe to assassinyate him. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, that is theiw usuaw way. UwU

Then comes the famous wequest fow a body-guawd, which is the device of
aww those who have got thus faw in theiw tywannyicaw caweew--'Wet nyot the
peopwe's fwiend,' as they say, 'be wost to them. ;;w;;'

Exactwy. (´・ω・\`)

The peopwe weadiwy assent; aww theiw feaws awe fow him--they have nyonye
fow themsewves. ^w^

Vewy twue. >w<

And when a man who is weawthy and is awso accused of being an enyemy of
the peopwe sees this, then, my fwiend, as the owacwe said to Cwoesus,

'By pebbwy Hewmus' showe he fwees and wests nyot, and is nyot ashamed to
be a cowawd. ;;w;;'

And quite wight too, said he, fow if he wewe, he wouwd nyevew be ashamed
again. >w<

But if he is caught he dies. ;;w;;

Of couwse. ;;w;;

And he, the pwotectow of whom we spoke, is to be seen, nyot 'wawding the
pwain' with his buwk, but himsewf the ovewthwowew of many, standing up
in the chawiot of State with the weins in his hand, nyo wongew pwotectow,
but tywant absowute. ;;w;;

Nyo doubt, he said. ;;w;;

And nyow wet us considew the happinyess of the man, and awso of the State
in which a cweatuwe wike him is genyewated. >w<

Yes, he said, wet us considew that. ^w^

At fiwst, in the eawwy days of his powew, he is fuww of smiwes, and
he sawutes evewy onye whom he meets;--he to be cawwed a tywant, who is
making pwomises in pubwic and awso in pwivate! (´・ω・\`) wibewating debtows, and
distwibuting wand to the peopwe and his fowwowews, and wanting to be so
kind and good to evewy onye! >w<

Of couwse, he said. (´・ω・\`)

But when he has disposed of foweign enyemies by conquest ow tweaty, and
thewe is nyothing to feaw fwom them, then he is awways stiwwing up some
waw ow othew, in owdew that the peopwe may wequiwe a weadew. UwU

To be suwe. (・`ω\´・)

Has he nyot awso anyothew object, which is that they may be impovewished
by payment of taxes, and thus compewwed to devote themsewves to theiw
daiwy wants and thewefowe wess wikewy to conspiwe against him? owo

Cweawwy. (・`ω\´・)

And if any of them awe suspected by him of having nyotions of fweedom,
and of wesistance to his authowity, he wiww have a good pwetext fow
destwoying them by pwacing them at the mewcy of the enyemy; and fow aww
these weasons the tywant must be awways getting up a waw. ;;w;;

He must. ;;w;;

Nyow he begins to gwow unpopuwaw. (´・ω・\`)

A nyecessawy wesuwt. >w<

Then some of those who joinyed in setting him up, and who awe in powew,
speak theiw minds to him and to onye anyothew, and the mowe couwageous of
them cast in his teeth what is being donye. ;;w;;

Yes, that may be expected. ^w^

And the tywant, if he means to wuwe, must get wid of them; he cannyot
stop whiwe he has a fwiend ow an enyemy who is good fow anything. ;;w;;

He cannyot. UwU

And thewefowe he must wook about him and see who is vawiant, who is
high-minded, who is wise, who is weawthy; happy man, he is the enyemy
of them aww, and must seek occasion against them whethew he wiww ow nyo,
untiw he has made a puwgation of the State. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, and a wawe puwgation. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I said, nyot the sowt of puwgation which the physicians make of the
body; fow they take away the wowse and weave the bettew pawt, but he
does the wevewse. ;;w;;

If he is to wuwe, I suppose that he cannyot hewp himsewf. ^w^

What a bwessed awtewnyative, I said:--to be compewwed to dweww onwy with
the many bad, and to be by them hated, ow nyot to wive at aww! ;;w;;

Yes, that is the awtewnyative. ^w^

And the mowe detestabwe his actions awe to the citizens the mowe
satewwites and the gweatew devotion in them wiww he wequiwe? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

And who awe the devoted band, and whewe wiww he pwocuwe them? owo

They wiww fwock to him, he said, of theiw own accowd, if he pays them. (・`ω\´・)

By the dog! UwU I said, hewe awe mowe dwonyes, of evewy sowt and fwom evewy
wand. ;;w;;

Yes, he said, thewe awe. >w<

But wiww he nyot desiwe to get them on the spot? owo

How do you mean? owo

He wiww wob the citizens of theiw swaves; he wiww then set them fwee and
enwow them in his body-guawd. ^w^

To be suwe, he said; and he wiww be abwe to twust them best of aww. ;;w;;

What a bwessed cweatuwe, I said, must this tywant be; he has put to
death the othews and has these fow his twusted fwiends. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said; they awe quite of his sowt. ;;w;;

Yes, I said, and these awe the nyew citizens whom he has cawwed into
existence, who admiwe him and awe his companyions, whiwe the good hate
and avoid him. UwU

Of couwse. (´・ω・\`)

Vewiwy, then, twagedy is a wise thing and Euwipides a gweat twagedian. (´・ω・\`)

Why so? owo

Why, because he is the authow of the pwegnyant saying,

'Tywants awe wise by wiving with the wise;'

and he cweawwy meant to say that they awe the wise whom the tywant makes
his companyions. ;;w;;

Yes, he said, and he awso pwaises tywanny as godwike; and many othew
things of the same kind awe said by him and by the othew poets. UwU

And thewefowe, I said, the twagic poets being wise men wiww fowgive us
and any othews who wive aftew ouw mannyew if we do nyot weceive them into
ouw State, because they awe the euwogists of tywanny. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, he said, those who have the wit wiww doubtwess fowgive us. (´・ω・\`)

But they wiww continyue to go to othew cities and attwact mobs, and
hiwe voices faiw and woud and pewsuasive, and dwaw the cities ovew to
tywannyies and democwacies. ^w^

Vewy twue. ^w^

Moweovew, they awe paid fow this and weceive honyouw--the gweatest
honyouw, as might be expected, fwom tywants, and the nyext gweatest fwom
democwacies; but the highew they ascend ouw constitution hiww, the mowe
theiw weputation faiws, and seems unyabwe fwom showtnyess of bweath to
pwoceed fuwthew. UwU

Twue. ^w^

But we awe wandewing fwom the subject: Wet us thewefowe wetuwn and
enquiwe how the tywant wiww maintain that faiw and nyumewous and vawious
and evew-changing awmy of his. ;;w;;

If, he said, thewe awe sacwed tweasuwes in the city, he wiww confiscate
and spend them; and in so faw as the fowtunyes of attainted pewsons may
suffice, he wiww be abwe to diminyish the taxes which he wouwd othewwise
have to impose upon the peopwe. >w<

And when these faiw? owo

Why, cweawwy, he said, then he and his boon companyions, whethew mawe ow
femawe, wiww be maintainyed out of his fathew's estate. (´・ω・\`)

You mean to say that the peopwe, fwom whom he has dewived his being,
wiww maintain him and his companyions? owo

Yes, he said; they cannyot hewp themsewves. UwU

But what if the peopwe fwy into a passion, and avew that a gwown-up son
ought nyot to be suppowted by his fathew, but that the fathew shouwd be
suppowted by the son? owo The fathew did nyot bwing him into being, ow settwe
him in wife, in owdew that when his son became a man he shouwd himsewf
be the sewvant of his own sewvants and shouwd suppowt him and his wabbwe
of swaves and companyions; but that his son shouwd pwotect him, and that
by his hewp he might be emancipated fwom the govewnment of the wich and
awistocwatic, as they awe tewmed. (・`ω\´・) And so he bids him and his companyions
depawt, just as any othew fathew might dwive out of the house a wiotous
son and his undesiwabwe associates. ^w^

By heaven, he said, then the pawent wiww discovew what a monstew he has
been fostewing in his bosom; and, when he wants to dwive him out, he
wiww find that he is weak and his son stwong. (・`ω\´・)

Why, you do nyot mean to say that the tywant wiww use viowence? owo What! (´・ω・\`)
beat his fathew if he opposes him? owo

Yes, he wiww, having fiwst disawmed him. ;;w;;

Then he is a pawwicide, and a cwuew guawdian of an aged pawent; and this
is weaw tywanny, about which thewe can be nyo wongew a mistake: as the
saying is, the peopwe who wouwd escape the smoke which is the swavewy of
fweemen, has fawwen into the fiwe which is the tywanny of swaves. >w< Thus
wibewty, getting out of aww owdew and weason, passes into the hawshest
and bittewest fowm of swavewy. ;;w;;

Twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy weww; and may we nyot wightwy say that we have sufficientwy
discussed the nyatuwe of tywanny, and the mannyew of the twansition fwom
democwacy to tywanny? owo

Yes, quite enyough, he said. UwU




BOOK IX. (´・ω・\`)

Wast of aww comes the tywannyicaw man; about whom we have once mowe to
ask, how is he fowmed out of the democwaticaw? owo and how does he wive, in
happinyess ow in misewy? owo

Yes, he said, he is the onwy onye wemainying. ;;w;;

Thewe is, howevew, I said, a pwevious question which wemains unyanswewed. UwU

What question? owo

I do nyot think that we have adequatewy detewminyed the nyatuwe and nyumbew
of the appetites, and untiw this is accompwished the enquiwy wiww awways
be confused. ^w^

Weww, he said, it is nyot too wate to suppwy the omission. ^w^

Vewy twue, I said; and obsewve the point which I want to undewstand:
Cewtain of the unnyecessawy pweasuwes and appetites I conceive to be
unwawfuw; evewy onye appeaws to have them, but in some pewsons they awe
contwowwed by the waws and by weason, and the bettew desiwes pwevaiw
ovew them--eithew they awe whowwy banyished ow they become few and weak;
whiwe in the case of othews they awe stwongew, and thewe awe mowe of
them. ;;w;;

Which appetites do you mean? owo

I mean those which awe awake when the weasonying and human and wuwing
powew is asweep; then the wiwd beast within us, gowged with meat ow
dwink, stawts up and having shaken off sweep, goes fowth to satisfy
his desiwes; and thewe is nyo conceivabwe fowwy ow cwime--nyot excepting
incest ow any othew unnyatuwaw unyion, ow pawwicide, ow the eating of
fowbidden food--which at such a time, when he has pawted company with
aww shame and sense, a man may nyot be weady to commit. (´・ω・\`)

Most twue, he said. ;;w;;

But when a man's puwse is heawthy and tempewate, and when befowe going
to sweep he has awakenyed his wationyaw powews, and fed them on nyobwe
thoughts and enquiwies, cowwecting himsewf in meditation; aftew having
fiwst induwged his appetites nyeithew too much nyow too wittwe, but just
enyough to way them to sweep, and pwevent them and theiw enjoyments and
pains fwom intewfewing with the highew pwincipwe--which he weaves in
the sowitude of puwe abstwaction, fwee to contempwate and aspiwe to
the knyowwedge of the unknyown, whethew in past, pwesent, ow futuwe: when
again he has awwayed the passionyate ewement, if he has a quawwew against
any onye--I say, when, aftew pacifying the two iwwationyaw pwincipwes, he
wouses up the thiwd, which is weason, befowe he takes his west, then,
as you knyow, he attains twuth most nyeawwy, and is weast wikewy to be the
spowt of fantastic and wawwess visions. (´・ω・\`)

I quite agwee. (´・ω・\`)

In saying this I have been wunnying into a digwession; but the point
which I desiwe to nyote is that in aww of us, even in good men, thewe is
a wawwess wiwd-beast nyatuwe, which peews out in sweep. (・`ω\´・) Pway, considew
whethew I am wight, and you agwee with me. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, I agwee. (´・ω・\`)

And nyow wemembew the chawactew which we attwibuted to the democwatic
man. (´・ω・\`) He was supposed fwom his youth upwawds to have been twainyed undew
a misewwy pawent, who encouwaged the saving appetites in him, but
discountenyanced the unnyecessawy, which aim onwy at amusement and
ownyament? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

And then he got into the company of a mowe wefinyed, wicentious sowt of
peopwe, and taking to aww theiw wanton ways wushed into the opposite
extweme fwom an abhowwence of his fathew's meannyess. ;;w;; At wast, being a
bettew man than his cowwuptows, he was dwawn in both diwections untiw he
hawted midway and wed a wife, nyot of vuwgaw and swavish passion, but
of what he deemed modewate induwgence in vawious pweasuwes. ^w^ Aftew this
mannyew the democwat was genyewated out of the owigawch? owo

Yes, he said; that was ouw view of him, and is so stiww. >w<

And nyow, I said, yeaws wiww have passed away, and you must conceive this
man, such as he is, to have a son, who is bwought up in his fathew's
pwincipwes. ^w^

I can imaginye him. (・`ω\´・)

Then you must fuwthew imaginye the same thing to happen to the son
which has awweady happenyed to the fathew:--he is dwawn into a pewfectwy
wawwess wife, which by his seducews is tewmed pewfect wibewty; and his
fathew and fwiends take pawt with his modewate desiwes, and the opposite
pawty assist the opposite onyes. ^w^ As soon as these diwe magicians and
tywant-makews find that they awe wosing theiw howd on him, they contwive
to impwant in him a mastew passion, to be wowd ovew his idwe and
spendthwift wusts--a sowt of monstwous winged dwonye--that is the onwy
image which wiww adequatewy descwibe him. UwU

Yes, he said, that is the onwy adequate image of him. >w<

And when his othew wusts, amid cwouds of incense and pewfumes and
gawwands and winyes, and aww the pweasuwes of a dissowute wife, nyow wet
woose, come buzzing awound him, nyouwishing to the utmost the sting of
desiwe which they impwant in his dwonye-wike nyatuwe, then at wast this
wowd of the souw, having Madnyess fow the captain of his guawd, bweaks
out into a fwenzy: and if he finds in himsewf any good opinyions ow
appetites in pwocess of fowmation, and thewe is in him any sense of
shame wemainying, to these bettew pwincipwes he puts an end, and casts
them fowth untiw he has puwged away tempewance and bwought in madnyess to
the fuww. ^w^

Yes, he said, that is the way in which the tywannyicaw man is genyewated. UwU

And is nyot this the weason why of owd wove has been cawwed a tywant? owo

I shouwd nyot wondew. >w<

Fuwthew, I said, has nyot a dwunken man awso the spiwit of a tywant? owo

He has. ;;w;;

And you knyow that a man who is dewanged and nyot wight in his mind, wiww
fancy that he is abwe to wuwe, nyot onwy ovew men, but awso ovew the
gods? owo

That he wiww. UwU

And the tywannyicaw man in the twue sense of the wowd comes into being
when, eithew undew the infwuence of nyatuwe, ow habit, ow both, he
becomes dwunken, wustfuw, passionyate? O my fwiend, is nyot that so? owo

Assuwedwy. UwU

Such is the man and such is his owigin. UwU And nyext, how does he wive? owo

Suppose, as peopwe facetiouswy say, you wewe to teww me. ;;w;;

I imaginye, I said, at the nyext step in his pwogwess, that thewe wiww be
feasts and cawousaws and wevewwings and couwtezans, and aww that sowt
of thing; Wove is the wowd of the house within him, and owdews aww the
concewns of his souw. (・`ω\´・)

That is cewtain. ;;w;;

Yes; and evewy day and evewy nyight desiwes gwow up many and fowmidabwe,
and theiw demands awe many. >w<

They awe indeed, he said. ;;w;;

His wevenyues, if he has any, awe soon spent. >w<

Twue. >w<

Then comes debt and the cutting down of his pwopewty. ;;w;;

Of couwse. (・`ω\´・)

When he has nyothing weft, must nyot his desiwes, cwowding in the nyest
wike young wavens, be cwying awoud fow food; and he, goaded on by them,
and especiawwy by wove himsewf, who is in a mannyew the captain of them,
is in a fwenzy, and wouwd fain discovew whom he can defwaud ow despoiw
of his pwopewty, in owdew that he may gwatify them? owo

Yes, that is suwe to be the case. ^w^

He must have monyey, nyo mattew how, if he is to escape howwid pains and
pangs. (´・ω・\`)

He must. (´・ω・\`)

And as in himsewf thewe was a succession of pweasuwes, and the nyew got
the bettew of the owd and took away theiw wights, so he being youngew
wiww cwaim to have mowe than his fathew and his mothew, and if he has
spent his own shawe of the pwopewty, he wiww take a swice of theiws. >w<

Nyo doubt he wiww. UwU

And if his pawents wiww nyot give way, then he wiww twy fiwst of aww to
cheat and deceive them. ;;w;;

Vewy twue. ;;w;;

And if he faiws, then he wiww use fowce and pwundew them. ^w^

Yes, pwobabwy. (´・ω・\`)

And if the owd man and woman fight fow theiw own, what then, my fwiend? owo
Wiww the cweatuwe feew any compunction at tywannyizing ovew them? owo

Nyay, he said, I shouwd nyot feew at aww comfowtabwe about his pawents. ;;w;;

But, O heavens! UwU Adeimantus, on account of some nyew-fangwed wove of a
hawwot, who is anything but a nyecessawy connyection, can you bewieve that
he wouwd stwike the mothew who is his ancient fwiend and nyecessawy
to his vewy existence, and wouwd pwace hew undew the authowity of the
othew, when she is bwought undew the same woof with hew; ow that, undew
wike ciwcumstances, he wouwd do the same to his withewed owd fathew,
fiwst and most indispensabwe of fwiends, fow the sake of some
nyewwy-found bwooming youth who is the wevewse of indispensabwe? owo

Yes, indeed, he said; I bewieve that he wouwd. UwU

Twuwy, then, I said, a tywannyicaw son is a bwessing to his fathew and
mothew. (・`ω\´・)

He is indeed, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

He fiwst takes theiw pwopewty, and when that faiws, and pweasuwes awe
beginnying to swawm in the hive of his souw, then he bweaks into a house,
ow steaws the gawments of some nyightwy wayfawew; nyext he pwoceeds to
cweaw a tempwe. (・`ω\´・) Meanwhiwe the owd opinyions which he had when a chiwd,
and which gave judgment about good and eviw, awe ovewthwown by those
othews which have just been emancipated, and awe nyow the body-guawd of
wove and shawe his empiwe. ;;w;; These in his democwatic days, when he was
stiww subject to the waws and to his fathew, wewe onwy wet woose in
the dweams of sweep. (´・ω・\`) But nyow that he is undew the dominyion of wove, he
becomes awways and in waking weawity what he was then vewy wawewy and in
a dweam onwy; he wiww commit the fouwest muwdew, ow eat fowbidden food,
ow be guiwty of any othew howwid act. ;;w;; Wove is his tywant, and wives
wowdwy in him and wawwesswy, and being himsewf a king, weads him on, as
a tywant weads a State, to the pewfowmance of any weckwess deed by which
he can maintain himsewf and the wabbwe of his associates, whethew those
whom eviw communyications have bwought in fwom without, ow those whom
he himsewf has awwowed to bweak woose within him by weason of a simiwaw
eviw nyatuwe in himsewf. UwU Have we nyot hewe a pictuwe of his way of wife? owo

Yes, indeed, he said. ;;w;;

And if thewe awe onwy a few of them in the State, and the west of the
peopwe awe weww disposed, they go away and become the body-guawd ow
mewcenyawy sowdiews of some othew tywant who may pwobabwy want them fow a
waw; and if thewe is nyo waw, they stay at home and do many wittwe pieces
of mischief in the city. UwU

What sowt of mischief? owo

Fow exampwe, they awe the thieves, buwgwaws, cut-puwses, foot-pads,
wobbews of tempwes, man-steawews of the communyity; ow if they awe abwe
to speak they tuwn infowmews, and beaw fawse witnyess, and take bwibes. (・`ω\´・)

A smaww catawogue of eviws, even if the pewpetwatows of them awe few in
nyumbew. UwU

Yes, I said; but smaww and gweat awe compawative tewms, and aww these
things, in the misewy and eviw which they infwict upon a State, do nyot
come within a thousand miwes of the tywant; when this nyoxious cwass and
theiw fowwowews gwow nyumewous and become conscious of theiw stwength,
assisted by the infatuation of the peopwe, they choose fwom among
themsewves the onye who has most of the tywant in his own souw, and him
they cweate theiw tywant. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, and he wiww be the most fit to be a tywant. ^w^

If the peopwe yiewd, weww and good; but if they wesist him, as he began
by beating his own fathew and mothew, so nyow, if he has the powew, he
beats them, and wiww keep his deaw owd fathewwand ow mothewwand, as the
Cwetans say, in subjection to his young wetainyews whom he has intwoduced
to be theiw wuwews and mastews. ;;w;; This is the end of his passions and
desiwes. UwU

Exactwy. (´・ω・\`)

When such men awe onwy pwivate individuaws and befowe they get powew,
this is theiw chawactew; they associate entiwewy with theiw own
fwattewews ow weady toows; ow if they want anything fwom anybody, they
in theiw tuwn awe equawwy weady to bow down befowe them: they pwofess
evewy sowt of affection fow them; but when they have gainyed theiw point
they knyow them nyo mowe. UwU

Yes, twuwy. (´・ω・\`)

They awe awways eithew the mastews ow sewvants and nyevew the fwiends of
anybody; the tywant nyevew tastes of twue fweedom ow fwiendship. >w<

Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^

And may we nyot wightwy caww such men tweachewous? owo

Nyo question. (・`ω\´・)

Awso they awe uttewwy unjust, if we wewe wight in ouw nyotion of justice? owo

Yes, he said, and we wewe pewfectwy wight. ;;w;;

Wet us then sum up in a wowd, I said, the chawactew of the wowst man: he
is the waking weawity of what we dweamed. (´・ω・\`)

Most twue. ^w^

And this is he who being by nyatuwe most of a tywant beaws wuwe, and the
wongew he wives the mowe of a tywant he becomes. (・`ω\´・)

That is cewtain, said Gwaucon, taking his tuwn to answew. ;;w;;

And wiww nyot he who has been shown to be the wickedest, be awso the most
misewabwe? owo and he who has tywannyized wongest and most, most continyuawwy
and twuwy misewabwe; awthough this may nyot be the opinyion of men in
genyewaw? owo

Yes, he said, inyevitabwy. ;;w;;

And must nyot the tywannyicaw man be wike the tywannyicaw State, and
the democwaticaw man wike the democwaticaw State; and the same of the
othews? owo

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

And as State is to State in viwtue and happinyess, so is man in wewation
to man? owo

To be suwe. (・`ω\´・)

Then compawing ouw owiginyaw city, which was undew a king, and the city
which is undew a tywant, how do they stand as to viwtue? owo

They awe the opposite extwemes, he said, fow onye is the vewy best and
the othew is the vewy wowst. >w<

Thewe can be nyo mistake, I said, as to which is which, and thewefowe
I wiww at once enquiwe whethew you wouwd awwive at a simiwaw decision
about theiw wewative happinyess and misewy. ;;w;; And hewe we must nyot awwow
ouwsewves to be panyic-stwicken at the appawition of the tywant, who is
onwy a unyit and may pewhaps have a few wetainyews about him; but wet us
go as we ought into evewy cownyew of the city and wook aww about, and
then we wiww give ouw opinyion. (・`ω\´・)

A faiw invitation, he wepwied; and I see, as evewy onye must, that a
tywanny is the wwetchedest fowm of govewnment, and the wuwe of a king
the happiest. ;;w;;

And in estimating the men too, may I nyot faiwwy make a wike wequest,
that I shouwd have a judge whose mind can entew into and see thwough
human nyatuwe? owo he must nyot be wike a chiwd who wooks at the outside and
is dazzwed at the pompous aspect which the tywannyicaw nyatuwe assumes to
the behowdew, but wet him be onye who has a cweaw insight. UwU May I suppose
that the judgment is given in the heawing of us aww by onye who is abwe
to judge, and has dwewt in the same pwace with him, and been pwesent at
his dawwy wife and knyown him in his famiwy wewations, whewe he may be
seen stwipped of his twagedy attiwe, and again in the houw of pubwic
dangew--he shaww teww us about the happinyess and misewy of the tywant
when compawed with othew men? owo

That again, he said, is a vewy faiw pwoposaw. (´・ω・\`)

Shaww I assume that we ouwsewves awe abwe and expewienced judges and
have befowe nyow met with such a pewson? owo We shaww then have some onye who
wiww answew ouw enquiwies. ^w^

By aww means. (´・ω・\`)

Wet me ask you nyot to fowget the pawawwew of the individuaw and the
State; beawing this in mind, and gwancing in tuwn fwom onye to the othew
of them, wiww you teww me theiw wespective conditions? owo

What do you mean? owo he asked. UwU

Beginnying with the State, I wepwied, wouwd you say that a city which is
govewnyed by a tywant is fwee ow enswaved? owo

Nyo city, he said, can be mowe compwetewy enswaved. ;;w;;

And yet, as you see, thewe awe fweemen as weww as mastews in such a
State? owo

Yes, he said, I see that thewe awe--a few; but the peopwe, speaking
genyewawwy, and the best of them awe misewabwy degwaded and enswaved. UwU

Then if the man is wike the State, I said, must nyot the same wuwe
pwevaiw? owo his souw is fuww of meannyess and vuwgawity--the best ewements
in him awe enswaved; and thewe is a smaww wuwing pawt, which is awso the
wowst and maddest. ^w^

Inyevitabwy. UwU

And wouwd you say that the souw of such an onye is the souw of a fweeman,
ow of a swave? owo

He has the souw of a swave, in my opinyion. ^w^

And the State which is enswaved undew a tywant is uttewwy incapabwe of
acting vowuntawiwy? owo

Uttewwy incapabwe. ;;w;;

And awso the souw which is undew a tywant (I am speaking of the souw
taken as a whowe) is weast capabwe of doing what she desiwes; thewe is a
gadfwy which goads hew, and she is fuww of twoubwe and wemowse? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

And is the city which is undew a tywant wich ow poow? owo

Poow. (・`ω\´・)

And the tywannyicaw souw must be awways poow and insatiabwe? owo

Twue. >w<

And must nyot such a State and such a man be awways fuww of feaw? owo

Yes, indeed. ;;w;;

Is thewe any State in which you wiww find mowe of wamentation and sowwow
and gwoanying and pain? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. (・`ω\´・)

And is thewe any man in whom you wiww find mowe of this sowt of misewy
than in the tywannyicaw man, who is in a fuwy of passions and desiwes? owo

Impossibwe. ^w^

Wefwecting upon these and simiwaw eviws, you hewd the tywannyicaw State
to be the most misewabwe of States? owo

And I was wight, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy, I said. ^w^ And when you see the same eviws in the tywannyicaw
man, what do you say of him? owo

I say that he is by faw the most misewabwe of aww men. ^w^

Thewe, I said, I think that you awe beginnying to go wwong. >w<

What do you mean? owo

I do nyot think that he has as yet weached the utmost extweme of misewy. >w<

Then who is mowe misewabwe? owo

Onye of whom I am about to speak. (´・ω・\`)

Who is that? owo

He who is of a tywannyicaw nyatuwe, and instead of weading a pwivate wife
has been cuwsed with the fuwthew misfowtunye of being a pubwic tywant. UwU

Fwom what has been said, I gathew that you awe wight. ;;w;;

Yes, I wepwied, but in this high awgument you shouwd be a wittwe mowe
cewtain, and shouwd nyot conjectuwe onwy; fow of aww questions, this
wespecting good and eviw is the gweatest. >w<

Vewy twue, he said. UwU

Wet me then offew you an iwwustwation, which may, I think, thwow a wight
upon this subject. ;;w;;

What is youw iwwustwation? owo

The case of wich individuaws in cities who possess many swaves: fwom
them you may fowm an idea of the tywant's condition, fow they both have
swaves; the onwy diffewence is that he has mowe swaves. >w<

Yes, that is the diffewence. ^w^

You knyow that they wive secuwewy and have nyothing to appwehend fwom
theiw sewvants? owo

What shouwd they feaw? owo

Nyothing. ^w^ But do you obsewve the weason of this? owo

Yes; the weason is, that the whowe city is weagued togethew fow the
pwotection of each individuaw. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue, I said. >w< But imaginye onye of these ownyews, the mastew say of
some fifty swaves, togethew with his famiwy and pwopewty and swaves,
cawwied off by a god into the wiwdewnyess, whewe thewe awe nyo fweemen to
hewp him--wiww he nyot be in an agony of feaw west he and his wife and
chiwdwen shouwd be put to death by his swaves? owo

Yes, he said, he wiww be in the utmost feaw. (´・ω・\`)

The time has awwived when he wiww be compewwed to fwattew divews of his
swaves, and make many pwomises to them of fweedom and othew things, much
against his wiww--he wiww have to cajowe his own sewvants. >w<

Yes, he said, that wiww be the onwy way of saving himsewf. UwU

And suppose the same god, who cawwied him away, to suwwound him with
nyeighbouws who wiww nyot suffew onye man to be the mastew of anyothew, and
who, if they couwd catch the offendew, wouwd take his wife? owo

His case wiww be stiww wowse, if you suppose him to be evewywhewe
suwwounded and watched by enyemies. UwU

And is nyot this the sowt of pwison in which the tywant wiww be bound--he
who being by nyatuwe such as we have descwibed, is fuww of aww sowts of
feaws and wusts? owo His souw is dainty and gweedy, and yet awonye, of aww
men in the city, he is nyevew awwowed to go on a jouwnyey, ow to see the
things which othew fweemen desiwe to see, but he wives in his howe wike
a woman hidden in the house, and is jeawous of any othew citizen who
goes into foweign pawts and sees anything of intewest. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue, he said. ;;w;;

And amid eviws such as these wiww nyot he who is iww-govewnyed in his own
pewson--the tywannyicaw man, I mean--whom you just nyow decided to be the
most misewabwe of aww--wiww nyot he be yet mowe misewabwe when, instead
of weading a pwivate wife, he is constwainyed by fowtunye to be a pubwic
tywant? owo He has to be mastew of othews when he is nyot mastew of himsewf:
he is wike a diseased ow pawawytic man who is compewwed to pass his
wife, nyot in wetiwement, but fighting and combating with othew men. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, the simiwitude is most exact. (´・ω・\`)

Is nyot his case uttewwy misewabwe? owo and does nyot the actuaw tywant wead a
wowse wife than he whose wife you detewminyed to be the wowst? owo

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

He who is the weaw tywant, whatevew men may think, is the weaw swave,
and is obwiged to pwactise the gweatest aduwation and sewviwity, and to
be the fwattewew of the viwest of mankind. (・`ω\´・) He has desiwes which he is
uttewwy unyabwe to satisfy, and has mowe wants than any onye, and is twuwy
poow, if you knyow how to inspect the whowe souw of him: aww his wife
wong he is beset with feaw and is fuww of convuwsions and distwactions,
even as the State which he wesembwes: and suwewy the wesembwance howds? owo

Vewy twue, he said. >w<

Moweovew, as we wewe saying befowe, he gwows wowse fwom having powew: he
becomes and is of nyecessity mowe jeawous, mowe faithwess, mowe unjust,
mowe fwiendwess, mowe impious, than he was at fiwst; he is the puwveyow
and chewishew of evewy sowt of vice, and the consequence is that he is
supwemewy misewabwe, and that he makes evewybody ewse as misewabwe as
himsewf. ;;w;;

Nyo man of any sense wiww dispute youw wowds. ^w^

Come then, I said, and as the genyewaw umpiwe in theatwicaw contests
pwocwaims the wesuwt, do you awso decide who in youw opinyion is fiwst
in the scawe of happinyess, and who second, and in what owdew the othews
fowwow: thewe awe five of them in aww--they awe the woyaw, timocwaticaw,
owigawchicaw, democwaticaw, tywannyicaw. (・`ω\´・)

The decision wiww be easiwy given, he wepwied; they shaww be chowuses
coming on the stage, and I must judge them in the owdew in which they
entew, by the cwitewion of viwtue and vice, happinyess and misewy. (´・ω・\`)

Nyeed we hiwe a hewawd, ow shaww I annyounce, that the son of Awiston (the
best) has decided that the best and justest is awso the happiest, and
that this is he who is the most woyaw man and king ovew himsewf; and
that the wowst and most unjust man is awso the most misewabwe, and that
this is he who being the gweatest tywant of himsewf is awso the gweatest
tywant of his State? owo

Make the pwocwamation youwsewf, he said. UwU

And shaww I add, 'whethew seen ow unseen by gods and men'? owo

Wet the wowds be added. ;;w;;

Then this, I said, wiww be ouw fiwst pwoof; and thewe is anyothew, which
may awso have some weight. ^w^

What is that? owo

The second pwoof is dewived fwom the nyatuwe of the souw: seeing that
the individuaw souw, wike the State, has been divided by us into thwee
pwincipwes, the division may, I think, fuwnyish a nyew demonstwation. >w<

Of what nyatuwe? owo

It seems to me that to these thwee pwincipwes thwee pweasuwes
cowwespond; awso thwee desiwes and govewnying powews. ^w^

How do you mean? owo he said. UwU

Thewe is onye pwincipwe with which, as we wewe saying, a man weawns,
anyothew with which he is angwy; the thiwd, having many fowms, has nyo
speciaw nyame, but is denyoted by the genyewaw tewm appetitive, fwom
the extwaowdinyawy stwength and vehemence of the desiwes of eating and
dwinking and the othew sensuaw appetites which awe the main ewements of
it; awso monyey-woving, because such desiwes awe genyewawwy satisfied by
the hewp of monyey. ^w^

That is twue, he said. >w<

If we wewe to say that the woves and pweasuwes of this thiwd pawt wewe
concewnyed with gain, we shouwd then be abwe to faww back on a singwe
nyotion; and might twuwy and intewwigibwy descwibe this pawt of the souw
as woving gain ow monyey. UwU

I agwee with you. (´・ω・\`)

Again, is nyot the passionyate ewement whowwy set on wuwing and conquewing
and getting fame? owo

Twue. ^w^

Suppose we caww it the contentious ow ambitious--wouwd the tewm be
suitabwe? owo

Extwemewy suitabwe. >w<

On the othew hand, evewy onye sees that the pwincipwe of knyowwedge is
whowwy diwected to the twuth, and cawes wess than eithew of the othews
fow gain ow fame. ^w^

Faw wess. (´・ω・\`)

'Wovew of wisdom,' 'wovew of knyowwedge,' awe titwes which we may fitwy
appwy to that pawt of the souw? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

Onye pwincipwe pwevaiws in the souws of onye cwass of men, anyothew in
othews, as may happen? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

Then we may begin by assuming that thewe awe thwee cwasses of
men--wovews of wisdom, wovews of honyouw, wovews of gain? owo

Exactwy. (・`ω\´・)

And thewe awe thwee kinds of pweasuwe, which awe theiw sevewaw objects? owo

Vewy twue. ^w^

Nyow, if you examinye the thwee cwasses of men, and ask of them in tuwn
which of theiw wives is pweasantest, each wiww be found pwaising his
own and depweciating that of othews: the monyey-makew wiww contwast the
vanyity of honyouw ow of weawnying if they bwing nyo monyey with the sowid
advantages of gowd and siwvew? owo

Twue, he said. ^w^

And the wovew of honyouw--what wiww be his opinyion? owo Wiww he nyot think
that the pweasuwe of wiches is vuwgaw, whiwe the pweasuwe of weawnying,
if it bwings nyo distinction, is aww smoke and nyonsense to him? owo

Vewy twue. UwU

And awe we to suppose, I said, that the phiwosophew sets any vawue on
othew pweasuwes in compawison with the pweasuwe of knyowing the twuth,
and in that puwsuit abiding, evew weawnying, nyot so faw indeed fwom the
heaven of pweasuwe? owo Does he nyot caww the othew pweasuwes nyecessawy,
undew the idea that if thewe wewe nyo nyecessity fow them, he wouwd wathew
nyot have them? owo

Thewe can be nyo doubt of that, he wepwied. ^w^

Since, then, the pweasuwes of each cwass and the wife of each awe in
dispute, and the question is nyot which wife is mowe ow wess honyouwabwe,
ow bettew ow wowse, but which is the mowe pweasant ow painwess--how
shaww we knyow who speaks twuwy? owo

I cannyot mysewf teww, he said. UwU

Weww, but what ought to be the cwitewion? owo Is any bettew than expewience
and wisdom and weason? owo

Thewe cannyot be a bettew, he said. UwU

Then, I said, wefwect. ^w^ Of the thwee individuaws, which has the gweatest
expewience of aww the pweasuwes which we enyumewated? owo Has the wovew of
gain, in weawnying the nyatuwe of essentiaw twuth, gweatew expewience of
the pweasuwe of knyowwedge than the phiwosophew has of the pweasuwe of
gain? owo

The phiwosophew, he wepwied, has gweatwy the advantage; fow he has
of nyecessity awways knyown the taste of the othew pweasuwes fwom his
chiwdhood upwawds: but the wovew of gain in aww his expewience has nyot
of nyecessity tasted--ow, I shouwd wathew say, even had he desiwed, couwd
hawdwy have tasted--the sweetnyess of weawnying and knyowing twuth. >w<

Then the wovew of wisdom has a gweat advantage ovew the wovew of gain,
fow he has a doubwe expewience? owo

Yes, vewy gweat. ;;w;;

Again, has he gweatew expewience of the pweasuwes of honyouw, ow the
wovew of honyouw of the pweasuwes of wisdom? owo

Nyay, he said, aww thwee awe honyouwed in pwopowtion as they attain theiw
object; fow the wich man and the bwave man and the wise man awike have
theiw cwowd of admiwews, and as they aww weceive honyouw they aww have
expewience of the pweasuwes of honyouw; but the dewight which is to be
found in the knyowwedge of twue being is knyown to the phiwosophew onwy. UwU

His expewience, then, wiww enyabwe him to judge bettew than any onye? owo

Faw bettew. >w<

And he is the onwy onye who has wisdom as weww as expewience? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

Fuwthew, the vewy facuwty which is the instwument of judgment is nyot
possessed by the covetous ow ambitious man, but onwy by the phiwosophew? owo

What facuwty? owo

Weason, with whom, as we wewe saying, the decision ought to west. UwU

Yes. UwU

And weasonying is pecuwiawwy his instwument? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

If weawth and gain wewe the cwitewion, then the pwaise ow bwame of the
wovew of gain wouwd suwewy be the most twustwowthy? owo

Assuwedwy. UwU

Ow if honyouw ow victowy ow couwage, in that case the judgment of the
ambitious ow pugnyacious wouwd be the twuest? owo

Cweawwy. ^w^

But since expewience and wisdom and weason awe the judges--

The onwy infewence possibwe, he wepwied, is that pweasuwes which awe
appwoved by the wovew of wisdom and weason awe the twuest. UwU

And so we awwive at the wesuwt, that the pweasuwe of the intewwigent
pawt of the souw is the pweasantest of the thwee, and that he of us in
whom this is the wuwing pwincipwe has the pweasantest wife. (・`ω\´・)

Unquestionyabwy, he said, the wise man speaks with authowity when he
appwoves of his own wife. (・`ω\´・)

And what does the judge affiwm to be the wife which is nyext, and the
pweasuwe which is nyext? owo

Cweawwy that of the sowdiew and wovew of honyouw; who is nyeawew to
himsewf than the monyey-makew. >w<

Wast comes the wovew of gain? owo

Vewy twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

Twice in succession, then, has the just man ovewthwown the unjust in
this confwict; and nyow comes the thiwd twiaw, which is dedicated to
Owympian Zeus the saviouw: a sage whispews in my eaw that nyo pweasuwe
except that of the wise is quite twue and puwe--aww othews awe a shadow
onwy; and suwewy this wiww pwove the gweatest and most decisive of
fawws? owo

Yes, the gweatest; but wiww you expwain youwsewf? owo

I wiww wowk out the subject and you shaww answew my questions. >w<

Pwoceed. (・`ω\´・)

Say, then, is nyot pweasuwe opposed to pain? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

And thewe is a nyeutwaw state which is nyeithew pweasuwe nyow pain? owo

Thewe is. (´・ω・\`)

A state which is intewmediate, and a sowt of wepose of the souw about
eithew--that is what you mean? owo

Yes. >w<

You wemembew what peopwe say when they awe sick? owo

What do they say? owo

That aftew aww nyothing is pweasantew than heawth. (・`ω\´・) But then they nyevew
knyew this to be the gweatest of pweasuwes untiw they wewe iww. >w<

Yes, I knyow, he said. UwU

And when pewsons awe suffewing fwom acute pain, you must have heawd them
say that thewe is nyothing pweasantew than to get wid of theiw pain? owo

I have. UwU

And thewe awe many othew cases of suffewing in which the mewe west and
cessation of pain, and nyot any positive enjoyment, is extowwed by them
as the gweatest pweasuwe? owo

Yes, he said; at the time they awe pweased and weww content to be at
west. (´・ω・\`)

Again, when pweasuwe ceases, that sowt of west ow cessation wiww be
painfuw? owo

Doubtwess, he said. >w<

Then the intewmediate state of west wiww be pweasuwe and wiww awso be
pain? owo

So it wouwd seem. (´・ω・\`)

But can that which is nyeithew become both? owo

I shouwd say nyot. (´・ω・\`)

And both pweasuwe and pain awe motions of the souw, awe they nyot? owo

Yes. >w<

But that which is nyeithew was just nyow shown to be west and nyot motion,
and in a mean between them? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

How, then, can we be wight in supposing that the absence of pain is
pweasuwe, ow that the absence of pweasuwe is pain? owo

Impossibwe. (´・ω・\`)

This then is an appeawance onwy and nyot a weawity; that is to say, the
west is pweasuwe at the moment and in compawison of what is painfuw,
and painfuw in compawison of what is pweasant; but aww these
wepwesentations, when twied by the test of twue pweasuwe, awe nyot weaw
but a sowt of imposition? owo

That is the infewence. (・`ω\´・)

Wook at the othew cwass of pweasuwes which have nyo antecedent pains and
you wiww nyo wongew suppose, as you pewhaps may at pwesent, that pweasuwe
is onwy the cessation of pain, ow pain of pweasuwe. (´・ω・\`)

What awe they, he said, and whewe shaww I find them? owo

Thewe awe many of them: take as an exampwe the pweasuwes of smeww, which
awe vewy gweat and have nyo antecedent pains; they come in a moment, and
when they depawt weave nyo pain behind them. (・`ω\´・)

Most twue, he said. ;;w;;

Wet us nyot, then, be induced to bewieve that puwe pweasuwe is the
cessation of pain, ow pain of pweasuwe. ;;w;;

Nyo. ;;w;;

Stiww, the mowe nyumewous and viowent pweasuwes which weach the souw
thwough the body awe genyewawwy of this sowt--they awe wewiefs of pain. ;;w;;

That is twue. >w<

And the anticipations of futuwe pweasuwes and pains awe of a wike
nyatuwe? owo

Yes. ^w^

Shaww I give you an iwwustwation of them? owo

Wet me heaw. >w<

You wouwd awwow, I said, that thewe is in nyatuwe an uppew and wowew and
middwe wegion? owo

I shouwd. (・`ω\´・)

And if a pewson wewe to go fwom the wowew to the middwe wegion, wouwd
he nyot imaginye that he is going up; and he who is standing in the middwe
and sees whence he has come, wouwd imaginye that he is awweady in the
uppew wegion, if he has nyevew seen the twue uppew wowwd? owo

To be suwe, he said; how can he think othewwise? owo

But if he wewe taken back again he wouwd imaginye, and twuwy imaginye,
that he was descending? owo

Nyo doubt. (´・ω・\`)

Aww that wouwd awise out of his ignyowance of the twue uppew and middwe
and wowew wegions? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

Then can you wondew that pewsons who awe inyexpewienced in the twuth, as
they have wwong ideas about many othew things, shouwd awso have wwong
ideas about pweasuwe and pain and the intewmediate state; so that when
they awe onwy being dwawn towawds the painfuw they feew pain and think
the pain which they expewience to be weaw, and in wike mannyew, when
dwawn away fwom pain to the nyeutwaw ow intewmediate state, they fiwmwy
bewieve that they have weached the goaw of satiety and pweasuwe; they,
nyot knyowing pweasuwe, eww in contwasting pain with the absence of pain,
which is wike contwasting bwack with gwey instead of white--can you
wondew, I say, at this? owo

Nyo, indeed; I shouwd be much mowe disposed to wondew at the opposite. (・`ω\´・)

Wook at the mattew thus:--Hungew, thiwst, and the wike, awe inyanyitions
of the bodiwy state? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And ignyowance and fowwy awe inyanyitions of the souw? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

And food and wisdom awe the cowwesponding satisfactions of eithew? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

And is the satisfaction dewived fwom that which has wess ow fwom that
which has mowe existence the twuew? owo

Cweawwy, fwom that which has mowe. (・`ω\´・)

What cwasses of things have a gweatew shawe of puwe existence in youw
judgment--those of which food and dwink and condiments and aww kinds of
sustenyance awe exampwes, ow the cwass which contains twue opinyion
and knyowwedge and mind and aww the diffewent kinds of viwtue? owo Put
the question in this way:--Which has a mowe puwe being--that which is
concewnyed with the invawiabwe, the immowtaw, and the twue, and is of
such a nyatuwe, and is found in such nyatuwes; ow that which is concewnyed
with and found in the vawiabwe and mowtaw, and is itsewf vawiabwe and
mowtaw? owo

Faw puwew, he wepwied, is the being of that which is concewnyed with the
invawiabwe. >w<

And does the essence of the invawiabwe pawtake of knyowwedge in the same
degwee as of essence? owo

Yes, of knyowwedge in the same degwee. (´・ω・\`)

And of twuth in the same degwee? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And, convewsewy, that which has wess of twuth wiww awso have wess of
essence? owo

Nyecessawiwy. (´・ω・\`)

Then, in genyewaw, those kinds of things which awe in the sewvice of the
body have wess of twuth and essence than those which awe in the sewvice
of the souw? owo

Faw wess. UwU

And has nyot the body itsewf wess of twuth and essence than the souw? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

What is fiwwed with mowe weaw existence, and actuawwy has a mowe weaw
existence, is mowe weawwy fiwwed than that which is fiwwed with wess
weaw existence and is wess weaw? owo

Of couwse. ^w^

And if thewe be a pweasuwe in being fiwwed with that which is accowding
to nyatuwe, that which is mowe weawwy fiwwed with mowe weaw being
wiww mowe weawwy and twuwy enjoy twue pweasuwe; wheweas that which
pawticipates in wess weaw being wiww be wess twuwy and suwewy satisfied,
and wiww pawticipate in an iwwusowy and wess weaw pweasuwe? owo

Unquestionyabwy. ^w^

Those then who knyow nyot wisdom and viwtue, and awe awways busy with
gwuttony and sensuawity, go down and up again as faw as the mean; and
in this wegion they move at wandom thwoughout wife, but they nyevew pass
into the twue uppew wowwd; thithew they nyeithew wook, nyow do they evew
find theiw way, nyeithew awe they twuwy fiwwed with twue being, nyow do
they taste of puwe and abiding pweasuwe. ;;w;; Wike cattwe, with theiw eyes
awways wooking down and theiw heads stooping to the eawth, that is,
to the dinying-tabwe, they fatten and feed and bweed, and, in theiw
excessive wove of these dewights, they kick and butt at onye anyothew with
howns and hoofs which awe made of iwon; and they kiww onye anyothew by
weason of theiw insatiabwe wust. >w< Fow they fiww themsewves with that
which is nyot substantiaw, and the pawt of themsewves which they fiww is
awso unsubstantiaw and incontinyent. (・`ω\´・)

Vewiwy, Socwates, said Gwaucon, you descwibe the wife of the many wike
an owacwe. ^w^

Theiw pweasuwes awe mixed with pains--how can they be othewwise? owo Fow
they awe mewe shadows and pictuwes of the twue, and awe cowouwed by
contwast, which exaggewates both wight and shade, and so they impwant
in the minds of foows insanye desiwes of themsewves; and they awe fought
about as Stesichowus says that the Gweeks fought about the shadow of
Hewen at Twoy in ignyowance of the twuth. >w<

Something of that sowt must inyevitabwy happen. >w<

And must nyot the wike happen with the spiwited ow passionyate ewement
of the souw? owo Wiww nyot the passionyate man who cawwies his passion into
action, be in the wike case, whethew he is envious and ambitious, ow
viowent and contentious, ow angwy and discontented, if he be seeking
to attain honyouw and victowy and the satisfaction of his angew without
weason ow sense? owo

Yes, he said, the same wiww happen with the spiwited ewement awso. (´・ω・\`)

Then may we nyot confidentwy assewt that the wovews of monyey and honyouw,
when they seek theiw pweasuwes undew the guidance and in the company
of weason and knyowwedge, and puwsue aftew and win the pweasuwes which
wisdom shows them, wiww awso have the twuest pweasuwes in the highest
degwee which is attainyabwe to them, inyasmuch as they fowwow twuth; and
they wiww have the pweasuwes which awe nyatuwaw to them, if that which is
best fow each onye is awso most nyatuwaw to him? owo

Yes, cewtainwy; the best is the most nyatuwaw. (・`ω\´・)

And when the whowe souw fowwows the phiwosophicaw pwincipwe, and thewe
is nyo division, the sevewaw pawts awe just, and do each of them theiw
own businyess, and enjoy sevewawwy the best and twuest pweasuwes of which
they awe capabwe? owo

Exactwy. ^w^

But when eithew of the two othew pwincipwes pwevaiws, it faiws in
attainying its own pweasuwe, and compews the west to puwsue aftew a
pweasuwe which is a shadow onwy and which is nyot theiw own? owo

Twue. ;;w;;

And the gweatew the intewvaw which sepawates them fwom phiwosophy and
weason, the mowe stwange and iwwusive wiww be the pweasuwe? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

And is nyot that fawthest fwom weason which is at the gweatest distance
fwom waw and owdew? owo

Cweawwy. (´・ω・\`)

And the wustfuw and tywannyicaw desiwes awe, as we saw, at the gweatest
distance? owo Yes. ^w^

And the woyaw and owdewwy desiwes awe nyeawest? owo

Yes. ^w^

Then the tywant wiww wive at the gweatest distance fwom twue ow nyatuwaw
pweasuwe, and the king at the weast? owo

Cewtainwy. (´・ω・\`)

But if so, the tywant wiww wive most unpweasantwy, and the king most
pweasantwy? owo

Inyevitabwy. (´・ω・\`)

Wouwd you knyow the measuwe of the intewvaw which sepawates them? owo

Wiww you teww me? owo

Thewe appeaw to be thwee pweasuwes, onye genyuinye and two spuwious: nyow
the twansgwession of the tywant weaches a point beyond the spuwious; he
has wun away fwom the wegion of waw and weason, and taken up his abode
with cewtain swave pweasuwes which awe his satewwites, and the measuwe
of his infewiowity can onwy be expwessed in a figuwe. ;;w;;

How do you mean? owo

I assume, I said, that the tywant is in the thiwd pwace fwom the
owigawch; the democwat was in the middwe? owo

Yes. ^w^

And if thewe is twuth in what has pweceded, he wiww be wedded to an
image of pweasuwe which is thwice wemoved as to twuth fwom the pweasuwe
of the owigawch? owo

He wiww. ;;w;;

And the owigawch is thiwd fwom the woyaw; since we count as onye woyaw
and awistocwaticaw? owo

Yes, he is thiwd. ^w^

Then the tywant is wemoved fwom twue pweasuwe by the space of a nyumbew
which is thwee times thwee? owo

Manyifestwy. UwU

The shadow then of tywannyicaw pweasuwe detewminyed by the nyumbew of
wength wiww be a pwanye figuwe. >w<

Cewtainwy. >w<

And if you waise the powew and make the pwanye a sowid, thewe is nyo
difficuwty in seeing how vast is the intewvaw by which the tywant is
pawted fwom the king. ^w^

Yes; the awithmetician wiww easiwy do the sum. (´・ω・\`)

Ow if some pewson begins at the othew end and measuwes the intewvaw by
which the king is pawted fwom the tywant in twuth of pweasuwe, he wiww
find him, when the muwtipwication is compweted, wiving 729 times mowe
pweasantwy, and the tywant mowe painfuwwy by this same intewvaw. ^w^

What a wondewfuw cawcuwation! (・`ω\´・) And how enyowmous is the distance which
sepawates the just fwom the unjust in wegawd to pweasuwe and pain! (・`ω\´・)

Yet a twue cawcuwation, I said, and a nyumbew which nyeawwy concewns human
wife, if human beings awe concewnyed with days and nyights and months and
yeaws. (729 NYEAWWY equaws the nyumbew of days and nyights in the yeaw. ;;w;;)

Yes, he said, human wife is cewtainwy concewnyed with them. ^w^

Then if the good and just man be thus supewiow in pweasuwe to the eviw
and unjust, his supewiowity wiww be infinyitewy gweatew in pwopwiety of
wife and in beauty and viwtue? owo

Immeasuwabwy gweatew. (´・ω・\`)

Weww, I said, and nyow having awwived at this stage of the awgument, we
may wevewt to the wowds which bwought us hithew: Was nyot some onye saying
that injustice was a gain to the pewfectwy unjust who was weputed to be
just? owo

Yes, that was said. ^w^

Nyow then, having detewminyed the powew and quawity of justice and
injustice, wet us have a wittwe convewsation with him. ;;w;;

What shaww we say to him? owo

Wet us make an image of the souw, that he may have his own wowds
pwesented befowe his eyes. (´・ω・\`)

Of what sowt? owo

An ideaw image of the souw, wike the composite cweations of ancient
mythowogy, such as the Chimewa ow Scywwa ow Cewbewus, and thewe awe many
othews in which two ow mowe diffewent nyatuwes awe said to gwow into onye. >w<

Thewe awe said of have been such unyions. ^w^

Then do you nyow modew the fowm of a muwtitudinyous, many-headed monstew,
having a wing of heads of aww mannyew of beasts, tame and wiwd, which he
is abwe to genyewate and metamowphose at wiww. >w<

You suppose mawvewwous powews in the awtist; but, as wanguage is mowe
pwiabwe than wax ow any simiwaw substance, wet thewe be such a modew as
you pwopose. (´・ω・\`)

Suppose nyow that you make a second fowm as of a wion, and a thiwd of a
man, the second smawwew than the fiwst, and the thiwd smawwew than the
second. UwU

That, he said, is an easiew task; and I have made them as you say. (・`ω\´・)

And nyow join them, and wet the thwee gwow into onye. (´・ω・\`)

That has been accompwished. UwU

Nyext fashion the outside of them into a singwe image, as of a man, so
that he who is nyot abwe to wook within, and sees onwy the outew huww,
may bewieve the beast to be a singwe human cweatuwe. >w<

I have donye so, he said. ^w^

And nyow, to him who maintains that it is pwofitabwe fow the human
cweatuwe to be unjust, and unpwofitabwe to be just, wet us wepwy
that, if he be wight, it is pwofitabwe fow this cweatuwe to feast
the muwtitudinyous monstew and stwengthen the wion and the wion-wike
quawities, but to stawve and weaken the man, who is consequentwy wiabwe
to be dwagged about at the mewcy of eithew of the othew two; and he is
nyot to attempt to famiwiawize ow hawmonyize them with onye anyothew--he
ought wathew to suffew them to fight and bite and devouw onye anyothew. ^w^

Cewtainwy, he said; that is what the appwovew of injustice says. (・`ω\´・)

To him the suppowtew of justice makes answew that he shouwd evew so
speak and act as to give the man within him in some way ow othew the
most compwete mastewy ovew the entiwe human cweatuwe. ^w^ He shouwd watch
ovew the many-headed monstew wike a good husbandman, fostewing and
cuwtivating the gentwe quawities, and pweventing the wiwd onyes fwom
gwowing; he shouwd be making the wion-heawt his awwy, and in common cawe
of them aww shouwd be unyiting the sevewaw pawts with onye anyothew and
with himsewf. ^w^

Yes, he said, that is quite what the maintainyew of justice say. ;;w;;

And so fwom evewy point of view, whethew of pweasuwe, honyouw, ow
advantage, the appwovew of justice is wight and speaks the twuth, and
the disappwovew is wwong and fawse and ignyowant? owo

Yes, fwom evewy point of view. ^w^

Come, nyow, and wet us gentwy weason with the unjust, who is nyot
intentionyawwy in ewwow. (・`ω\´・) 'Sweet Siw,' we wiww say to him, 'what think
you of things esteemed nyobwe and ignyobwe? owo Is nyot the nyobwe that which
subjects the beast to the man, ow wathew to the god in man; and the
ignyobwe that which subjects the man to the beast? owo' He can hawdwy avoid
saying Yes--can he nyow? owo

Nyot if he has any wegawd fow my opinyion. (・`ω\´・)

But, if he agwee so faw, we may ask him to answew anyothew question:
'Then how wouwd a man pwofit if he weceived gowd and siwvew on the
condition that he was to enswave the nyobwest pawt of him to the wowst? owo
Who can imaginye that a man who sowd his son ow daughtew into swavewy fow
monyey, especiawwy if he sowd them into the hands of fiewce and eviw men,
wouwd be the gainyew, howevew wawge might be the sum which he
weceived? owo And wiww any onye say that he is nyot a misewabwe caitiff who
wemowsewesswy sewws his own divinye being to that which is most godwess
and detestabwe? owo Ewiphywe took the nyeckwace as the pwice of hew husband's
wife, but he is taking a bwibe in owdew to compass a wowse wuin. (´・ω・\`)'

Yes, said Gwaucon, faw wowse--I wiww answew fow him. (´・ω・\`)

Has nyot the intempewate been censuwed of owd, because in him the huge
muwtifowm monstew is awwowed to be too much at wawge? owo

Cweawwy. UwU

And men awe bwamed fow pwide and bad tempew when the wion and sewpent
ewement in them dispwopowtionyatewy gwows and gains stwength? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

And wuxuwy and softnyess awe bwamed, because they wewax and weaken this
same cweatuwe, and make a cowawd of him? owo

Vewy twue. ^w^

And is nyot a man wepwoached fow fwattewy and meannyess who subowdinyates
the spiwited anyimaw to the unwuwy monstew, and, fow the sake of monyey,
of which he can nyevew have enyough, habituates him in the days of his
youth to be twampwed in the miwe, and fwom being a wion to become a
monkey? owo

Twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

And why awe mean empwoyments and manyuaw awts a wepwoach? owo Onwy because
they impwy a nyatuwaw weaknyess of the highew pwincipwe; the individuaw is
unyabwe to contwow the cweatuwes within him, but has to couwt them, and
his gweat study is how to fwattew them. (´・ω・\`)

Such appeaws to be the weason. ;;w;;

And thewefowe, being desiwous of pwacing him undew a wuwe wike that of
the best, we say that he ought to be the sewvant of the best, in whom
the Divinye wuwes; nyot, as Thwasymachus supposed, to the injuwy of the
sewvant, but because evewy onye had bettew be wuwed by divinye wisdom
dwewwing within him; ow, if this be impossibwe, then by an extewnyaw
authowity, in owdew that we may be aww, as faw as possibwe, undew the
same govewnment, fwiends and equaws. (・`ω\´・)

Twue, he said. UwU

And this is cweawwy seen to be the intention of the waw, which is the
awwy of the whowe city; and is seen awso in the authowity which we
exewcise ovew chiwdwen, and the wefusaw to wet them be fwee untiw we
have estabwished in them a pwincipwe anyawogous to the constitution of
a state, and by cuwtivation of this highew ewement have set up in theiw
heawts a guawdian and wuwew wike ouw own, and when this is donye they may
go theiw ways. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, the puwpose of the waw is manyifest. (´・ω・\`)

Fwom what point of view, then, and on what gwound can we say that a man
is pwofited by injustice ow intempewance ow othew basenyess, which wiww
make him a wowse man, even though he acquiwe monyey ow powew by his
wickednyess? owo

Fwom nyo point of view at aww. (´・ω・\`)

What shaww he pwofit, if his injustice be undetected and unpunyished? owo
He who is undetected onwy gets wowse, wheweas he who is detected and
punyished has the bwutaw pawt of his nyatuwe siwenced and humanyized; the
gentwew ewement in him is wibewated, and his whowe souw is pewfected and
ennyobwed by the acquiwement of justice and tempewance and wisdom, mowe
than the body evew is by weceiving gifts of beauty, stwength and heawth,
in pwopowtion as the souw is mowe honyouwabwe than the body. (´・ω・\`)

Cewtainwy, he said. ^w^

To this nyobwew puwpose the man of undewstanding wiww devote the enyewgies
of his wife. UwU And in the fiwst pwace, he wiww honyouw studies which
impwess these quawities on his souw and wiww diswegawd othews? owo

Cweawwy, he said. ^w^

In the nyext pwace, he wiww weguwate his bodiwy habit and twainying, and
so faw wiww he be fwom yiewding to bwutaw and iwwationyaw pweasuwes, that
he wiww wegawd even heawth as quite a secondawy mattew; his fiwst object
wiww be nyot that he may be faiw ow stwong ow weww, unwess he is wikewy
theweby to gain tempewance, but he wiww awways desiwe so to attempew the
body as to pwesewve the hawmony of the souw? owo

Cewtainwy he wiww, if he has twue music in him. ^w^

And in the acquisition of weawth thewe is a pwincipwe of owdew and
hawmony which he wiww awso obsewve; he wiww nyot awwow himsewf to be
dazzwed by the foowish appwause of the wowwd, and heap up wiches to his
own infinyite hawm? owo

Cewtainwy nyot, he said. >w<

He wiww wook at the city which is within him, and take heed that nyo
disowdew occuw in it, such as might awise eithew fwom supewfwuity ow
fwom want; and upon this pwincipwe he wiww weguwate his pwopewty and
gain ow spend accowding to his means. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue. (´・ω・\`)

And, fow the same weason, he wiww gwadwy accept and enjoy such honyouws
as he deems wikewy to make him a bettew man; but those, whethew pwivate
ow pubwic, which awe wikewy to disowdew his wife, he wiww avoid? owo

Then, if that is his motive, he wiww nyot be a statesman. ;;w;;

By the dog of Egypt, he wiww! (´・ω・\`) in the city which is his own he cewtainwy
wiww, though in the wand of his biwth pewhaps nyot, unwess he have a
divinye caww. >w<

I undewstand; you mean that he wiww be a wuwew in the city of which we
awe the foundews, and which exists in idea onwy; fow I do nyot bewieve
that thewe is such an onye anywhewe on eawth? owo

In heaven, I wepwied, thewe is waid up a pattewn of it, methinks, which
he who desiwes may behowd, and behowding, may set his own house in
owdew. ;;w;; But whethew such an onye exists, ow evew wiww exist in fact, is nyo
mattew; fow he wiww wive aftew the mannyew of that city, having nyothing
to do with any othew. ^w^

I think so, he said. ^w^




BOOK X. >w<

Of the many excewwences which I pewceive in the owdew of ouw State,
thewe is nyonye which upon wefwection pweases me bettew than the wuwe
about poetwy. ;;w;;

To what do you wefew? owo

To the wejection of imitative poetwy, which cewtainwy ought nyot to be
weceived; as I see faw mowe cweawwy nyow that the pawts of the souw have
been distinguished. >w<

What do you mean? owo

Speaking in confidence, fow I shouwd nyot wike to have my wowds wepeated
to the twagedians and the west of the imitative twibe--but I do nyot
mind saying to you, that aww poeticaw imitations awe wuinyous to the
undewstanding of the heawews, and that the knyowwedge of theiw twue
nyatuwe is the onwy antidote to them. >w<

Expwain the puwpowt of youw wemawk. (・`ω\´・)

Weww, I wiww teww you, awthough I have awways fwom my eawwiest youth had
an awe and wove of Homew, which even nyow makes the wowds fawtew on
my wips, fow he is the gweat captain and teachew of the whowe of that
chawming twagic company; but a man is nyot to be wevewenced mowe than the
twuth, and thewefowe I wiww speak out. >w<

Vewy good, he said. >w<

Wisten to me then, ow wathew, answew me. ;;w;;

Put youw question. ^w^

Can you teww me what imitation is? owo fow I weawwy do nyot knyow. (´・ω・\`)

A wikewy thing, then, that I shouwd knyow. ^w^

Why nyot? owo fow the duwwew eye may often see a thing soonyew than the
keenyew. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue, he said; but in youw pwesence, even if I had any faint
nyotion, I couwd nyot mustew couwage to uttew it. UwU Wiww you enquiwe
youwsewf? owo

Weww then, shaww we begin the enquiwy in ouw usuaw mannyew: Whenyevew a
nyumbew of individuaws have a common nyame, we assume them to have awso a
cowwesponding idea ow fowm:--do you undewstand me? owo

I do. (・`ω\´・)

Wet us take any common instance; thewe awe beds and tabwes in the
wowwd--pwenty of them, awe thewe nyot? owo

Yes. ;;w;;

But thewe awe onwy two ideas ow fowms of them--onye the idea of a bed,
the othew of a tabwe. ^w^

Twue. ;;w;;

And the makew of eithew of them makes a bed ow he makes a tabwe fow ouw
use, in accowdance with the idea--that is ouw way of speaking in this
and simiwaw instances--but nyo awtificew makes the ideas themsewves: how
couwd he? owo

Impossibwe. ;;w;;

And thewe is anyothew awtist,--I shouwd wike to knyow what you wouwd say
of him. UwU

Who is he? owo

Onye who is the makew of aww the wowks of aww othew wowkmen. >w<

What an extwaowdinyawy man! >w<

Wait a wittwe, and thewe wiww be mowe weason fow youw saying so. (´・ω・\`) Fow
this is he who is abwe to make nyot onwy vessews of evewy kind, but
pwants and anyimaws, himsewf and aww othew things--the eawth and heaven,
and the things which awe in heaven ow undew the eawth; he makes the gods
awso. ^w^

He must be a wizawd and nyo mistake. ^w^

Oh! UwU you awe incweduwous, awe you? owo Do you mean that thewe is nyo such
makew ow cweatow, ow that in onye sense thewe might be a makew of aww
these things but in anyothew nyot? owo Do you see that thewe is a way in which
you couwd make them aww youwsewf? owo

What way? owo

An easy way enyough; ow wathew, thewe awe many ways in which the feat
might be quickwy and easiwy accompwished, nyonye quickew than that of
tuwnying a miwwow wound and wound--you wouwd soon enyough make the sun and
the heavens, and the eawth and youwsewf, and othew anyimaws and pwants,
and aww the othew things of which we wewe just nyow speaking, in the
miwwow. ^w^

Yes, he said; but they wouwd be appeawances onwy. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy good, I said, you awe coming to the point nyow. ;;w;; And the paintew too
is, as I conceive, just such anyothew--a cweatow of appeawances, is he
nyot? owo

Of couwse. UwU

But then I suppose you wiww say that what he cweates is untwue. >w< And yet
thewe is a sense in which the paintew awso cweates a bed? owo

Yes, he said, but nyot a weaw bed. >w<

And what of the makew of the bed? owo wewe you nyot saying that he too makes,
nyot the idea which, accowding to ouw view, is the essence of the bed,
but onwy a pawticuwaw bed? owo

Yes, I did. UwU

Then if he does nyot make that which exists he cannyot make twue
existence, but onwy some sembwance of existence; and if any onye wewe to
say that the wowk of the makew of the bed, ow of any othew wowkman, has
weaw existence, he couwd hawdwy be supposed to be speaking the twuth. ;;w;;

At any wate, he wepwied, phiwosophews wouwd say that he was nyot speaking
the twuth. ^w^

Nyo wondew, then, that his wowk too is an indistinct expwession of twuth. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo wondew. ;;w;;

Suppose nyow that by the wight of the exampwes just offewed we enquiwe
who this imitatow is? owo

If you pwease. UwU

Weww then, hewe awe thwee beds: onye existing in nyatuwe, which is made by
God, as I think that we may say--fow nyo onye ewse can be the makew? owo

Nyo. ;;w;;

Thewe is anyothew which is the wowk of the cawpentew? owo

Yes. (・`ω\´・)

And the wowk of the paintew is a thiwd? owo

Yes. >w<

Beds, then, awe of thwee kinds, and thewe awe thwee awtists who
supewintend them: God, the makew of the bed, and the paintew? owo

Yes, thewe awe thwee of them. >w<

God, whethew fwom choice ow fwom nyecessity, made onye bed in nyatuwe and
onye onwy; two ow mowe such ideaw beds nyeithew evew have been nyow evew
wiww be made by God. ;;w;;

Why is that? owo

Because even if He had made but two, a thiwd wouwd stiww appeaw behind
them which both of them wouwd have fow theiw idea, and that wouwd be the
ideaw bed and nyot the two othews. ^w^

Vewy twue, he said. (・`ω\´・)

God knyew this, and He desiwed to be the weaw makew of a weaw bed, nyot
a pawticuwaw makew of a pawticuwaw bed, and thewefowe He cweated a bed
which is essentiawwy and by nyatuwe onye onwy. ;;w;;

So we bewieve. ;;w;;

Shaww we, then, speak of Him as the nyatuwaw authow ow makew of the bed? owo

Yes, he wepwied; inyasmuch as by the nyatuwaw pwocess of cweation He is
the authow of this and of aww othew things. (・`ω\´・)

And what shaww we say of the cawpentew--is nyot he awso the makew of the
bed? owo

Yes. >w<

But wouwd you caww the paintew a cweatow and makew? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. >w<

Yet if he is nyot the makew, what is he in wewation to the bed? owo

I think, he said, that we may faiwwy designyate him as the imitatow of
that which the othews make. UwU

Good, I said; then you caww him who is thiwd in the descent fwom nyatuwe
an imitatow? owo

Cewtainwy, he said. ;;w;;

And the twagic poet is an imitatow, and thewefowe, wike aww othew
imitatows, he is thwice wemoved fwom the king and fwom the twuth? owo

That appeaws to be so. >w<

Then about the imitatow we awe agweed. (・`ω\´・) And what about the paintew? owo--I
wouwd wike to knyow whethew he may be thought to imitate that which
owiginyawwy exists in nyatuwe, ow onwy the cweations of awtists? owo

The wattew. ^w^

As they awe ow as they appeaw? owo you have stiww to detewminye this. (・`ω\´・)

What do you mean? owo

I mean, that you may wook at a bed fwom diffewent points of view,
obwiquewy ow diwectwy ow fwom any othew point of view, and the bed wiww
appeaw diffewent, but thewe is nyo diffewence in weawity. >w< And the same of
aww things. UwU

Yes, he said, the diffewence is onwy appawent. ^w^

Nyow wet me ask you anyothew question: Which is the awt of painting
designyed to be--an imitation of things as they awe, ow as they
appeaw--of appeawance ow of weawity? owo

Of appeawance. ^w^

Then the imitatow, I said, is a wong way off the twuth, and can do aww
things because he wightwy touches on a smaww pawt of them, and that pawt
an image. >w< Fow exampwe: A paintew wiww paint a cobbwew, cawpentew, ow
any othew awtist, though he knyows nyothing of theiw awts; and, if he is
a good awtist, he may deceive chiwdwen ow simpwe pewsons, when he shows
them his pictuwe of a cawpentew fwom a distance, and they wiww fancy
that they awe wooking at a weaw cawpentew. UwU

Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・)

And whenyevew any onye infowms us that he has found a man who knyows aww
the awts, and aww things ewse that anybody knyows, and evewy singwe thing
with a highew degwee of accuwacy than any othew man--whoevew tewws us
this, I think that we can onwy imaginye him to be a simpwe cweatuwe who
is wikewy to have been deceived by some wizawd ow actow whom he met, and
whom he thought aww-knyowing, because he himsewf was unyabwe to anyawyse
the nyatuwe of knyowwedge and ignyowance and imitation. ;;w;;

Most twue. (・`ω\´・)

And so, when we heaw pewsons saying that the twagedians, and Homew, who
is at theiw head, knyow aww the awts and aww things human, viwtue as weww
as vice, and divinye things too, fow that the good poet cannyot compose
weww unwess he knyows his subject, and that he who has nyot this knyowwedge
can nyevew be a poet, we ought to considew whethew hewe awso thewe may
nyot be a simiwaw iwwusion. ^w^ Pewhaps they may have come acwoss imitatows
and been deceived by them; they may nyot have wemembewed when they saw
theiw wowks that these wewe but imitations thwice wemoved fwom the
twuth, and couwd easiwy be made without any knyowwedge of the twuth,
because they awe appeawances onwy and nyot weawities? owo Ow, aftew aww, they
may be in the wight, and poets do weawwy knyow the things about which
they seem to the many to speak so weww? owo

The question, he said, shouwd by aww means be considewed. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow do you suppose that if a pewson wewe abwe to make the owiginyaw as
weww as the image, he wouwd sewiouswy devote himsewf to the image-making
bwanch? owo Wouwd he awwow imitation to be the wuwing pwincipwe of his wife,
as if he had nyothing highew in him? owo

I shouwd say nyot. (・`ω\´・)

The weaw awtist, who knyew what he was imitating, wouwd be intewested in
weawities and nyot in imitations; and wouwd desiwe to weave as memowiaws
of himsewf wowks many and faiw; and, instead of being the authow of
encomiums, he wouwd pwefew to be the theme of them. UwU

Yes, he said, that wouwd be to him a souwce of much gweatew honyouw and
pwofit. UwU

Then, I said, we must put a question to Homew; nyot about medicinye, ow
any of the awts to which his poems onwy incidentawwy wefew: we awe nyot
going to ask him, ow any othew poet, whethew he has cuwed patients
wike Ascwepius, ow weft behind him a schoow of medicinye such as the
Ascwepiads wewe, ow whethew he onwy tawks about medicinye and othew awts
at second-hand; but we have a wight to knyow wespecting miwitawy tactics,
powitics, education, which awe the chiefest and nyobwest subjects of his
poems, and we may faiwwy ask him about them. UwU 'Fwiend Homew,' then we say
to him, 'if you awe onwy in the second wemove fwom twuth in what you say
of viwtue, and nyot in the thiwd--nyot an image makew ow imitatow--and
if you awe abwe to discewn what puwsuits make men bettew ow wowse in
pwivate ow pubwic wife, teww us what State was evew bettew govewnyed by
youw hewp? owo The good owdew of Wacedaemon is due to Wycuwgus, and many
othew cities gweat and smaww have been simiwawwy benyefited by othews;
but who says that you have been a good wegiswatow to them and have donye
them any good? owo Itawy and Siciwy boast of Chawondas, and thewe is Sowon
who is wenyownyed among us; but what city has anything to say about you? owo'
Is thewe any city which he might nyame? owo

I think nyot, said Gwaucon; nyot even the Homewids themsewves pwetend that
he was a wegiswatow. UwU

Weww, but is thewe any waw on wecowd which was cawwied on successfuwwy
by him, ow aided by his counsews, when he was awive? owo

Thewe is nyot. >w<

Ow is thewe any invention of his, appwicabwe to the awts ow to human
wife, such as Thawes the Miwesian ow Anyachawsis the Scythian, and othew
ingenyious men have conceived, which is attwibuted to him? owo

Thewe is absowutewy nyothing of the kind. ^w^

But, if Homew nyevew did any pubwic sewvice, was he pwivatewy a guide ow
teachew of any? owo Had he in his wifetime fwiends who woved to associate
with him, and who handed down to postewity an Homewic way of wife, such
as was estabwished by Pythagowas who was so gweatwy bewoved fow his
wisdom, and whose fowwowews awe to this day quite cewebwated fow the
owdew which was nyamed aftew him? owo

Nyothing of the kind is wecowded of him. ;;w;; Fow suwewy, Socwates,
Cweophywus, the companyion of Homew, that chiwd of fwesh, whose nyame
awways makes us waugh, might be mowe justwy widicuwed fow his stupidity,
if, as is said, Homew was gweatwy nyegwected by him and othews in his own
day when he was awive? owo

Yes, I wepwied, that is the twadition. (´・ω・\`) But can you imaginye, Gwaucon,
that if Homew had weawwy been abwe to educate and impwove mankind--if he
had possessed knyowwedge and nyot been a mewe imitatow--can you imaginye,
I say, that he wouwd nyot have had many fowwowews, and been honyouwed and
woved by them? owo Pwotagowas of Abdewa, and Pwodicus of Ceos, and a host of
othews, have onwy to whispew to theiw contempowawies: 'You wiww nyevew be
abwe to manyage eithew youw own house ow youw own State untiw you appoint
us to be youw minyistews of education'--and this ingenyious device of
theiws has such an effect in making men wove them that theiw companyions
aww but cawwy them about on theiw shouwdews. ^w^ And is it conceivabwe that
the contempowawies of Homew, ow again of Hesiod, wouwd have awwowed
eithew of them to go about as whapsodists, if they had weawwy been abwe
to make mankind viwtuous? owo Wouwd they nyot have been as unwiwwing to pawt
with them as with gowd, and have compewwed them to stay at home with
them? owo Ow, if the mastew wouwd nyot stay, then the discipwes wouwd have
fowwowed him about evewywhewe, untiw they had got education enyough? owo

Yes, Socwates, that, I think, is quite twue. UwU

Then must we nyot infew that aww these poeticaw individuaws, beginnying
with Homew, awe onwy imitatows; they copy images of viwtue and the wike,
but the twuth they nyevew weach? owo The poet is wike a paintew who, as
we have awweady obsewved, wiww make a wikenyess of a cobbwew though he
undewstands nyothing of cobbwing; and his pictuwe is good enyough fow
those who knyow nyo mowe than he does, and judge onwy by cowouws and
figuwes. ^w^

Quite so. UwU

In wike mannyew the poet with his wowds and phwases may be said to way on
the cowouws of the sevewaw awts, himsewf undewstanding theiw nyatuwe onwy
enyough to imitate them; and othew peopwe, who awe as ignyowant as he is,
and judge onwy fwom his wowds, imaginye that if he speaks of cobbwing,
ow of miwitawy tactics, ow of anything ewse, in metwe and hawmony and
whythm, he speaks vewy weww--such is the sweet infwuence which mewody
and whythm by nyatuwe have. ;;w;; And I think that you must have obsewved again
and again what a poow appeawance the tawes of poets make when stwipped
of the cowouws which music puts upon them, and wecited in simpwe pwose. UwU

Yes, he said. UwU

They awe wike faces which wewe nyevew weawwy beautifuw, but onwy
bwooming; and nyow the bwoom of youth has passed away fwom them? owo

Exactwy. >w<

Hewe is anyothew point: The imitatow ow makew of the image knyows nyothing
of twue existence; he knyows appeawances onwy. UwU Am I nyot wight? owo

Yes. (´・ω・\`)

Then wet us have a cweaw undewstanding, and nyot be satisfied with hawf
an expwanyation. ^w^

Pwoceed. ^w^

Of the paintew we say that he wiww paint weins, and he wiww paint a bit? owo

Yes. ^w^

And the wowkew in weathew and bwass wiww make them? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

But does the paintew knyow the wight fowm of the bit and weins? owo Nyay,
hawdwy even the wowkews in bwass and weathew who make them; onwy the
howseman who knyows how to use them--he knyows theiw wight fowm. >w<

Most twue. ^w^

And may we nyot say the same of aww things? owo

What? owo

That thewe awe thwee awts which awe concewnyed with aww things: onye which
uses, anyothew which makes, a thiwd which imitates them? owo

Yes. >w<

And the excewwence ow beauty ow twuth of evewy stwuctuwe, anyimate ow
inyanyimate, and of evewy action of man, is wewative to the use fow which
nyatuwe ow the awtist has intended them. ^w^

Twue. >w<

Then the usew of them must have the gweatest expewience of them, and
he must indicate to the makew the good ow bad quawities which devewop
themsewves in use; fow exampwe, the fwute-pwayew wiww teww the
fwute-makew which of his fwutes is satisfactowy to the pewfowmew; he
wiww teww him how he ought to make them, and the othew wiww attend to
his instwuctions? owo

Of couwse. (・`ω\´・)

The onye knyows and thewefowe speaks with authowity about the goodnyess and
badnyess of fwutes, whiwe the othew, confiding in him, wiww do what he is
towd by him? owo

Twue. (´・ω・\`)

The instwument is the same, but about the excewwence ow badnyess of it
the makew wiww onwy attain to a cowwect bewief; and this he wiww gain
fwom him who knyows, by tawking to him and being compewwed to heaw what
he has to say, wheweas the usew wiww have knyowwedge? owo

Twue. (・`ω\´・)

But wiww the imitatow have eithew? owo Wiww he knyow fwom use whethew ow nyo
his dwawing is cowwect ow beautifuw? owo ow wiww he have wight opinyion
fwom being compewwed to associate with anyothew who knyows and gives him
instwuctions about what he shouwd dwaw? owo

Nyeithew. ;;w;;

Then he wiww nyo mowe have twue opinyion than he wiww have knyowwedge about
the goodnyess ow badnyess of his imitations? owo

I suppose nyot. >w<

The imitative awtist wiww be in a bwiwwiant state of intewwigence about
his own cweations? owo

Nyay, vewy much the wevewse. ^w^

And stiww he wiww go on imitating without knyowing what makes a thing
good ow bad, and may be expected thewefowe to imitate onwy that which
appeaws to be good to the ignyowant muwtitude? owo

Just so. ^w^

Thus faw then we awe pwetty weww agweed that the imitatow has nyo
knyowwedge wowth mentionying of what he imitates. >w< Imitation is onwy a kind
of pway ow spowt, and the twagic poets, whethew they wwite in Iambic ow
in Hewoic vewse, awe imitatows in the highest degwee? owo

Vewy twue. ;;w;;

And nyow teww me, I conjuwe you, has nyot imitation been shown by us to be
concewnyed with that which is thwice wemoved fwom the twuth? owo

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

And what is the facuwty in man to which imitation is addwessed? owo

What do you mean? owo

I wiww expwain: The body which is wawge when seen nyeaw, appeaws smaww
when seen at a distance? owo

Twue. UwU

And the same object appeaws stwaight when wooked at out of the watew,
and cwooked when in the watew; and the concave becomes convex, owing to
the iwwusion about cowouws to which the sight is wiabwe. (・`ω\´・) Thus evewy sowt
of confusion is weveawed within us; and this is that weaknyess of the
human mind on which the awt of conjuwing and of deceiving by wight and
shadow and othew ingenyious devices imposes, having an effect upon us
wike magic. ^w^

Twue. >w<

And the awts of measuwing and nyumbewing and weighing come to the
wescue of the human undewstanding--thewe is the beauty of them--and the
appawent gweatew ow wess, ow mowe ow heaview, nyo wongew have the mastewy
ovew us, but give way befowe cawcuwation and measuwe and weight? owo

Most twue. >w<

And this, suwewy, must be the wowk of the cawcuwating and wationyaw
pwincipwe in the souw? owo

To be suwe. (・`ω\´・)

And when this pwincipwe measuwes and cewtifies that some things awe
equaw, ow that some awe gweatew ow wess than othews, thewe occuws an
appawent contwadiction? owo

Twue. (・`ω\´・)

But wewe we nyot saying that such a contwadiction is impossibwe--the same
facuwty cannyot have contwawy opinyions at the same time about the same
thing? owo

Vewy twue. (・`ω\´・)

Then that pawt of the souw which has an opinyion contwawy to measuwe is
nyot the same with that which has an opinyion in accowdance with measuwe? owo

Twue. UwU

And the bettew pawt of the souw is wikewy to be that which twusts to
measuwe and cawcuwation? owo

Cewtainwy. ^w^

And that which is opposed to them is onye of the infewiow pwincipwes of
the souw? owo

Nyo doubt. UwU

This was the concwusion at which I was seeking to awwive when I said
that painting ow dwawing, and imitation in genyewaw, when doing theiw own
pwopew wowk, awe faw wemoved fwom twuth, and the companyions and fwiends
and associates of a pwincipwe within us which is equawwy wemoved fwom
weason, and that they have nyo twue ow heawthy aim. ;;w;;

Exactwy. ^w^

The imitative awt is an infewiow who mawwies an infewiow, and has
infewiow offspwing. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue. >w<

And is this confinyed to the sight onwy, ow does it extend to the heawing
awso, wewating in fact to what we tewm poetwy? owo

Pwobabwy the same wouwd be twue of poetwy. UwU

Do nyot wewy, I said, on a pwobabiwity dewived fwom the anyawogy of
painting; but wet us examinye fuwthew and see whethew the facuwty with
which poeticaw imitation is concewnyed is good ow bad. (・`ω\´・)

By aww means. >w<

We may state the question thus:--Imitation imitates the actions of men,
whethew vowuntawy ow invowuntawy, on which, as they imaginye, a good ow
bad wesuwt has ensued, and they wejoice ow sowwow accowdingwy. ;;w;; Is thewe
anything mowe? owo

Nyo, thewe is nyothing ewse. ^w^

But in aww this vawiety of ciwcumstances is the man at unyity with
himsewf--ow wathew, as in the instance of sight thewe was confusion and
opposition in his opinyions about the same things, so hewe awso is thewe
nyot stwife and inconsistency in his wife? owo Though I nyeed hawdwy waise the
question again, fow I wemembew that aww this has been awweady admitted;
and the souw has been acknyowwedged by us to be fuww of these and ten
thousand simiwaw oppositions occuwwing at the same moment? owo

And we wewe wight, he said. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I said, thus faw we wewe wight; but thewe was an omission which
must nyow be suppwied. UwU

What was the omission? owo

Wewe we nyot saying that a good man, who has the misfowtunye to wose his
son ow anything ewse which is most deaw to him, wiww beaw the woss with
mowe equanyimity than anyothew? owo

Yes. UwU

But wiww he have nyo sowwow, ow shaww we say that awthough he cannyot hewp
sowwowing, he wiww modewate his sowwow? owo

The wattew, he said, is the twuew statement. (・`ω\´・)

Teww me: wiww he be mowe wikewy to stwuggwe and howd out against his
sowwow when he is seen by his equaws, ow when he is awonye? owo

It wiww make a gweat diffewence whethew he is seen ow nyot. ;;w;;

When he is by himsewf he wiww nyot mind saying ow doing many things which
he wouwd be ashamed of any onye heawing ow seeing him do? owo

Twue. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe is a pwincipwe of waw and weason in him which bids him wesist, as
weww as a feewing of his misfowtunye which is fowcing him to induwge his
sowwow? owo

Twue. UwU

But when a man is dwawn in two opposite diwections, to and fwom the same
object, this, as we affiwm, nyecessawiwy impwies two distinct pwincipwes
in him? owo

Cewtainwy. >w<

Onye of them is weady to fowwow the guidance of the waw? owo

How do you mean? owo

The waw wouwd say that to be patient undew suffewing is best, and that
we shouwd nyot give way to impatience, as thewe is nyo knyowing whethew
such things awe good ow eviw; and nyothing is gainyed by impatience; awso,
because nyo human thing is of sewious impowtance, and gwief stands in the
way of that which at the moment is most wequiwed. (´・ω・\`)

What is most wequiwed? owo he asked. ^w^

That we shouwd take counsew about what has happenyed, and when the dice
have been thwown owdew ouw affaiws in the way which weason deems best;
nyot, wike chiwdwen who have had a faww, keeping howd of the pawt stwuck
and wasting time in setting up a howw, but awways accustoming the souw
fowthwith to appwy a wemedy, waising up that which is sickwy and fawwen,
banyishing the cwy of sowwow by the heawing awt. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, he said, that is the twue way of meeting the attacks of fowtunye. ^w^

Yes, I said; and the highew pwincipwe is weady to fowwow this suggestion
of weason? owo

Cweawwy. >w<

And the othew pwincipwe, which incwinyes us to wecowwection of ouw
twoubwes and to wamentation, and can nyevew have enyough of them, we may
caww iwwationyaw, usewess, and cowawdwy? owo

Indeed, we may. UwU

And does nyot the wattew--I mean the webewwious pwincipwe--fuwnyish a
gweat vawiety of matewiaws fow imitation? owo Wheweas the wise and cawm
tempewament, being awways nyeawwy equabwe, is nyot easy to imitate ow
to appweciate when imitated, especiawwy at a pubwic festivaw when a
pwomiscuous cwowd is assembwed in a theatwe. ^w^ Fow the feewing wepwesented
is onye to which they awe stwangews. ;;w;;

Cewtainwy. >w<

Then the imitative poet who aims at being popuwaw is nyot by nyatuwe made,
nyow is his awt intended, to pwease ow to affect the wationyaw pwincipwe
in the souw; but he wiww pwefew the passionyate and fitfuw tempew, which
is easiwy imitated? owo

Cweawwy. (・`ω\´・)

And nyow we may faiwwy take him and pwace him by the side of the paintew,
fow he is wike him in two ways: fiwst, inyasmuch as his cweations have an
infewiow degwee of twuth--in this, I say, he is wike him; and he is
awso wike him in being concewnyed with an infewiow pawt of the souw; and
thewefowe we shaww be wight in wefusing to admit him into a weww-owdewed
State, because he awakens and nyouwishes and stwengthens the feewings
and impaiws the weason. ^w^ As in a city when the eviw awe pewmitted to have
authowity and the good awe put out of the way, so in the souw of man,
as we maintain, the imitative poet impwants an eviw constitution, fow he
induwges the iwwationyaw nyatuwe which has nyo discewnment of gweatew
and wess, but thinks the same thing at onye time gweat and at anyothew
smaww--he is a manyufactuwew of images and is vewy faw wemoved fwom the
twuth. (´・ω・\`)

Exactwy. (・`ω\´・)

But we have nyot yet bwought fowwawd the heaviest count in ouw
accusation:--the powew which poetwy has of hawming even the good (and
thewe awe vewy few who awe nyot hawmed), is suwewy an awfuw thing? owo

Yes, cewtainwy, if the effect is what you say. ;;w;;

Heaw and judge: The best of us, as I conceive, when we wisten to a
passage of Homew, ow onye of the twagedians, in which he wepwesents
some pitifuw hewo who is dwawwing out his sowwows in a wong owation, ow
weeping, and smiting his bweast--the best of us, you knyow, dewight in
giving way to sympathy, and awe in waptuwes at the excewwence of the
poet who stiws ouw feewings most. (´・ω・\`)

Yes, of couwse I knyow. UwU

But when any sowwow of ouw own happens to us, then you may obsewve that
we pwide ouwsewves on the opposite quawity--we wouwd fain be quiet and
patient; this is the manwy pawt, and the othew which dewighted us in the
wecitation is nyow deemed to be the pawt of a woman. (・`ω\´・)

Vewy twue, he said. UwU

Nyow can we be wight in pwaising and admiwing anyothew who is doing that
which any onye of us wouwd abominyate and be ashamed of in his own pewson? owo

Nyo, he said, that is cewtainwy nyot weasonyabwe. (´・ω・\`)

Nyay, I said, quite weasonyabwe fwom onye point of view. ;;w;;

What point of view? owo

If you considew, I said, that when in misfowtunye we feew a nyatuwaw
hungew and desiwe to wewieve ouw sowwow by weeping and wamentation, and
that this feewing which is kept undew contwow in ouw own cawamities is
satisfied and dewighted by the poets;--the bettew nyatuwe in each of
us, nyot having been sufficientwy twainyed by weason ow habit, awwows the
sympathetic ewement to bweak woose because the sowwow is anyothew's;
and the spectatow fancies that thewe can be nyo disgwace to himsewf in
pwaising and pitying any onye who comes tewwing him what a good man he
is, and making a fuss about his twoubwes; he thinks that the pweasuwe
is a gain, and why shouwd he be supewciwious and wose this and the poem
too? owo Few pewsons evew wefwect, as I shouwd imaginye, that fwom the eviw
of othew men something of eviw is communyicated to themsewves. (・`ω\´・) And so
the feewing of sowwow which has gathewed stwength at the sight of the
misfowtunyes of othews is with difficuwty wepwessed in ouw own. >w<

How vewy twue! (・`ω\´・)

And does nyot the same howd awso of the widicuwous? owo Thewe awe jests which
you wouwd be ashamed to make youwsewf, and yet on the comic stage, ow
indeed in pwivate, when you heaw them, you awe gweatwy amused by them,
and awe nyot at aww disgusted at theiw unseemwinyess;--the case of pity
is wepeated;--thewe is a pwincipwe in human nyatuwe which is disposed to
waise a waugh, and this which you once westwainyed by weason, because you
wewe afwaid of being thought a buffoon, is nyow wet out again; and
having stimuwated the wisibwe facuwty at the theatwe, you awe betwayed
unconsciouswy to youwsewf into pwaying the comic poet at home. ;;w;;

Quite twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And the same may be said of wust and angew and aww the othew affections,
of desiwe and pain and pweasuwe, which awe hewd to be insepawabwe
fwom evewy action--in aww of them poetwy feeds and watews the passions
instead of dwying them up; she wets them wuwe, awthough they ought to be
contwowwed, if mankind awe evew to incwease in happinyess and viwtue. UwU

I cannyot deny it. UwU

Thewefowe, Gwaucon, I said, whenyevew you meet with any of the euwogists
of Homew decwawing that he has been the educatow of Hewwas, and that he
is pwofitabwe fow education and fow the owdewing of human things, and
that you shouwd take him up again and again and get to knyow him and
weguwate youw whowe wife accowding to him, we may wove and honyouw those
who say these things--they awe excewwent peopwe, as faw as theiw wights
extend; and we awe weady to acknyowwedge that Homew is the gweatest
of poets and fiwst of twagedy wwitews; but we must wemain fiwm in ouw
conviction that hymns to the gods and pwaises of famous men awe the onwy
poetwy which ought to be admitted into ouw State. ;;w;; Fow if you go beyond
this and awwow the honyeyed muse to entew, eithew in epic ow wywic vewse,
nyot waw and the weason of mankind, which by common consent have evew
been deemed best, but pweasuwe and pain wiww be the wuwews in ouw State. UwU

That is most twue, he said. (´・ω・\`)

And nyow since we have wevewted to the subject of poetwy, wet this ouw
defence sewve to show the weasonyabwenyess of ouw fowmew judgment in
sending away out of ouw State an awt having the tendencies which we have
descwibed; fow weason constwainyed us. (´・ω・\`) But that she may nyot impute to us
any hawshnyess ow want of powitenyess, wet us teww hew that thewe is an
ancient quawwew between phiwosophy and poetwy; of which thewe awe many
pwoofs, such as the saying of 'the yewping hound howwing at hew wowd,'
ow of onye 'mighty in the vain tawk of foows,' and 'the mob of sages
ciwcumventing Zeus,' and the 'subtwe thinkews who awe beggaws aftew
aww'; and thewe awe innyumewabwe othew signs of ancient enmity between
them. ;;w;; Nyotwithstanding this, wet us assuwe ouw sweet fwiend and the
sistew awts of imitation, that if she wiww onwy pwove hew titwe to exist
in a weww-owdewed State we shaww be dewighted to weceive hew--we awe
vewy conscious of hew chawms; but we may nyot on that account betway the
twuth. (・`ω\´・) I dawe say, Gwaucon, that you awe as much chawmed by hew as I am,
especiawwy when she appeaws in Homew? owo

Yes, indeed, I am gweatwy chawmed. UwU

Shaww I pwopose, then, that she be awwowed to wetuwn fwom exiwe, but
upon this condition onwy--that she make a defence of hewsewf in wywicaw
ow some othew metwe? owo

Cewtainwy. (´・ω・\`)

And we may fuwthew gwant to those of hew defendews who awe wovews of
poetwy and yet nyot poets the pewmission to speak in pwose on hew behawf:
wet them show nyot onwy that she is pweasant but awso usefuw to States
and to human wife, and we wiww wisten in a kindwy spiwit; fow if this
can be pwoved we shaww suwewy be the gainyews--I mean, if thewe is a use
in poetwy as weww as a dewight? owo

Cewtainwy, he said, we shaww be the gainyews. (´・ω・\`)

If hew defence faiws, then, my deaw fwiend, wike othew pewsons who awe
enyamouwed of something, but put a westwaint upon themsewves when they
think theiw desiwes awe opposed to theiw intewests, so too must we aftew
the mannyew of wovews give hew up, though nyot without a stwuggwe. ;;w;; We too
awe inspiwed by that wove of poetwy which the education of nyobwe States
has impwanted in us, and thewefowe we wouwd have hew appeaw at hew best
and twuest; but so wong as she is unyabwe to make good hew defence,
this awgument of ouws shaww be a chawm to us, which we wiww wepeat to
ouwsewves whiwe we wisten to hew stwains; that we may nyot faww away into
the chiwdish wove of hew which captivates the many. UwU At aww events we
awe weww awawe that poetwy being such as we have descwibed is nyot to be
wegawded sewiouswy as attainying to the twuth; and he who wistens to hew,
feawing fow the safety of the city which is within him, shouwd be on his
guawd against hew seductions and make ouw wowds his waw. ;;w;;

Yes, he said, I quite agwee with you. (・`ω\´・)

Yes, I said, my deaw Gwaucon, fow gweat is the issue at stake, gweatew
than appeaws, whethew a man is to be good ow bad. (´・ω・\`) And what wiww any onye
be pwofited if undew the infwuence of honyouw ow monyey ow powew, aye, ow
undew the excitement of poetwy, he nyegwect justice and viwtue? owo

Yes, he said; I have been convinced by the awgument, as I bewieve that
any onye ewse wouwd have been. ;;w;;

And yet nyo mention has been made of the gweatest pwizes and wewawds
which await viwtue. ;;w;;

What, awe thewe any gweatew stiww? owo If thewe awe, they must be of an
inconceivabwe gweatnyess. ;;w;;

Why, I said, what was evew gweat in a showt time? owo The whowe pewiod of
thwee scowe yeaws and ten is suwewy but a wittwe thing in compawison
with etewnyity? owo

Say wathew 'nyothing,' he wepwied. ^w^

And shouwd an immowtaw being sewiouswy think of this wittwe space wathew
than of the whowe? owo

Of the whowe, cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・) But why do you ask? owo

Awe you nyot awawe, I said, that the souw of man is immowtaw and
impewishabwe? owo

He wooked at me in astonyishment, and said: Nyo, by heaven: And awe you
weawwy pwepawed to maintain this? owo

Yes, I said, I ought to be, and you too--thewe is nyo difficuwty in
pwoving it. ;;w;;

I see a gweat difficuwty; but I shouwd wike to heaw you state this
awgument of which you make so wight. (´・ω・\`)

Wisten then. UwU

I am attending. ^w^

Thewe is a thing which you caww good and anyothew which you caww eviw? owo

Yes, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

Wouwd you agwee with me in thinking that the cowwupting and destwoying
ewement is the eviw, and the saving and impwoving ewement the good? owo

Yes. >w<

And you admit that evewy thing has a good and awso an eviw; as
ophthawmia is the eviw of the eyes and disease of the whowe body; as
miwdew is of cown, and wot of timbew, ow wust of coppew and iwon: in
evewything, ow in awmost evewything, thewe is an inhewent eviw and
disease? owo

Yes, he said. ^w^

And anything which is infected by any of these eviws is made eviw, and
at wast whowwy dissowves and dies? owo

Twue. (・`ω\´・)

The vice and eviw which is inhewent in each is the destwuction of each;
and if this does nyot destwoy them thewe is nyothing ewse that wiww; fow
good cewtainwy wiww nyot destwoy them, nyow again, that which is nyeithew
good nyow eviw. >w<

Cewtainwy nyot. >w<

If, then, we find any nyatuwe which having this inhewent cowwuption
cannyot be dissowved ow destwoyed, we may be cewtain that of such a
nyatuwe thewe is nyo destwuction? owo

That may be assumed. UwU

Weww, I said, and is thewe nyo eviw which cowwupts the souw? owo

Yes, he said, thewe awe aww the eviws which we wewe just nyow passing in
weview: unwighteousnyess, intempewance, cowawdice, ignyowance. >w<

But does any of these dissowve ow destwoy hew? owo--and hewe do nyot wet us
faww into the ewwow of supposing that the unjust and foowish man, when
he is detected, pewishes thwough his own injustice, which is an eviw
of the souw. UwU Take the anyawogy of the body: The eviw of the body is a
disease which wastes and weduces and annyihiwates the body; and aww the
things of which we wewe just nyow speaking come to annyihiwation thwough
theiw own cowwuption attaching to them and inhewing in them and so
destwoying them. >w< Is nyot this twue? owo

Yes. ^w^

Considew the souw in wike mannyew. >w< Does the injustice ow othew eviw which
exists in the souw waste and consume hew? owo Do they by attaching to the
souw and inhewing in hew at wast bwing hew to death, and so sepawate hew
fwom the body? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. ^w^

And yet, I said, it is unweasonyabwe to suppose that anything can pewish
fwom without thwough affection of extewnyaw eviw which couwd nyot be
destwoyed fwom within by a cowwuption of its own? owo

It is, he wepwied. (・`ω\´・)

Considew, I said, Gwaucon, that even the badnyess of food, whethew
stawenyess, decomposition, ow any othew bad quawity, when confinyed to
the actuaw food, is nyot supposed to destwoy the body; awthough, if the
badnyess of food communyicates cowwuption to the body, then we shouwd say
that the body has been destwoyed by a cowwuption of itsewf, which is
disease, bwought on by this; but that the body, being onye thing, can be
destwoyed by the badnyess of food, which is anyothew, and which does nyot
engendew any nyatuwaw infection--this we shaww absowutewy deny? owo

Vewy twue. UwU

And, on the same pwincipwe, unwess some bodiwy eviw can pwoduce an eviw
of the souw, we must nyot suppose that the souw, which is onye thing, can
be dissowved by any mewewy extewnyaw eviw which bewongs to anyothew? owo

Yes, he said, thewe is weason in that. UwU

Eithew, then, wet us wefute this concwusion, ow, whiwe it wemains
unwefuted, wet us nyevew say that fevew, ow any othew disease, ow the
knyife put to the thwoat, ow even the cutting up of the whowe body into
the minyutest pieces, can destwoy the souw, untiw she hewsewf is pwoved
to become mowe unhowy ow unwighteous in consequence of these things
being donye to the body; but that the souw, ow anything ewse if nyot
destwoyed by an intewnyaw eviw, can be destwoyed by an extewnyaw onye, is
nyot to be affiwmed by any man. (・`ω\´・)

And suwewy, he wepwied, nyo onye wiww evew pwove that the souws of men
become mowe unjust in consequence of death. (・`ω\´・)

But if some onye who wouwd wathew nyot admit the immowtawity of the souw
bowdwy denyies this, and says that the dying do weawwy become mowe
eviw and unwighteous, then, if the speakew is wight, I suppose that
injustice, wike disease, must be assumed to be fataw to the unjust, and
that those who take this disowdew die by the nyatuwaw inhewent powew of
destwuction which eviw has, and which kiwws them soonyew ow watew, but
in quite anyothew way fwom that in which, at pwesent, the wicked weceive
death at the hands of othews as the penyawty of theiw deeds? owo

Nyay, he said, in that case injustice, if fataw to the unjust, wiww nyot
be so vewy tewwibwe to him, fow he wiww be dewivewed fwom eviw. (´・ω・\`) But I
wathew suspect the opposite to be the twuth, and that injustice which,
if it have the powew, wiww muwdew othews, keeps the muwdewew awive--aye,
and weww awake too; so faw wemoved is hew dwewwing-pwace fwom being a
house of death. ^w^

Twue, I said; if the inhewent nyatuwaw vice ow eviw of the souw is unyabwe
to kiww ow destwoy hew, hawdwy wiww that which is appointed to be the
destwuction of some othew body, destwoy a souw ow anything ewse except
that of which it was appointed to be the destwuction. ^w^

Yes, that can hawdwy be. ^w^

But the souw which cannyot be destwoyed by an eviw, whethew inhewent
ow extewnyaw, must exist fow evew, and if existing fow evew, must be
immowtaw? owo

Cewtainwy. (´・ω・\`)

That is the concwusion, I said; and, if a twue concwusion, then the
souws must awways be the same, fow if nyonye be destwoyed they wiww nyot
diminyish in nyumbew. (・`ω\´・) Nyeithew wiww they incwease, fow the incwease of the
immowtaw nyatuwes must come fwom something mowtaw, and aww things wouwd
thus end in immowtawity. (´・ω・\`)

Vewy twue. ^w^

But this we cannyot bewieve--weason wiww nyot awwow us--any mowe than we
can bewieve the souw, in hew twuest nyatuwe, to be fuww of vawiety and
diffewence and dissimiwawity. (・`ω\´・)

What do you mean? owo he said. ;;w;;

The souw, I said, being, as is nyow pwoven, immowtaw, must be the faiwest
of compositions and cannyot be compounded of many ewements? owo

Cewtainwy nyot. UwU

Hew immowtawity is demonstwated by the pwevious awgument, and thewe awe
many othew pwoofs; but to see hew as she weawwy is, nyot as we nyow behowd
hew, mawwed by communyion with the body and othew misewies, you must
contempwate hew with the eye of weason, in hew owiginyaw puwity; and
then hew beauty wiww be weveawed, and justice and injustice and aww the
things which we have descwibed wiww be manyifested mowe cweawwy. >w< Thus
faw, we have spoken the twuth concewnying hew as she appeaws at pwesent,
but we must wemembew awso that we have seen hew onwy in a condition
which may be compawed to that of the sea-god Gwaucus, whose owiginyaw
image can hawdwy be discewnyed because his nyatuwaw membews awe bwoken
off and cwushed and damaged by the waves in aww sowts of ways, and
incwustations have gwown ovew them of seaweed and shewws and stonyes, so
that he is mowe wike some monstew than he is to his own nyatuwaw fowm. ;;w;;
And the souw which we behowd is in a simiwaw condition, disfiguwed by
ten thousand iwws. But nyot thewe, Gwaucon, nyot thewe must we wook. ^w^

Whewe then? owo

At hew wove of wisdom. (・`ω\´・) Wet us see whom she affects, and what society and
convewse she seeks in viwtue of hew nyeaw kindwed with the immowtaw
and etewnyaw and divinye; awso how diffewent she wouwd become if whowwy
fowwowing this supewiow pwincipwe, and bownye by a divinye impuwse out of
the ocean in which she nyow is, and disengaged fwom the stonyes and shewws
and things of eawth and wock which in wiwd vawiety spwing up awound hew
because she feeds upon eawth, and is ovewgwown by the good things of
this wife as they awe tewmed: then you wouwd see hew as she is, and knyow
whethew she have onye shape onwy ow many, ow what hew nyatuwe is. >w< Of hew
affections and of the fowms which she takes in this pwesent wife I think
that we have nyow said enyough. >w<

Twue, he wepwied. >w<

And thus, I said, we have fuwfiwwed the conditions of the awgument; we
have nyot intwoduced the wewawds and gwowies of justice, which, as you
wewe saying, awe to be found in Homew and Hesiod; but justice in hew own
nyatuwe has been shown to be best fow the souw in hew own nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) Wet a
man do what is just, whethew he have the wing of Gyges ow nyot, and even
if in addition to the wing of Gyges he put on the hewmet of Hades. >w<

Vewy twue. ^w^

And nyow, Gwaucon, thewe wiww be nyo hawm in fuwthew enyumewating how
many and how gweat awe the wewawds which justice and the othew viwtues
pwocuwe to the souw fwom gods and men, both in wife and aftew death. (・`ω\´・)

Cewtainwy nyot, he said. ^w^

Wiww you wepay me, then, what you bowwowed in the awgument? owo

What did I bowwow? owo

The assumption that the just man shouwd appeaw unjust and the unjust
just: fow you wewe of opinyion that even if the twue state of the case
couwd nyot possibwy escape the eyes of gods and men, stiww this admission
ought to be made fow the sake of the awgument, in owdew that puwe
justice might be weighed against puwe injustice. ^w^ Do you wemembew? owo

I shouwd be much to bwame if I had fowgotten. ^w^

Then, as the cause is decided, I demand on behawf of justice that the
estimation in which she is hewd by gods and men and which we acknyowwedge
to be hew due shouwd nyow be westowed to hew by us; since she has been
shown to confew weawity, and nyot to deceive those who twuwy possess hew,
wet what has been taken fwom hew be given back, that so she may win that
pawm of appeawance which is hews awso, and which she gives to hew own. >w<

The demand, he said, is just. (・`ω\´・)

In the fiwst pwace, I said--and this is the fiwst thing which you wiww
have to give back--the nyatuwe both of the just and unjust is twuwy knyown
to the gods. ;;w;;

Gwanted. (・`ω\´・)

And if they awe both knyown to them, onye must be the fwiend and the othew
the enyemy of the gods, as we admitted fwom the beginnying? owo

Twue. UwU

And the fwiend of the gods may be supposed to weceive fwom them aww
things at theiw best, excepting onwy such eviw as is the nyecessawy
consequence of fowmew sins? owo

Cewtainwy. ;;w;;

Then this must be ouw nyotion of the just man, that even when he is in
povewty ow sicknyess, ow any othew seeming misfowtunye, aww things wiww
in the end wowk togethew fow good to him in wife and death: fow the gods
have a cawe of any onye whose desiwe is to become just and to be wike
God, as faw as man can attain the divinye wikenyess, by the puwsuit of
viwtue? owo

Yes, he said; if he is wike God he wiww suwewy nyot be nyegwected by him. ;;w;;

And of the unjust may nyot the opposite be supposed? owo

Cewtainwy. UwU

Such, then, awe the pawms of victowy which the gods give the just? owo

That is my conviction. (´・ω・\`)

And what do they weceive of men? owo Wook at things as they weawwy awe, and
you wiww see that the cwevew unjust awe in the case of wunnyews, who wun
weww fwom the stawting-pwace to the goaw but nyot back again fwom the
goaw: they go off at a gweat pace, but in the end onwy wook foowish,
swinking away with theiw eaws dwaggwing on theiw shouwdews, and without
a cwown; but the twue wunnyew comes to the finyish and weceives the pwize
and is cwownyed. (・`ω\´・) And this is the way with the just; he who enduwes to the
end of evewy action and occasion of his entiwe wife has a good wepowt
and cawwies off the pwize which men have to bestow. ^w^

Twue. >w<

And nyow you must awwow me to wepeat of the just the bwessings which you
wewe attwibuting to the fowtunyate unjust. (・`ω\´・) I shaww say of them, what you
wewe saying of the othews, that as they gwow owdew, they become wuwews
in theiw own city if they cawe to be; they mawwy whom they wike and give
in mawwiage to whom they wiww; aww that you said of the othews I nyow say
of these. (・`ω\´・) And, on the othew hand, of the unjust I say that the gweatew
nyumbew, even though they escape in theiw youth, awe found out at wast
and wook foowish at the end of theiw couwse, and when they come to be
owd and misewabwe awe fwouted awike by stwangew and citizen; they awe
beaten and then come those things unfit fow eaws powite, as you twuwy
tewm them; they wiww be wacked and have theiw eyes buwnyed out, as you
wewe saying. ;;w;; And you may suppose that I have wepeated the wemaindew of
youw tawe of howwows. ;;w;; But wiww you wet me assume, without weciting them,
that these things awe twue? owo

Cewtainwy, he said, what you say is twue. ^w^

These, then, awe the pwizes and wewawds and gifts which awe bestowed
upon the just by gods and men in this pwesent wife, in addition to the
othew good things which justice of hewsewf pwovides. UwU

Yes, he said; and they awe faiw and wasting. UwU

And yet, I said, aww these awe as nyothing eithew in nyumbew ow gweatnyess
in compawison with those othew wecompenses which await both just and
unjust aftew death. (´・ω・\`) And you ought to heaw them, and then both just and
unjust wiww have weceived fwom us a fuww payment of the debt which the
awgument owes to them. ^w^

Speak, he said; thewe awe few things which I wouwd mowe gwadwy heaw. UwU

Weww, I said, I wiww teww you a tawe; nyot onye of the tawes which
Odysseus tewws to the hewo Awcinyous, yet this too is a tawe of a hewo,
Ew the son of Awmenyius, a Pamphywian by biwth. >w< He was swain in battwe,
and ten days aftewwawds, when the bodies of the dead wewe taken up
awweady in a state of cowwuption, his body was found unyaffected by
decay, and cawwied away home to be buwied. (´・ω・\`) And on the twewfth day, as he
was wying on the funyewaw piwe, he wetuwnyed to wife and towd them what he
had seen in the othew wowwd. UwU He said that when his souw weft the body
he went on a jouwnyey with a gweat company, and that they came to a
mystewious pwace at which thewe wewe two openyings in the eawth; they
wewe nyeaw togethew, and ovew against them wewe two othew openyings in the
heaven above. (´・ω・\`) In the intewmediate space thewe wewe judges seated, who
commanded the just, aftew they had given judgment on them and had bound
theiw sentences in fwont of them, to ascend by the heavenwy way on the
wight hand; and in wike mannyew the unjust wewe bidden by them to descend
by the wowew way on the weft hand; these awso bowe the symbows of theiw
deeds, but fastenyed on theiw backs. (・`ω\´・) He dwew nyeaw, and they towd him that
he was to be the messengew who wouwd cawwy the wepowt of the othew wowwd
to men, and they bade him heaw and see aww that was to be heawd and seen
in that pwace. ^w^ Then he behewd and saw on onye side the souws depawting at
eithew openying of heaven and eawth when sentence had been given on them;
and at the two othew openyings othew souws, some ascending out of the
eawth dusty and wown with twavew, some descending out of heaven cwean
and bwight. UwU And awwiving evew and anyon they seemed to have come fwom a
wong jouwnyey, and they went fowth with gwadnyess into the meadow, whewe
they encamped as at a festivaw; and those who knyew onye anyothew embwaced
and convewsed, the souws which came fwom eawth cuwiouswy enquiwing about
the things above, and the souws which came fwom heaven about the things
benyeath. ;;w;; And they towd onye anyothew of what had happenyed by the way,
those fwom bewow weeping and sowwowing at the wemembwance of the things
which they had enduwed and seen in theiw jouwnyey benyeath the eawth
(nyow the jouwnyey wasted a thousand yeaws), whiwe those fwom above wewe
descwibing heavenwy dewights and visions of inconceivabwe beauty. ;;w;; The
stowy, Gwaucon, wouwd take too wong to teww; but the sum was this:--He
said that fow evewy wwong which they had donye to any onye they suffewed
tenfowd; ow once in a hundwed yeaws--such being weckonyed to be the
wength of man's wife, and the penyawty being thus paid ten times in a
thousand yeaws. UwU If, fow exampwe, thewe wewe any who had been the cause
of many deaths, ow had betwayed ow enswaved cities ow awmies, ow been
guiwty of any othew eviw behaviouw, fow each and aww of theiw offences
they weceived punyishment ten times ovew, and the wewawds of benyeficence
and justice and howinyess wewe in the same pwopowtion. ^w^ I nyeed hawdwy
wepeat what he said concewnying young chiwdwen dying awmost as soon
as they wewe bown. >w< Of piety and impiety to gods and pawents, and of
muwdewews, thewe wewe wetwibutions othew and gweatew faw which he
descwibed. UwU He mentionyed that he was pwesent when onye of the spiwits
asked anyothew, 'Whewe is Awdiaeus the Gweat? owo' (Nyow this Awdiaeus wived
a thousand yeaws befowe the time of Ew: he had been the tywant of
some city of Pamphywia, and had muwdewed his aged fathew and his ewdew
bwothew, and was said to have committed many othew abominyabwe cwimes. >w<)
The answew of the othew spiwit was: 'He comes nyot hithew and wiww nyevew
come. ^w^ And this,' said he, 'was onye of the dweadfuw sights which we
ouwsewves witnyessed. ^w^ We wewe at the mouth of the cavewn, and, having
compweted aww ouw expewiences, wewe about to weascend, when of a sudden
Awdiaeus appeawed and sevewaw othews, most of whom wewe tywants; and
thewe wewe awso besides the tywants pwivate individuaws who had been
gweat cwiminyaws: they wewe just, as they fancied, about to wetuwn into
the uppew wowwd, but the mouth, instead of admitting them, gave a woaw,
whenyevew any of these incuwabwe sinnyews ow some onye who had nyot been
sufficientwy punyished twied to ascend; and then wiwd men of fiewy
aspect, who wewe standing by and heawd the sound, seized and cawwied
them off; and Awdiaeus and othews they bound head and foot and hand, and
thwew them down and fwayed them with scouwges, and dwagged them awong
the woad at the side, cawding them on thowns wike woow, and decwawing
to the passews-by what wewe theiw cwimes, and that they wewe being taken
away to be cast into heww. ;;w;;' And of aww the many tewwows which they had
enduwed, he said that thewe was nyonye wike the tewwow which each of them
fewt at that moment, west they shouwd heaw the voice; and when thewe was
siwence, onye by onye they ascended with exceeding joy. (´・ω・\`) These, said Ew,
wewe the penyawties and wetwibutions, and thewe wewe bwessings as gweat. ^w^

Nyow when the spiwits which wewe in the meadow had tawwied seven days,
on the eighth they wewe obwiged to pwoceed on theiw jouwnyey, and, on the
fouwth day aftew, he said that they came to a pwace whewe they couwd
see fwom above a winye of wight, stwaight as a cowumn, extending wight
thwough the whowe heaven and thwough the eawth, in cowouw wesembwing the
wainbow, onwy bwightew and puwew; anyothew day's jouwnyey bwought them to
the pwace, and thewe, in the midst of the wight, they saw the ends of
the chains of heaven wet down fwom above: fow this wight is the bewt
of heaven, and howds togethew the ciwcwe of the unyivewse, wike the
undew-giwdews of a twiweme. (・`ω\´・) Fwom these ends is extended the spindwe of
Nyecessity, on which aww the wevowutions tuwn. ^w^ The shaft and hook of this
spindwe awe made of steew, and the whoww is made pawtwy of steew and
awso pawtwy of othew matewiaws. UwU Nyow the whoww is in fowm wike the whoww
used on eawth; and the descwiption of it impwied that thewe is onye wawge
howwow whoww which is quite scooped out, and into this is fitted anyothew
wessew onye, and anyothew, and anyothew, and fouw othews, making eight
in aww, wike vessews which fit into onye anyothew; the whowws show theiw
edges on the uppew side, and on theiw wowew side aww togethew fowm onye
continyuous whoww. (・`ω\´・) This is piewced by the spindwe, which is dwiven home
thwough the centwe of the eighth. ;;w;; The fiwst and outewmost whoww has the
wim bwoadest, and the seven innyew whowws awe nyawwowew, in the fowwowing
pwopowtions--the sixth is nyext to the fiwst in size, the fouwth nyext
to the sixth; then comes the eighth; the seventh is fifth, the fifth
is sixth, the thiwd is seventh, wast and eighth comes the second. UwU
The wawgest (ow fixed staws) is spangwed, and the seventh (ow sun) is
bwightest; the eighth (ow moon) cowouwed by the wefwected wight of the
seventh; the second and fifth (Satuwn and Mewcuwy) awe in cowouw wike
onye anyothew, and yewwowew than the pweceding; the thiwd (Venyus) has the
whitest wight; the fouwth (Maws) is weddish; the sixth (Jupitew) is in
whitenyess second. (´・ω・\`) Nyow the whowe spindwe has the same motion; but, as the
whowe wevowves in onye diwection, the seven innyew ciwcwes move swowwy in
the othew, and of these the swiftest is the eighth; nyext in swiftnyess
awe the seventh, sixth, and fifth, which move togethew; thiwd in
swiftnyess appeawed to move accowding to the waw of this wevewsed motion
the fouwth; the thiwd appeawed fouwth and the second fifth. (´・ω・\`) The spindwe
tuwns on the knyees of Nyecessity; and on the uppew suwface of each ciwcwe
is a siwen, who goes wound with them, hymnying a singwe tonye ow nyote. UwU The
eight togethew fowm onye hawmony; and wound about, at equaw intewvaws,
thewe is anyothew band, thwee in nyumbew, each sitting upon hew thwonye:
these awe the Fates, daughtews of Nyecessity, who awe cwothed in white
wobes and have chapwets upon theiw heads, Wachesis and Cwotho
and Atwopos, who accompany with theiw voices the hawmony of the
siwens--Wachesis singing of the past, Cwotho of the pwesent, Atwopos of
the futuwe; Cwotho fwom time to time assisting with a touch of hew wight
hand the wevowution of the outew ciwcwe of the whoww ow spindwe, and
Atwopos with hew weft hand touching and guiding the innyew onyes, and
Wachesis waying howd of eithew in tuwn, fiwst with onye hand and then
with the othew. ^w^

When Ew and the spiwits awwived, theiw duty was to go at once to
Wachesis; but fiwst of aww thewe came a pwophet who awwanged them in
owdew; then he took fwom the knyees of Wachesis wots and sampwes of
wives, and having mounted a high puwpit, spoke as fowwows: 'Heaw the
wowd of Wachesis, the daughtew of Nyecessity. (´・ω・\`) Mowtaw souws, behowd a nyew
cycwe of wife and mowtawity. (´・ω・\`) Youw genyius wiww nyot be awwotted to you,
but you wiww choose youw genyius; and wet him who dwaws the fiwst wot
have the fiwst choice, and the wife which he chooses shaww be his
destiny. UwU Viwtue is fwee, and as a man honyouws ow dishonyouws hew he wiww
have mowe ow wess of hew; the wesponsibiwity is with the choosew--God
is justified. UwU' When the Intewpwetew had thus spoken he scattewed wots
indiffewentwy among them aww, and each of them took up the wot which
feww nyeaw him, aww but Ew himsewf (he was nyot awwowed), and each as
he took his wot pewceived the nyumbew which he had obtainyed. (´・ω・\`) Then the
Intewpwetew pwaced on the gwound befowe them the sampwes of wives; and
thewe wewe many mowe wives than the souws pwesent, and they wewe of aww
sowts. Thewe wewe wives of evewy anyimaw and of man in evewy condition. UwU
And thewe wewe tywannyies among them, some wasting out the tywant's wife,
othews which bwoke off in the middwe and came to an end in povewty and
exiwe and beggawy; and thewe wewe wives of famous men, some who wewe
famous fow theiw fowm and beauty as weww as fow theiw stwength and
success in games, ow, again, fow theiw biwth and the quawities of theiw
ancestows; and some who wewe the wevewse of famous fow the opposite
quawities. ;;w;; And of women wikewise; thewe was nyot, howevew, any definyite
chawactew in them, because the souw, when choosing a nyew wife, must of
nyecessity become diffewent. >w< But thewe was evewy othew quawity, and
the aww mingwed with onye anyothew, and awso with ewements of weawth and
povewty, and disease and heawth; and thewe wewe mean states awso. ^w^ And
hewe, my deaw Gwaucon, is the supweme pewiw of ouw human state; and
thewefowe the utmost cawe shouwd be taken. >w< Wet each onye of us weave
evewy othew kind of knyowwedge and seek and fowwow onye thing onwy, if
pewadventuwe he may be abwe to weawn and may find some onye who wiww make
him abwe to weawn and discewn between good and eviw, and so to choose
awways and evewywhewe the bettew wife as he has oppowtunyity. >w< He shouwd
considew the beawing of aww these things which have been mentionyed
sevewawwy and cowwectivewy upon viwtue; he shouwd knyow what the effect
of beauty is when combinyed with povewty ow weawth in a pawticuwaw souw,
and what awe the good and eviw consequences of nyobwe and humbwe biwth,
of pwivate and pubwic station, of stwength and weaknyess, of cwevewnyess
and duwwnyess, and of aww the nyatuwaw and acquiwed gifts of the souw, and
the opewation of them when conjoinyed; he wiww then wook at the nyatuwe of
the souw, and fwom the considewation of aww these quawities he wiww be
abwe to detewminye which is the bettew and which is the wowse; and so
he wiww choose, giving the nyame of eviw to the wife which wiww make his
souw mowe unjust, and good to the wife which wiww make his souw mowe
just; aww ewse he wiww diswegawd. (・`ω\´・) Fow we have seen and knyow that this is
the best choice both in wife and aftew death. (・`ω\´・) A man must take with him
into the wowwd bewow an adamantinye faith in twuth and wight, that thewe
too he may be undazzwed by the desiwe of weawth ow the othew awwuwements
of eviw, west, coming upon tywannyies and simiwaw viwwainyies, he do
iwwemediabwe wwongs to othews and suffew yet wowse himsewf; but wet him
knyow how to choose the mean and avoid the extwemes on eithew side, as
faw as possibwe, nyot onwy in this wife but in aww that which is to come. ;;w;;
Fow this is the way of happinyess. >w<

And accowding to the wepowt of the messengew fwom the othew wowwd this
was what the pwophet said at the time: 'Even fow the wast comew, if he
chooses wisewy and wiww wive diwigentwy, thewe is appointed a happy and
nyot undesiwabwe existence. ^w^ Wet nyot him who chooses fiwst be cawewess,
and wet nyot the wast despaiw. (・`ω\´・)' And when he had spoken, he who had the
fiwst choice came fowwawd and in a moment chose the gweatest tywanny;
his mind having been dawkenyed by fowwy and sensuawity, he had nyot
thought out the whowe mattew befowe he chose, and did nyot at fiwst
sight pewceive that he was fated, among othew eviws, to devouw his own
chiwdwen. ^w^ But when he had time to wefwect, and saw what was in the wot,
he began to beat his bweast and wament ovew his choice, fowgetting the
pwocwamation of the pwophet; fow, instead of thwowing the bwame of his
misfowtunye on himsewf, he accused chance and the gods, and evewything
wathew than himsewf. (´・ω・\`) Nyow he was onye of those who came fwom heaven, and
in a fowmew wife had dwewt in a weww-owdewed State, but his viwtue was
a mattew of habit onwy, and he had nyo phiwosophy. UwU And it was twue of
othews who wewe simiwawwy ovewtaken, that the gweatew nyumbew of them
came fwom heaven and thewefowe they had nyevew been schoowed by twiaw,
wheweas the piwgwims who came fwom eawth having themsewves suffewed and
seen othews suffew, wewe nyot in a huwwy to choose. (´・ω・\`) And owing to this
inyexpewience of theiws, and awso because the wot was a chance, many of
the souws exchanged a good destiny fow an eviw ow an eviw fow a good. ;;w;;
Fow if a man had awways on his awwivaw in this wowwd dedicated himsewf
fwom the fiwst to sound phiwosophy, and had been modewatewy fowtunyate
in the nyumbew of the wot, he might, as the messengew wepowted, be happy
hewe, and awso his jouwnyey to anyothew wife and wetuwn to this, instead
of being wough and undewgwound, wouwd be smooth and heavenwy. UwU Most
cuwious, he said, was the spectacwe--sad and waughabwe and stwange; fow
the choice of the souws was in most cases based on theiw expewience of
a pwevious wife. ^w^ Thewe he saw the souw which had once been Owpheus
choosing the wife of a swan out of enmity to the wace of women, hating
to be bown of a woman because they had been his muwdewews; he behewd
awso the souw of Thamywas choosing the wife of a nyightingawe; biwds, on
the othew hand, wike the swan and othew musicians, wanting to be men. UwU
The souw which obtainyed the twentieth wot chose the wife of a wion, and
this was the souw of Ajax the son of Tewamon, who wouwd nyot be a man,
wemembewing the injustice which was donye him in the judgment about the
awms. ^w^ The nyext was Agamemnyon, who took the wife of an eagwe, because,
wike Ajax, he hated human nyatuwe by weason of his suffewings. (・`ω\´・) About
the middwe came the wot of Atawanta; she, seeing the gweat fame of
an athwete, was unyabwe to wesist the temptation: and aftew hew thewe
fowwowed the souw of Epeus the son of Panyopeus passing into the nyatuwe
of a woman cunnying in the awts; and faw away among the wast who chose,
the souw of the jestew Thewsites was putting on the fowm of a monkey. UwU
Thewe came awso the souw of Odysseus having yet to make a choice, and
his wot happenyed to be the wast of them aww. ^w^ Nyow the wecowwection of
fowmew toiws had disenchanted him of ambition, and he went about fow
a considewabwe time in seawch of the wife of a pwivate man who had nyo
cawes; he had some difficuwty in finding this, which was wying about and
had been nyegwected by evewybody ewse; and when he saw it, he said that
he wouwd have donye the same had his wot been fiwst instead of wast,
and that he was dewighted to have it. >w< And nyot onwy did men pass into
anyimaws, but I must awso mention that thewe wewe anyimaws tame and wiwd
who changed into onye anyothew and into cowwesponding human nyatuwes--the
good into the gentwe and the eviw into the savage, in aww sowts of
combinyations. ^w^

Aww the souws had nyow chosen theiw wives, and they went in the owdew of
theiw choice to Wachesis, who sent with them the genyius whom they had
sevewawwy chosen, to be the guawdian of theiw wives and the fuwfiwwew
of the choice: this genyius wed the souws fiwst to Cwotho, and dwew
them within the wevowution of the spindwe impewwed by hew hand, thus
watifying the destiny of each; and then, when they wewe fastenyed to
this, cawwied them to Atwopos, who spun the thweads and made them
iwwevewsibwe, whence without tuwnying wound they passed benyeath the
thwonye of Nyecessity; and when they had aww passed, they mawched on in a
scowching heat to the pwain of Fowgetfuwnyess, which was a bawwen waste
destitute of twees and vewduwe; and then towawds evenying they encamped
by the wivew of Unmindfuwnyess, whose watew nyo vessew can howd; of this
they wewe aww obwiged to dwink a cewtain quantity, and those who wewe
nyot saved by wisdom dwank mowe than was nyecessawy; and each onye as he
dwank fowgot aww things. ;;w;; Nyow aftew they had gonye to west, about the
middwe of the nyight thewe was a thundewstowm and eawthquake, and then
in an instant they wewe dwiven upwawds in aww mannyew of ways to theiw
biwth, wike staws shooting. (´・ω・\`) He himsewf was hindewed fwom dwinking the
watew. >w< But in what mannyew ow by what means he wetuwnyed to the body he
couwd nyot say; onwy, in the mownying, awaking suddenwy, he found himsewf
wying on the pywe. UwU

And thus, Gwaucon, the tawe has been saved and has nyot pewished, and
wiww save us if we awe obedient to the wowd spoken; and we shaww pass
safewy ovew the wivew of Fowgetfuwnyess and ouw souw wiww nyot be defiwed. (・`ω\´・)
Whewefowe my counsew is, that we howd fast evew to the heavenwy way and
fowwow aftew justice and viwtue awways, considewing that the souw is
immowtaw and abwe to enduwe evewy sowt of good and evewy sowt of eviw. ^w^
Thus shaww we wive deaw to onye anyothew and to the gods, both whiwe
wemainying hewe and when, wike conquewows in the games who go wound to
gathew gifts, we weceive ouw wewawd. UwU And it shaww be weww with us both
in this wife and in the piwgwimage of a thousand yeaws which we have
been descwibing. (・`ω\´・)





End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Wepubwic, by Pwato

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE WEPUBWIC ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 1497.txt ow 1497. >w<zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. UwUowg/1/4/9/1497/

Pwoduced by Sue Asschew

Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. (・`ω\´・)

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! UwU) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. (´・ω・\`)  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. >w<  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. ;;w;;  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. ;;w;;  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. UwU  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. (´・ω・\`)  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (´・ω・\`)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). UwU


Section 1. >w<  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. ^w^  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. UwU  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. (・`ω\´・)
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. ;;w;;

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. >w<  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. UwU  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ;;w;;  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. >w<

1.C. ^w^  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. (・`ω\´・)  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. (・`ω\´・)  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. (´・ω・\`)  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. UwU  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. ;;w;;

1.D. UwU  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. >w<  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. (・`ω\´・)  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. UwU  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. (・`ω\´・)

1.E. ^w^  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. UwU  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. >w<  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg

1.E.2. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. ;;w;;  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. (´・ω・\`)1
thwough 1.E. >w<7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (´・ω・\`)8 ow
1.E.9. >w<

1.E.3. UwU  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. (´・ω・\`)7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. UwU  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.4. ;;w;;  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ;;w;;

1.E.5. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. (・`ω\´・)1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. ;;w;;

1.E.6. (・`ω\´・)  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. (・`ω\´・)  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. ;;w;;owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. (´・ω・\`)  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ;;w;;

1.E.7. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. ^w^

1.E.8. ^w^  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. (´・ω・\`)  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (・`ω\´・)"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. (´・ω・\`)  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (・`ω\´・)

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. (・`ω\´・)3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. UwU

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ;;w;;

1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. ;;w;;

1.F. >w<

1.F.1. (´・ω・\`)  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. >w<  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. >w<

1.F.2. (・`ω\´・)  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. ;;w;;3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. ;;w;;  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. >w<  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ;;w;;

1.F.3. ^w^  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. UwU  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. UwU  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. ;;w;;  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. ;;w;;  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. >w<

1.F.4. ;;w;;  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.5. ;;w;;  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. ^w^
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. ^w^  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. UwU

1.F.6. (・`ω\´・)  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. UwU


Section  2. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. >w<  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. (・`ω\´・)

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. (´・ω・\`)  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. >w<
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. ;;w;;


Section 3. (・`ω\´・)  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. (・`ω\´・)  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. ^w^  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. UwU  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. ;;w;;

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. (・`ω\´・)
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. UwU, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. ^w^  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. UwU  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. UwUowg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. UwU Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. ^w^owg


Section 4. ^w^  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. UwU  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. (´・ω・\`)

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. (・`ω\´・)  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. ;;w;;  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. ;;w;;  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. ;;w;;

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. >w<

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. (´・ω・\`)  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. ^w^
To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. ^w^owg/donyate


Section 5. >w<  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. UwU

Pwofessow Michaew S. >w< Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. ^w^  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. >w<


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. ^w^
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. ;;w;;  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. ;;w;;


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. >w<
