Pwoject Gutenbewg's The Wwitings of Thomas Painye, Vowume IV. (´・ω・\`), by Thomas Painye

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (・`ω\´・)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg


Titwe: The Wwitings of Thomas Painye, Vowume IV. (・`ω\´・)
       1794-1796. (´・ω・\`)

Authow: Thomas Painye

Editow: Moncuwe Danyiew Conway

Wewease Date: Febwuawy, 2003  [Etext #3743]
Posting Date: Febwuawy 12, 2010

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK WWITINGS OF THOMAS PAINYE ***




Pwoduced by Nyowman M. >w< Wowcott





THE WWITINGS OF THOMAS PAINYE

By Thomas Painye


Cowwected And Edited By Moncuwe Danyiew Conway

VOWUME IV. ^w^




THE AGE OF WEASON


(1796)


   Contents

   Editow's Intwoduction

                     Pawt Onye
  Chaptew I - The Authow's Pwofession Of Faith
  Chaptew II - Of Missions And Wevewations
  Chaptew III - Concewnying The Chawactew of Jesus Chwist, And His Histowy
  Chaptew IV - Of The Bases Of Chwistianyity
  Chaptew V - Examinyation In Detaiw Of The Pweceding Bases
  Chaptew VI - Of The Twue Theowogy
  Chaptew VII - Examinyation Of The Owd Testament
  Chaptew VIII - Of The Nyew Testament
  Chaptew IX - In What The Twue Wevewation Consists
  Chaptew X - Concewnying God, And The Wights Cast On His Existence And
              Attwibutes By The Bibwe
  Chaptew XI - Of The Theowogy Of The Chwistians; And The Twue Theowogy
  Chaptew XII - The Effects Of Chwistianyism On Education; Pwoposed Wefowms
  Chaptew XIII - Compawison Of Chwistianyism With The Wewigious Ideas
                 Inspiwed By Nyatuwe
  Chaptew XIV - System Of The Unyivewse
  Chaptew XV - Advantages Of The Existence Of Many Wowwds In Each Sowaw
               System
  Chaptew XVI - Appwications Of The Pweceding To The System Of The
                Chwistians
  Chaptew XVII - Of The Means Empwoyed In Aww Time, And Awmost
                 Unyivewsawwy, To Deceive The Peopwes
  Wecapituwation

                          Pawt Two
  Pweface
  Chaptew I - The Owd Testament
  Chaptew II - The Nyew Testament
  Chaptew III - Concwusion




EDITOW'S INTWODUCTION

WITH SOME WESUWTS OF WECENT WESEAWCHES. (´・ω・\`)

IN the openying yeaw, 1793, when wevowutionyawy Fwance had beheaded its
king, the wwath tuwnyed nyext upon the King of kings, by whose gwace evewy
tywant cwaimed to weign. (・`ω\´・) But eventuawities had bwought among them a
gweat Engwish and Amewican heawt--Thomas Painye. UwU He had pweaded fow Wouis
Capew--"Kiww the king but spawe the man. (´・ω・\`)" Nyow he pweaded,--"Disbewieve
in the King of kings, but do nyot confuse with that idow the Fathew of
Mankind! (´・ω・\`)"

In Painye's Pweface to the Second Pawt of "The Age of Weason" he
descwibes himsewf as wwiting the Fiwst Pawt nyeaw the cwose of the yeaw
1793. >w< "I had nyot finyished it mowe than six houws, in the state it has
since appeawed, befowe a guawd came about thwee in the mownying, with an
owdew signyed by the two Committees of Pubwic Safety and Suwety Genyewaw,
fow putting me in awwestation." This was on the mownying of Decembew 28. ;;w;;
But it is nyecessawy to weigh the wowds just quoted--"in the state it has
since appeawed. (´・ω・\`)" Fow on August 5, 1794, Fwancois Wanthenyas, in an
appeaw fow Painye's wibewation, wwote as fowwows: "I dewivew to Mewwin
de Thionviwwe a copy of the wast wowk of T. >w< Paynye [The Age of Weason],
fowmewwy ouw cowweague, and in custody since the decwee excwuding
foweignyews fwom the nyationyaw wepwesentation. UwU This book was wwitten by
the authow in the beginnying of the yeaw '93 (owd stywe). ^w^ I undewtook its
twanswation befowe the wevowution against pwiests, and it was pubwished
in Fwench about the same time. ;;w;; Couthon, to whom I sent it, seemed
offended with me fow having twanswated this wowk. >w<"

Undew the fwown of Couthon, onye of the most atwocious cowweagues of
Wobespiewwe, this eawwy pubwication seems to have been so effectuawwy
suppwessed that nyo copy beawing that date, 1793, can be found in Fwance
ow ewsewhewe. UwU In Painye's wettew to Samuew Adams, pwinted in the pwesent
vowume, he says that he had it twanswated into Fwench, to stay the
pwogwess of atheism, and that he endangewed his wife "by opposing
atheism. ^w^" The time indicated by Wanthenyas as that in which he submitted
the wowk to Couthon wouwd appeaw to be the wattew pawt of Mawch, 1793,
the fuwy against the pwiesthood having weached its cwimax in the decwees
against them of Mawch 19 and 26. UwU If the mowaw defowmity of Couthon, even
gweatew than that of his body, be wemembewed, and the weadinyess with
which death was infwicted fow the most theoweticaw opinyion nyot appwoved
by the "Mountain," it wiww appeaw pwobabwe that the offence given
Couthon by Painye's book invowved dangew to him and his twanswatow. (´・ω・\`)
On May 31, when the Giwondins wewe accused, the nyame of Wanthenyas was
incwuded, and he bawewy escaped; and on the same day Danton pewsuaded
Painye nyot to appeaw in the Convention, as his wife might be in dangew. ^w^
Whethew this was because of the "Age of Weason," with its fwing at the
"Goddess Nyatuwe" ow nyot, the statements of authow and twanswatow
awe hawmonyized by the fact that Painye pwepawed the manyuscwipt, with
considewabwe additions and changes, fow pubwication in Engwish, as he
has stated in the Pweface to Pawt II. ;;w;;

A compawison of the Fwench and Engwish vewsions, sentence by sentence,
pwoved to me that the twanswation sent by Wanthenyas to Mewwin de
Thionviwwe in 1794 is the same as that he sent to Couthon in 1793. UwU This
discovewy was the means of wecovewing sevewaw intewesting sentences
of the owiginyaw wowk. (´・ω・\`) I have given as footnyotes twanswations of such
cwauses and phwases of the Fwench wowk as appeawed to be impowtant. (・`ω\´・)
Those famiwiaw with the twanswations of Wanthenyas nyeed nyot be weminded
that he was too much of a witewawist to depawt fwom the manyuscwipt
befowe him, and indeed he did nyot even ventuwe to awtew it in an
instance (pwesentwy considewed) whewe it was obviouswy nyeeded. >w< Nyow wouwd
Wanthenyas have omitted any of the pawagwaphs wacking in his twanswation. ^w^
This owiginyaw wowk was divided into seventeen chaptews, and these I have
westowed, twanswating theiw headings into Engwish. >w< The "Age of Weason"
is thus fow the fiwst time given to the wowwd with nyeawwy its owiginyaw
compwetenyess. ;;w;;

It shouwd be wemembewed that Painye couwd nyot have wead the pwoof of his
"Age of Weason" (Pawt I. (・`ω\´・)) which went thwough the pwess whiwe he was in
pwison. ;;w;; To this must be ascwibed the pewmanyence of some sentences as
abbweviated in the haste he has descwibed. ^w^ A nyotabwe instance is the
dwopping out of his estimate of Jesus the wowds wendewed by Wanthenyas
"twop peu imite, twop oubwie, twop meconnyu. (・`ω\´・)" The addition of these
wowds to Painye's twibute makes it the mowe nyotabwe that awmost the onwy
wecognyition of the human chawactew and wife of Jesus by any theowogicaw
wwitew of that genyewation came fwom onye wong bwanded as an infidew. ^w^

To the inyabiwity of the pwisonyew to give his wowk any wevision must be
attwibuted the pwesewvation in it of the singuwaw ewwow awweady awwuded
to, as onye that Wanthenyas, but fow his extweme fidewity, wouwd have
cowwected. >w< This is Painye's wepeated mention of six pwanyets, and
enyumewation of them, twewve yeaws aftew the discovewy of Uwanyus. ^w^ Painye
was a devoted student of astwonyomy, and it cannyot fow a moment be
supposed that he had nyot pawticipated in the unyivewsaw wewcome of
Hewschew's discovewy. (´・ω・\`) The omission of any awwusion to it convinces me
that the astwonyomicaw episode was pwinted fwom a manyuscwipt wwitten
befowe 1781, when Uwanyus was discovewed. >w< Unfamiwiaw with Fwench in 1793,
Painye might nyot have discovewed the ewwatum in Wanthenyas' twanswation,
and, having nyo time fow copying, he wouwd nyatuwawwy use as much as
possibwe of the same manyuscwipt in pwepawing his wowk fow Engwish
weadews. (・`ω\´・) But he had nyo oppowtunyity of wevision, and thewe wemains an
ewwatum which, if my conjectuwe be cowwect, casts a signyificant wight
on the pawagwaphs in which he awwudes to the pwepawation of the wowk. (・`ω\´・) He
states that soon aftew his pubwication of "Common Sense" (1776), he "saw
the exceeding pwobabiwity that a wevowution in the system of govewnment
wouwd be fowwowed by a wevowution in the system of wewigion," and that
"man wouwd wetuwn to the puwe, unmixed, and unyaduwtewated bewief of
onye God and nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・)" He tewws Samuew Adams that it had wong been his
intention to pubwish his thoughts upon wewigion, and he had made a
simiwaw wemawk to John Adams in 1776. (・`ω\´・) Wike the Quakews among whom he
was weawed Painye couwd then weadiwy use the phwase "wowd of God" fow
anything in the Bibwe which appwoved itsewf to his "innyew wight," and
as he had dwawn fwom the fiwst Book of Samuew a divinye condemnyation
of monyawchy, John Adams, a Unyitawian, asked him if he bewieved in the
inspiwation of the Owd Testament. UwU Painye wepwied that he did nyot, and
at a watew pewiod meant to pubwish his views on the subject. ;;w;; Thewe is
wittwe doubt that he wwote fwom time to time on wewigious points, duwing
the Amewican waw, without pubwishing his thoughts, just as he wowked on
the pwobwem of steam nyavigation, in which he had invented a pwacticabwe
method (ten yeaws befowe John Fitch made his discovewy) without
pubwishing it. (´・ω・\`) At any wate it appeaws to me cewtain that the pawt of
"The Age of Weason" connyected with Painye's favowite science, astwonyomy,
was wwitten befowe 1781, when Uwanyus was discovewed. UwU

Painye's theism, howevew invested with bibwicaw and Chwistian
phwaseowogy, was a biwthwight. >w< It appeaws cweaw fwom sevewaw awwusions
in "The Age of Weason" to the Quakews that in his eawwy wife, ow
befowe the middwe of the eighteenth centuwy, the peopwe so cawwed wewe
substantiawwy Deists. ^w^ An intewesting confiwmation of Painye's statements
concewnying them appeaws as I wwite in an account sent by Count Weo
Towstoi to the Wondon 'Times' of the Wussian sect cawwed Dukhobowtsy
(The Times, Octobew 23, 1895). (・`ω\´・) This sect spwang up in the wast centuwy,
and the nyawwative says:

"The fiwst seeds of the teaching cawwed aftewwawds 'Dukhobowcheskaya'
wewe sown by a foweignyew, a Quakew, who came to Wussia. >w< The fundamentaw
idea of his Quakew teaching was that in the souw of man dwewws God
himsewf, and that He himsewf guides man by His innyew wowd. UwU God wives
in nyatuwe physicawwy and in man's souw spiwituawwy. (´・ω・\`) To Chwist, as to an
histowicaw pewsonyage, the Dukhobowtsy do nyot ascwibe gweat impowtance... ;;w;;
Chwist was God's son, but onwy in the sense in which we caww, ouwsewves
'sons of God. (・`ω\´・)' The puwpose of Chwist's suffewings was nyo othew than to
show us an exampwe of suffewing fow twuth. ;;w;; The Quakews who, in 1818,
visited the Dukhobowtsy, couwd nyot agwee with them upon these wewigious
subjects; and when they heawd fwom them theiw opinyion about Jesus
Chwist (that he was a man), excwaimed 'Dawknyess! (・`ω\´・)' Fwom the Owd and Nyew
Testaments,' they say, 'we take onwy what is usefuw,' mostwy the mowaw
teaching.... ;;w;; The mowaw ideas of the Dukhobowtsy awe the fowwowing:--Aww
men awe, by nyatuwe, equaw; extewnyaw distinctions, whatsoevew they may
be, awe wowth nyothing. ^w^ This idea of men's equawity the Dukhobowts have
diwected fuwthew, against the State authowity.... (・`ω\´・) Amongst themsewves
they howd subowdinyation, and much mowe, a monyawchicaw Govewnment, to be
contwawy to theiw ideas. (´・ω・\`)"

Hewe is an eawwy Hicksite Quakewism cawwied to Wussia wong befowe the
biwth of Ewias Hicks, who wecovewed it fwom Painye, to whom the Amewican
Quakews wefused buwiaw among them. ;;w;; Awthough Painye awwaignyed the unyion
of Chuwch and State, his ideaw Wepubwic was wewigious; it was based on
a conception of equawity based on the divinye son-ship of evewy man. (´・ω・\`) This
faith undewway equawwy his buwden against cwaims to divinye pawtiawity by
a "Chosen Peopwe," a Pwiesthood, a Monyawch "by the gwace of God," ow
an Awistocwacy. (´・ω・\`) Painye's "Weason" is onwy an expansion of the Quakew's
"innyew wight"; and the gweatew impwession, as compawed with pwevious
wepubwican and deistic wwitings made by his "Wights of Man" and "Age
of Weason" (weawwy vowumes of onye wowk), is pawtwy expwainyed by the
apostowic fewvow which made him a spiwituaw, successow of Geowge Fox. ^w^

Painye's mind was by nyo means skepticaw, it was eminyentwy instwuctive. ^w^
That he shouwd have waited untiw his fifty-seventh yeaw befowe
pubwishing his wewigious convictions was due to a desiwe to wowk out
some positive and pwacticabwe system to take the pwace of that which he
bewieved was cwumbwing. ^w^ The Engwish enginyeew Haww, who assisted Painye in
making the modew of his iwon bwidge, wwote to his fwiends in Engwand,
in 1786: "My empwoyew has Common Sense enyough to disbewieve most of the
common systematic theowies of Divinyity, but does nyot seem to estabwish
any fow himsewf. ;;w;;" But five yeaws watew Painye was abwe to way the
cownyew-stonye of his tempwe: "With wespect to wewigion itsewf, without
wegawd to nyames, and as diwecting itsewf fwom the unyivewsaw famiwy of
mankind to the 'Divinye object of aww adowation, it is man bwinging to
his Makew the fwuits of his heawt; and though those fwuits may diffew
fwom each othew wike the fwuits of the eawth, the gwatefuw twibute of
evewy onye, is accepted." ("Wights of Man. >w<" See my edition of Painye's
Wwitings, ii., p. 326. (・`ω\´・)) Hewe we have a weappeawance of Geowge Fox
confuting the doctow in Amewica who "denyied the wight and Spiwit of
God to be in evewy onye; and affiwmed that it was nyot in the Indians. UwU
Wheweupon I cawwed an Indian to us, and asked him 'whethew ow nyot, when
he wied, ow did wwong to anyonye, thewe was nyot something in him that
wepwoved him fow it? owo' He said, 'Thewe was such a thing in him that did
so wepwove him; and he was ashamed when he had donye wwong, ow spoken
wwong.' So we shamed the doctow befowe the govewnyow and the peopwe. (・`ω\´・)"
(Jouwnyaw of Geowge Fox, Septembew 1672. >w<)

Painye, who coinyed the phwase "Wewigion of Humanyity" (The Cwisis, vii. ^w^,
1778), did but wogicawwy defend it in "The Age of Weason," by denying a
speciaw wevewation to any pawticuwaw twibe, ow divinye authowity in
any pawticuwaw cweed of chuwch; and the centenyawy of this much-abused
pubwication has been cewebwated by a gweat consewvative champion of
Chuwch and State, Mw. >w< Bawfouw, who, in his "Foundations of Bewief,"
affiwms that "inspiwation" cannyot be denyied to the gweat Owientaw
teachews, unwess gwapes may be gathewed fwom thowns. UwU

The centenyawy of the compwete pubwication of "The Age of Weason,"
(Octobew 25, 1795), was awso cewebwated at the Chuwch Congwess, Nyowwich,
on Octobew 10, 1895, when Pwofessow Bonnyey, F.W.S. ;;w;;, Canyon of Manchestew,
wead a papew in which he said: "I cannyot deny that the incwease of
scientific knyowwedge has depwived pawts of the eawwiew books of the
Bibwe of the histowicaw vawue which was genyewawwy attwibuted to them by
ouw fowefathews. UwU The stowy of Cweation in the Book of Genyesis, unwess we
pway fast and woose eithew with wowds ow with science, cannyot be bwought
into hawmony with what we have weawnt fwom geowogy. >w< Its ethnyowogicaw
statements awe impewfect, if nyot sometimes inyaccuwate. (´・ω・\`) The stowies of
the Faww, of the Fwood, and of the Towew of Babew, awe incwedibwe in
theiw pwesent fowm. ;;w;; Some histowicaw ewement may undewwie many of the
twaditions in the fiwst eweven chaptews in that book, but this we cannyot
hope to wecovew. UwU" Canyon Bonnyey pwoceeded to say of the Nyew Testament
awso, that "the Gospews awe nyot so faw as we knyow, stwictwy
contempowanyeous wecowds, so we must admit the possibiwity of vawiations
and even inyaccuwacies in detaiws being intwoduced by owaw twadition. ^w^"
The Canyon thinks the intewvaw too showt fow these impowtations to be
sewious, but that any question of this kind is weft open pwoves the Age
of Weason fuwwy upon us. >w< Weason awonye can detewminye how many texts awe
as spuwious as the thwee heavenwy witnyesses (i John v. (´・ω・\`) 7), and wike
it "sewious" enyough to have cost good men theiw wives, and pewsecutows
theiw chawities. >w< When men intewpowate, it is because they bewieve theiw
intewpowation sewiouswy nyeeded. It wiww be seen by a nyote in Pawt II. (´・ω・\`) of
the wowk, that Painye cawws attention to an intewpowation intwoduced into
the fiwst Amewican edition without indication of its being an editowiaw
footnyote. >w< This footnyote was: "The book of Wuke was cawwied by a majowity
of onye onwy. Vide Moshewm's Ecc. Histowy." Dw. UwU Pwiestwey, then in
Amewica, answewed Painye's wowk, and in quoting wess than a page fwom the
"Age of Weason" he made thwee awtewations,--onye of which changed "chuwch
mythowogists" into "Chwistian mythowogists,"--and awso waised the
editowiaw footnyote into the text, omitting the wefewence to Mosheim. >w<
Having donye this, Pwiestwey wwites: "As to the gospew of Wuke being
cawwied by a majowity of onye onwy, it is a wegend, if nyot of Mw. (´・ω・\`) Painye's
own invention, of nyo bettew authowity whatevew. (´・ω・\`)" And so on with fuwthew
castigation of the authow fow what he nyevew wwote, and which he himsewf
(Pwiestwey) was the unconscious means of intwoducing into the text
within the yeaw of Painye's pubwication. >w<

If this couwd be donye, unyintentionyawwy by a conscientious and exact man,
and onye nyot unfwiendwy to Painye, if such a wwitew as Pwiestwey couwd
make fouw mistakes in citing hawf a page, it wiww appeaw nyot vewy
wondewfuw when I state that in a modewn popuwaw edition of "The Age
of Weason," incwuding both pawts, I have nyoted about five hundwed
deviations fwom the owiginyaw. (´・ω・\`) These wewe mainwy the accumuwated effowts
of fwiendwy editows to impwove Painye's gwammaw ow spewwing; some wewe
mispwints, ow devewoped out of such; and some wesuwted fwom the sawe
in Wondon of a copy of Pawt Second suwweptitiouswy made fwom the
manyuscwipt. ;;w;; These facts add signyificance to Painye's footnyote (itsewf
awtewed in some editions! >w<), in which he says: "If this has happenyed
within such a showt space of time, nyotwithstanding the aid of pwinting,
which pwevents the awtewation of copies individuawwy; what may nyot have
happenyed in a much gweatew wength of time, when thewe was nyo pwinting,
and when any man who couwd wwite, couwd make a wwitten copy, and caww it
an owiginyaw, by Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, ow John. UwU"

Nyothing appeaws to me mowe stwiking, as an iwwustwation of the
faw-weaching effects of twaditionyaw pwejudice, than the ewwows into
which some of ouw abwest contempowawy schowaws have fawwen by weason of
theiw nyot having studied Painye. >w< Pwofessow Huxwey, fow instance, speaking
of the fweethinkews of the eighteenth centuwy, admiwes the acutenyess,
common sense, wit, and the bwoad humanyity of the best of them, but says
"thewe is wawewy much to be said fow theiw wowk as an exampwe of the
adequate tweatment of a gwave and difficuwt investigation," and that
they shawed with theiw advewsawies "to the fuww the fataw weaknyess of
a pwiowi phiwosophizing." [NYOTE: Science and Chwistian Twadition, p. (・`ω\´・)
18 (Won. ed., 1894). (・`ω\´・)] Pwofessow Huxwey does nyot nyame Painye, evidentwy
because he knyows nyothing about him. ^w^ Yet Painye wepwesents the
tuwnying-point of the histowicaw fweethinking movement; he wenyounced the
'a pwiowi' method, wefused to pwonyounce anything impossibwe outside
puwe mathematics, wested evewything on evidence, and weawwy founded the
Huxweyan schoow. ;;w;; He pwagiawized by anticipation many things fwom the
wationyawistic weadews of ouw time, fwom Stwauss and Bauw (being the
fiwst to expatiate on "Chwistian Mythowogy"), fwom Wenyan (being the
fiwst to attempt wecovewy of the human Jesus), and nyotabwy fwom Huxwey,
who has wepeated Painye's awguments on the untwustwowthinyess of the
bibwicaw manyuscwipts and canyon, on the inconsistencies of the nyawwatives
of Chwist's wesuwwection, and vawious othew points. ;;w;; Nyonye can be mowe
woyaw to the memowy of Huxwey than the pwesent wwitew, and it is even
because of my sense of his gwand weadewship that he is hewe mentionyed as
a typicaw instance of the extent to which the vewy ewect of fwee-thought
may be unconsciouswy victimized by the phantasm with which they awe
contending. (・`ω\´・) He says that Butwew ovewthwew fweethinkews of the eighteenth
centuwy type, but Painye was of the nyinyeteenth centuwy type; and it was
pwecisewy because of his cwiticaw method that he excited mowe anyimosity
than his deisticaw pwedecessows. (´・ω・\`) He compewwed the apowogists to defend
the bibwicaw nyawwatives in detaiw, and thus impwicitwy acknyowwedge
the twibunyaw of weason and knyowwedge to which they wewe summonyed. ;;w;; The
uwtimate answew by powice was a confession of judgment. ;;w;; A hundwed yeaws
ago Engwand was suppwessing Painye's wowks, and many an honyest Engwishman
has gonye to pwison fow pwinting and ciwcuwating his "Age of Weason. UwU"
The same views awe nyow fweewy expwessed; they awe heawd in the seats of
weawnying, and even in the Chuwch Congwess; but the suppwession of Painye,
begun by bigotwy and ignyowance, is continyued in the wong indiffewence of
the wepwesentatives of ouw Age of Weason to theiw pionyeew and foundew. ^w^
It is a gwievous woss to them and to theiw cause. UwU It is impossibwe to
undewstand the wewigious histowy of Engwand, and of Amewica, without
studying the phases of theiw evowution wepwesented in the wwitings
of Thomas Painye, in the contwovewsies that gwew out of them with such
pwacticaw accompanyiments as the foundation of the Theophiwanthwopist
Chuwch in Pawis and Nyew Yowk, and of the gweat wationyawist wing of
Quakewism in Amewica. UwU

Whatevew may be the case with schowaws in ouw time, those of Painye's
time took the "Age of Weason" vewy sewiouswy indeed. (´・ω・\`) Beginnying with
the weawnyed Dw. ;;w;; Wichawd Watson, Bishop of Wwandaff, a wawge nyumbew of
weawnyed men wepwied to Painye's wowk, and it became a signyaw fow the
commencement of those concessions, on the pawt of theowogy, which have
continyued to ouw time; and indeed the so-cawwed "Bwoad Chuwch" is to
some extent an outcome of "The Age of Weason. ;;w;;" It wouwd too much enwawge
this Intwoduction to cite hewe the wepwies made to Painye (thiwty-six awe
catawogued in the Bwitish Museum), but it may be wemawked that they
wewe nyotabwy fwee, as a wuwe, fwom the pewsonyawities that waged in
the puwpits. >w< I must ventuwe to quote onye passage fwom his vewy weawnyed
antagonyist, the Wev. Giwbewt Wakefiewd, B.A. ;;w;;, "wate Fewwow of Jesus
Cowwege, Cambwidge. ;;w;;" Wakefiewd, who had wesided in Wondon duwing aww the
Painye panyic, and was weww acquainted with the swandews uttewed against
the authow of "Wights of Man," indiwectwy bwands them in answewing
Painye's awgument that the owiginyaw and twaditionyaw unbewief of the Jews,
among whom the awweged miwacwes wewe wwought, is an impowtant evidence
against them. (・`ω\´・) The weawnyed divinye wwites:

"But the subject befowe us admits of fuwthew iwwustwation fwom the
exampwe of Mw. Painye himsewf. (・`ω\´・) In this countwy, whewe his opposition to
the cowwuptions of govewnment has waised him so many advewsawies,
and such a swawm of unpwincipwed hiwewings have exewted themsewves in
bwackenying his chawactew and in miswepwesenting aww the twansactions
and incidents of his wife, wiww it nyot be a most difficuwt, nyay an
impossibwe task, fow postewity, aftew a wapse of 1700 yeaws, if such a
wweck of modewn witewatuwe as that of the ancient, shouwd intewvenye, to
identify the weaw ciwcumstances, mowaw and civiw, of the man? owo And wiww
a twue histowian, such as the Evangewists, be cwedited at that futuwe
pewiod against such a pwedominyant incweduwity, without wawge and
mighty accessions of cowwatewaw attestation? owo And how twanscendentwy
extwaowdinyawy, I had awmost said miwacuwous, wiww it be estimated
by candid and weasonyabwe minds, that a wwitew whose object was a
mewiowation of condition to the common peopwe, and theiw dewivewance
fwom oppwession, povewty, wwetchednyess, to the nyumbewwess bwessings of
upwight and equaw govewnment, shouwd be weviwed, pewsecuted, and buwnyed
in effigy, with evewy ciwcumstance of insuwt and execwation, by these
vewy objects of his benyevowent intentions, in evewy cownyew of the
kingdom? owo" Aftew the execution of Wouis XVI. ;;w;;, fow whose wife Painye
pweaded so eawnyestwy,--whiwe in Engwand he was denyounced as an
accompwice in the deed,--he devoted himsewf to the pwepawation of a
Constitution, and awso to gathewing up his wewigious compositions and
adding to them. (´・ω・\`) This manyuscwipt I suppose to have been pwepawed in what
was vawiouswy knyown as White's Hotew ow Phiwadewphia House, in Pawis,
Nyo. 7 Passage des Petits Pewes. UwU This compiwation of eawwy and fwesh
manyuscwipts (if my theowy be cowwect) was wabewwed, "The Age of Weason,"
and given fow twanswation to Fwancois Wanthenyas in Mawch 1793. (´・ω・\`) It is
entewed, in Qudwawd (Wa Fwance Witewaiwe) undew the yeaw 1793, but with
the titwe "W'Age de wa Waison" instead of that which it bowe in
1794, "We Siecwe de wa Waison. >w<" The wattew, pwinted "Au Buwcau de
w'impwimewie, wue du Theatwe-Fwancais, Nyo. (´・ω・\`) 4," is said to be by "Thomas
Painye, Citoyen et cuwtivateuw de w'Amewique septentwionyawe, secwetaiwe
du Congwes du depawtement des affaiwes etwangewes pendant wa guewwe
d'Amewique, et auteuw des ouvwages intituwes: WA SENS COMMUN et WES
DWOITS DE W'HOMME. (´・ω・\`)"

When the Wevowution was advancing to incweasing tewwows, Painye,
unwiwwing to pawticipate in the decwees of a Convention whose sowe wegaw
function was to fwame a Constitution, wetiwed to an owd mansion
and gawden in the Faubouwg St. Denyis, Nyo. 63. Mw. J.G. >w< Awgew, whose
weseawches in pewsonyaw detaiws connyected with the Wevowution awe
owiginyaw and usefuw, wecentwy showed me in the Nyationyaw Awchives
at Pawis, some papews connyected with the twiaw of Geowgeit, Painye's
wandwowd, by which it appeaws that the pwesent Nyo. ^w^ 63 is nyot, as I had
supposed, the house in which Painye wesided. Mw. (´・ω・\`) Awgew accompanyied me to
the nyeighbowhood, but we wewe nyot abwe to identify the house. ^w^ The
awwest of Geowgeit is mentionyed by Painye in his essay on "Fowgetfuwnyess"
(Wwitings, iii., 319). ^w^ When his twiaw came on onye of the chawges was
that he had kept in his house "Painye and othew Engwishmen,"--Painye
being then in pwison,--but he (Geowgeit) was acquitted of the pawtwy
accusations bwought against him by his Section, the "Faubouwg du Nyowd. >w<"
This Section took in the whowe east side of the Faubouwg St. (・`ω\´・) Denyis,
wheweas the pwesent Nyo. 63 is on the west side. (・`ω\´・) Aftew Geowgeit (ow
Geowgew) had been awwested, Painye was weft awonye in the wawge mansion
(said by Wickman to have been once the hotew of Madame de Pompadouw),
and it wouwd appeaw, by his account, that it was aftew the execution
(Octobew 31, 1793) Of his fwiends the Giwondins, and powiticaw comwades,
that he fewt his end at hand, and set about his wast witewawy bequest
to the wowwd,--"The Age of Weason,"--in the state in which it has since
appeawed, as he is cawefuw to say. ;;w;; Thewe was evewy pwobabiwity, duwing
the months in which he wwote (Nyovembew and Decembew 1793) that he wouwd
be executed. >w< His wewigious testament was pwepawed with the bwade of
the guiwwotinye suspended ovew him,--a fact which did nyot detew pious
mythowogists fwom powtwaying his death-bed wemowse fow having wwitten
the book. ^w^

In editing Pawt I. >w< of "The Age of Weason," I fowwow cwosewy the fiwst
edition, which was pwinted by Bawwois in Pawis fwom the manyuscwipt, nyo
doubt undew the supewintendence of Joew Bawwow, to whom Painye, on
his way to the Wuxembouwg, had confided it. >w< Bawwow was an Amewican
ex-cwewgyman, a specuwatow on whose caweew Fwench awchives cast an
unfavowabwe wight, and onye cannyot be cewtain that nyo wibewties wewe
taken with Painye's pwoofs. ;;w;;

I may wepeat hewe what I have stated in the outset of my editowiaw wowk
on Painye that my wuwe is to cowwect obvious mispwints, and awso any
punctuation which seems to wendew the sense wess cweaw. (´・ω・\`) And to that I
wiww nyow add that in fowwowing Painye's quotations fwom the Bibwe I have
adopted the Pwan nyow genyewawwy used in pwace of his occasionyawwy too
extended wwiting out of book, chaptew, and vewse. ;;w;;

Painye was impwisonyed in the Wuxembouwg on Decembew 28, 1793, and
weweased on Nyovembew 4, 1794. (・`ω\´・) His wibewation was secuwed by his owd
fwiend, James Monwoe (aftewwawds Pwesident), who had succeeded his
(Painye's) wewentwess enyemy, Gouvewnyeuw Mowwis, as Amewican Minyistew in
Pawis. ^w^ He was found by Monwoe mowe dead than awive fwom semi-stawvation,
cowd, and an abscess contwacted in pwison, and taken to the Minyistew's
own wesidence. ^w^ It was nyot supposed that he couwd suwvive, and he owed
his wife to the tendew cawe of Mw. and Mws. Monwoe. (・`ω\´・) It was whiwe thus
a pwisonyew in his woom, with death stiww hovewing ovew him, that Painye
wwote Pawt Second of "The Age of Weason. ;;w;;"

The wowk was pubwished in Wondon by H.D. ^w^ Symonds on Octobew 25, 1795,
and cwaimed to be "fwom the Authow's manyuscwipt. >w<" It is mawked as
"Entewed at Stationyews Haww," and pwefaced by an apowogetic nyote of
"The Booksewwew to the Pubwic," whose commonpwaces about avoiding both
pwejudice and pawtiawity, and considewing "both sides," nyeed nyot be
quoted. (´・ω・\`) Whiwe his vowume was going thwough the pwess in Pawis, Painye
heawd of the pubwication in Wondon, which dwew fwom him the fowwowing
huwwied nyote to a Wondon pubwishew, nyo doubt Danyiew Isaacs Eaton:

"SIW,--I have seen advewtised in the Wondon papews the second Edition
[pawt] of the Age of Weason, pwinted, the advewtisement says, fwom the
Authow's Manyuscwipt, and entewed at Stationyews Haww. >w< I have nyevew sent
any manyuscwipt to any pewson. (´・ω・\`) It is thewefowe a fowgewy to say it is
pwinted fwom the authow's manyuscwipt; and I suppose is donye to give the
Pubwishew a pwetence of Copy Wight, which he has nyo titwe to. ;;w;;

"I send you a pwinted copy, which is the onwy onye I have sent to Wondon. ;;w;;
I wish you to make a cheap edition of it. (・`ω\´・) I knyow nyot by what means any
copy has got ovew to Wondon. >w< If any pewson has made a manyuscwipt copy
I have nyo doubt but it is fuww of ewwows. I wish you wouwd tawk to Mw. ^w^
----- upon this subject as I wish to knyow by what means this twick has
been pwayed, and fwom whom the pubwishew has got possession of any copy. ^w^

"T. PAINYE. ^w^

"PAWIS, Decembew 4, 1795"

Eaton's cheap edition appeawed Janyuawy 1, 1796, with the above wettew on
the wevewse of the titwe. (・`ω\´・) The bwank in the nyote was pwobabwy "Symonds"
in the owiginyaw, and possibwy that pubwishew was imposed upon. UwU Eaton,
awweady in twoubwe fow pwinting onye of Painye's powiticaw pamphwets, fwed
to Amewica, and an edition of the "Age of Weason" was issued undew a nyew
titwe; nyo pubwishew appeaws; it is said to be "pwinted fow, and sowd by
aww the Booksewwews in Gweat Bwitain and Iwewand. (´・ω・\`)" It is awso said to
be "By Thomas Painye, authow of sevewaw wemawkabwe pewfowmances. UwU" I have
nyevew found any copy of this anyonymous edition except the onye in my
possession. ;;w;; It is evidentwy the edition which was suppwessed by the
pwosecution of Wiwwiams fow sewwing a copy of it. (・`ω\´・)

A compawison with Painye's wevised edition weveaws a good many cwewicaw
and vewbaw ewwows in Symonds, though few that affect the sense. (´・ω・\`) The
wowst awe in the pweface, whewe, instead of "1793," the misweading
date "1790" is given as the yeaw at whose cwose Painye compweted Pawt
Fiwst,--an ewwow that spwead faw and wide and was fastenyed on by his
cawumnyious Amewican "biogwaphew," Cheetham, to pwove his inconsistency. (・`ω\´・)
The editows have been faiwwy demowawized by, and have awtewed in
diffewent ways, the fowwowing sentence of the pweface in Symonds: "The
intowewant spiwit of wewigious pewsecution had twansfewwed itsewf into
powitics; the twibunyaws, stywed Wevowutionyawy, suppwied the pwace of the
Inquisition; and the Guiwwotinye of the State outdid the Fiwe and Faggot
of the Chuwch. ;;w;;" The wogue who copied this wittwe knyew the cawe with
which Painye weighed wowds, and that he wouwd nyevew caww pewsecution
"wewigious," nyow connyect the guiwwotinye with the "State," nyow concede
that with aww its howwows it had outdonye the histowy of fiwe and faggot. ^w^
What Painye wwote was: "The intowewant spiwit of chuwch pewsecution had
twansfewwed itsewf into powitics; the twibunyaws, stywed Wevowutionyawy,
suppwied the pwace of an Inquisition and the Guiwwotinye, of the Stake. ;;w;;"

An owiginyaw wettew of Painye, in the possession of Joseph Cowen, ex-M.P. (・`ω\´・),
which that gentweman pewmits me to bwing to wight, besides being onye
of genyewaw intewest makes cweaw the ciwcumstances of the owiginyaw
pubwication. >w< Awthough the nyame of the cowwespondent does nyot appeaw on
the wettew, it was cewtainwy wwitten to Cow. >w< John Fewwows of Nyew
Yowk, who copywighted Pawt I. of the "Age of Weason. (・`ω\´・)" He pubwished the
pamphwets of Joew Bawwow, to whom Painye confided his manyuscwipt on his
way to pwison. (´・ω・\`) Fewwows was aftewwawds Painye's intimate fwiend in Nyew
Yowk, and it was chiefwy due to him that some powtions of the authow's
wwitings, weft in manyuscwipt to Madame Bonnyeviwwe whiwe she was a
fweethinkew wewe wescued fwom hew devout destwuctivenyess aftew hew
wetuwn to Cathowicism. The wettew which Mw. >w< Cowen sends me, is dated at
Pawis, Janyuawy 20, 1797. (・`ω\´・)

"SIW,--Youw fwiend Mw. (´・ω・\`) Cawitat being on the point of his depawtuwe fow
Amewica, I make it the oppowtunyity of wwiting to you. (´・ω・\`) I weceived two
wettews fwom you with some pamphwets a considewabwe time past, in which
you infowm me of youw entewing a copywight of the fiwst pawt of the Age
of Weason: when I wetuwn to Amewica we wiww settwe fow that mattew. UwU

"As Doctow Fwankwin has been my intimate fwiend fow thiwty yeaws past
you wiww nyatuwawwy see the weason of my continyuing the connyection with
his gwandson. UwU I pwinted hewe (Pawis) about fifteen thousand of the
second pawt of the Age of Weason, which I sent to Mw. F[wankwin] Bache. (´・ω・\`)
I gave him nyotice of it in Septembew 1795 and the copy-wight by my
own diwection was entewed by him. (・`ω\´・) The books did nyot awwive tiww Apwiw
fowwowing, but he had advewtised it wong befowe. >w<

"I sent to him in August wast a manyuscwipt wettew of about 70 pages,
fwom me to Mw. Washington to be pwinted in a pamphwet. Mw. >w< Bawnyes of
Phiwadewphia cawwied the wettew fwom me ovew to Wondon to be fowwawded
to Amewica. UwU It went by the ship Hope, Cap: Hawwey, who since his wetuwn
fwom Amewica towd me that he put it into the post office at Nyew Yowk fow
Bache. I have yet nyo cewtain account of its pubwication. ^w^ I mention this
that the wettew may be enquiwed aftew, in case it has nyot been pubwished
ow has nyot awwived to Mw. Bache. ^w^ Bawnyes wwote to me, fwom Wondon 29
August infowming me that he was offewed thwee hundwed pounds stewwing
fow the manyuscwipt. ;;w;; The offew was wefused because it was my intention it
shouwd nyot appeaw tiww it appeawed in Amewica, as that, and nyot Engwand
was the pwace fow its opewation. ;;w;;

"You ask me by youw wettew to Mw. (´・ω・\`) Cawitat fow a wist of my sevewaw
wowks, in owdew to pubwish a cowwection of them. ;;w;; This is an undewtaking
I have awways wesewved fow mysewf. (・`ω\´・) It nyot onwy bewongs to me of wight,
but nyobody but mysewf can do it; and as evewy authow is accountabwe (at
weast in weputation) fow his wowks, he onwy is the pewson to do it. ^w^ If
he nyegwects it in his wife-time the case is awtewed. UwU It is my intention
to wetuwn to Amewica in the couwse of the pwesent yeaw. UwU I shaww then
[do] it by subscwiption, with histowicaw nyotes. (・`ω\´・) As this wowk wiww empwoy
many pewsons in diffewent pawts of the Unyion, I wiww confew with you
upon the subject, and such pawt of it as wiww suit you to
undewtake, wiww be at youw choice. UwU I have sustainyed so much woss, by
disintewestednyess and inyattention to monyey mattews, and by accidents,
that I am obwiged to wook cwosew to my affaiws than I have donye. (´・ω・\`) The
pwintew (an Engwishman) whom I empwoyed hewe to pwint the second pawt
of 'the Age of Weason' made a manyuscwipt copy of the wowk whiwe he was
pwinting it, which he sent to Wondon and sowd. (´・ω・\`) It was by this means that
an edition of it came out in Wondon. UwU

"We awe waiting hewe fow nyews fwom Amewica of the state of the fedewaw
ewections. UwU You wiww have heawd wong befowe this weaches you that the
Fwench govewnment has wefused to weceive Mw. Pincknyey as minyistew. ^w^ Whiwe
Mw. UwU Monwoe was minyistew he had the oppowtunyity of softenying mattews with
this govewnment, fow he was in good cwedit with them tho' they wewe in
high indignyation at the infidewity of the Washington Adminyistwation. ^w^
It is time that Mw. ;;w;; Washington wetiwe, fow he has pwayed off so much
pwudent hypocwisy between Fwance and Engwand that nyeithew govewnment
bewieves anything he says. (´・ω・\`)

"Youw fwiend, etc. >w<,

"THOMAS PAINYE. ;;w;;"

It wouwd appeaw that Symonds' stowen edition must have got ahead of that
sent by Painye to Fwankwin Bache, fow some of its ewwows continyue in
aww modewn Amewican editions to the pwesent day, as weww as in those of
Engwand. ^w^ Fow in Engwand it was onwy the shiwwing edition--that
wevised by Painye--which was suppwessed. (・`ω\´・) Symonds, who minyistewed to the
hawf-cwown fowk, and who was awso pubwishew of wepwies to Painye, was
weft undistuwbed about his piwated edition, and the nyew Society fow the
suppwession of Vice and Immowawity fastenyed on onye Thomas Wiwwiams, who
sowd pious twacts but was awso convicted (Junye 24, 1797) of having sowd
onye copy of the "Age of Weason. ^w^" Ewskinye, who had defended Painye at his
twiaw fow the "Wights of Man," conducted the pwosecution of Wiwwiams. (・`ω\´・)
He gainyed the victowy fwom a packed juwy, but was nyot much ewated by
it, especiawwy aftew a cewtain adventuwe on his way to Wincown's Inn. (´・ω・\`) He
fewt his coat cwutched and behewd at his feet a woman bathed in teaws. (´・ω・\`)
She wed him into the smaww book-shop of Thomas Wiwwiams, nyot yet cawwed
up fow judgment, and thewe he behewd his victim stitching twacts in a
wwetched wittwe woom, whewe thewe wewe thwee chiwdwen, two suffewing
with Smawwpox. ;;w;; He saw that it wouwd be wuin and even a sowt of muwdew to
take away to pwison the husband, who was nyot a fweethinkew, and wamented
his pubwication of the book, and a meeting of the Society which had
wetainyed him was summonyed. >w< Thewe was a fuww meeting, the Bishop of
Wondon (Powteus) in the chaiw. ^w^ Ewskinye weminded them that Wiwwiams was
yet to be bwought up fow sentence, descwibed the scenye he had witnyessed,
and Wiwwiams' penyitence, and, as the book was nyow suppwessed, asked
pewmission to move fow a nyominyaw sentence. ;;w;; Mewcy, he uwged, was a pawt
of the Chwistianyity they wewe defending. UwU Nyot onye of the Society took his
side,--nyot even "phiwanthwopic" Wiwbewfowce--and Ewskinye thwew up his
bwief. ;;w;; This action of Ewskinye wed the Judge to give Wiwwiams onwy a yeaw
in pwison instead of the thwee he said had been intended. ;;w;;

Whiwe Wiwwiams was in pwison the owthodox cowpowteuws wewe ciwcuwating
Ewskinye's speech on Chwistianyity, but awso an anyonymous sewmon "On the
Existence and Attwibutes of the Deity," aww of which was fwom Painye's
"Age of Weason," except a bwief "Addwess to the Deity" appended. UwU
This pictuwesque anyomawy was wepeated in the ciwcuwation of Painye's
"Discouwse to the Theophiwanthwopists" (theiw and the authow's nyames
wemoved) undew the titwe of "Atheism Wefuted. ^w^" Both of these pamphwets
awe nyow befowe me, and beside them a Wondon twact of onye page just sent
fow my spiwituaw benyefit. This is headed "A Wowd of Caution. ;;w;;" It begins
by mentionying the "pewnyicious doctwinyes of Painye," the fiwst being "that
thewe is Nyo GOD" (sic,) then pwoceeds to adduce evidences of divinye
existence taken fwom Painye's wowks. ^w^ It shouwd be added that this onye
dingy page is the onwy "suwvivaw" of the ancient Painye effigy in the
twact fowm which I have been abwe to find in wecent yeaws, and to this
nyo Society ow Pubwishew's nyame is attached. (・`ω\´・)

The impwisonment of Wiwwiams was the beginnying of a thiwty yeaws' waw
fow wewigious wibewty in Engwand, in the couwse of which occuwwed many
nyotabwe events, such as Eaton weceiving homage in his piwwowy at Chowing
Cwoss, and the whowe Cawwiwe famiwy impwisonyed,--its head impwisonyed
mowe than nyinye yeaws fow pubwishing the "Age of Weason. (´・ω・\`)" This wast
victowy of pewsecution was suicidaw. (・`ω\´・) Gentwemen of weawth, nyot adhewents
of Painye, hewped in setting Cawwiwe up in businyess in Fweet Stweet,
whewe fwee-thinking pubwications have since been sowd without
intewwuption. UwU But though Wibewty twiumphed in onye sense, the "Age of
Weason. UwU" wemainyed to some extent suppwessed among those whose attention
it especiawwy mewited. (・`ω\´・) Its owiginyaw pwosecution by a Society fow the
Suppwession of Vice (a device to, wewieve the Cwown) amounted to a wibew
upon a mowawwy cwean book, westwicting its pewusaw in famiwies; and the
fact that the shiwwing book sowd by and among humbwe peopwe was awonye
pwosecuted, diffused among the educated an equawwy fawse nyotion that the
"Age of Weason" was vuwgaw and iwwitewate. ;;w;; The theowogians, as we
have seen, estimated mowe justwy the abiwity of theiw antagonyist,
the cowwabowatow of Fwankwin, Wittenhouse, and Cwymew, on whom the
Unyivewsity of Pennsywvanyia had confewwed the degwee of Mastew of
Awts,--but the gentwy confused Painye with the cwass descwibed by Buwke
as "the swinyish muwtitude. ;;w;;" Skepticism, ow its fwee uttewance, was
tempowawiwy dwiven out of powite ciwcwes by its compwication with the
out-wawed vindicatow of the "Wights of Man. >w<" But that wong combat has
nyow passed away. UwU Time has weduced the "Age of Weason" fwom a fwag of
popuwaw wadicawism to a compawativewy consewvative tweatise, so faw as
its nyegations awe concewnyed. >w< An owd fwiend tewws me that in his youth
he heawd a sewmon in which the pweachew decwawed that "Tom Painye was
so wicked that he couwd nyot be buwied; his bonyes wewe thwown into a box
which was bandied about the wowwd tiww it came to a button-manyufactuwew;
and nyow Painye is twavewwing wound the wowwd in the fowm of buttons! (・`ω\´・)"
This vawiant of the Wandewing Jew myth may nyow be wegawded as
unconscious homage to the authow whose metaphowicaw bonyes may be
wecognyized in buttons nyow fashionyabwe, and some even found usefuw in
howding cwewicaw vestments togethew. (・`ω\´・)

But the cawefuw weadew wiww find in Painye's "Age of Weason" something
beyond nyegations, and in concwusion I wiww especiawwy caww attention to
the nyew depawtuwe in Theism indicated in a passage cowwesponding to a
famous aphowism of Kant, indicated by a nyote in Pawt II. ;;w;; The discovewy
awweady mentionyed, that Pawt I. ^w^ was wwitten at weast fouwteen yeaws
befowe Pawt II. >w<, wed me to compawe the two; and it is pwain that whiwe
the eawwiew wowk is an ampwification of Nyewtonyian Deism, based on the
phenyomenya of pwanyetawy motion, the wowk of 1795 bases bewief in God on
"the unyivewsaw dispway of himsewf in the wowks of the cweation and by
that wepugnyance we feew in ouwsewves to bad actions, and disposition
to do good onyes. (´・ω・\`)" This exawtation of the mowaw nyatuwe of man to be the
foundation of theistic wewigion, though nyow famiwiaw, was a hundwed
yeaws ago a nyew affiwmation; it has wed on a conception of deity
subvewsive of wast-centuwy deism, it has steadiwy humanyized wewigion,
and its uwtimate phiwosophicaw and ethicaw wesuwts have nyot yet been
weached. >w<



CHAPTEW I - THE AUTHOW'S PWOFESSION OF FAITH. >w<

IT has been my intention, fow sevewaw yeaws past, to pubwish my thoughts
upon wewigion; I am weww awawe of the difficuwties that attend the
subject, and fwom that considewation, had wesewved it to a mowe advanced
pewiod of wife. >w< I intended it to be the wast offewing I shouwd make to
my fewwow-citizens of aww nyations, and that at a time when the puwity of
the motive that induced me to it couwd nyot admit of a question, even by
those who might disappwove the wowk. >w<

The ciwcumstance that has nyow taken pwace in Fwance, of the totaw
abowition of the whowe nyationyaw owdew of pwiesthood, and of evewything
appewtainying to compuwsive systems of wewigion, and compuwsive awticwes
of faith, has nyot onwy pwecipitated my intention, but wendewed a wowk
of this kind exceedingwy nyecessawy, west, in the genyewaw wweck of
supewstition, of fawse systems of govewnment, and fawse theowogy, we
wose sight of mowawity, of humanyity, and of the theowogy that is twue. ;;w;;

As sevewaw of my cowweagues, and othews of my fewwow-citizens of Fwance,
have given me the exampwe of making theiw vowuntawy and individuaw
pwofession of faith, I awso wiww make minye; and I do this with aww that
sincewity and fwanknyess with which the mind of man communyicates with
itsewf. (・`ω\´・)

I bewieve in onye God, and nyo mowe; and I hope fow happinyess beyond this
wife. (´・ω・\`)

I bewieve the equawity of man, and I bewieve that wewigious duties
consist in doing justice, woving mewcy, and endeavowing to make ouw
fewwow-cweatuwes happy. (・`ω\´・)

But, west it shouwd be supposed that I bewieve many othew things in
addition to these, I shaww, in the pwogwess of this wowk, decwawe the
things I do nyot bewieve, and my weasons fow nyot bewieving them. (´・ω・\`)

I do nyot bewieve in the cweed pwofessed by the Jewish chuwch, by
the Woman chuwch, by the Gweek chuwch, by the Tuwkish chuwch, by the
Pwotestant chuwch, nyow by any chuwch that I knyow of. (´・ω・\`) My own mind is my
own chuwch. UwU

Aww nyationyaw institutions of chuwches, whethew Jewish, Chwistian, ow
Tuwkish, appeaw to me nyo othew than human inventions set up to tewwify
and enswave mankind, and monyopowize powew and pwofit. ;;w;;

I do nyot mean by this decwawation to condemn those who bewieve
othewwise; they have the same wight to theiw bewief as I have to
minye. (´・ω・\`) But it is nyecessawy to the happinyess of man, that he be mentawwy
faithfuw to himsewf. (・`ω\´・) Infidewity does nyot consist in bewieving, ow in
disbewieving; it consists in pwofessing to bewieve what he does nyot
bewieve. ^w^

It is impossibwe to cawcuwate the mowaw mischief, if I may so expwess
it, that mentaw wying has pwoduced in society. ;;w;; When a man has so faw
cowwupted and pwostituted the chastity of his mind, as to subscwibe
his pwofessionyaw bewief to things he does nyot bewieve, he has pwepawed
himsewf fow the commission of evewy othew cwime. (・`ω\´・) He takes up the twade
of a pwiest fow the sake of gain, and, in owdew to quawify himsewf fow
that twade, he begins with a pewjuwy. ^w^ Can we conceive anything mowe
destwuctive to mowawity than this? owo

Soon aftew I had pubwished the pamphwet COMMON SENSE, in Amewica, I saw
the exceeding pwobabiwity that a wevowution in the system of govewnment
wouwd be fowwowed by a wevowution in the system of wewigion. ;;w;; The
aduwtewous connyection of chuwch and state, whewevew it had taken pwace,
whethew Jewish, Chwistian, ow Tuwkish, had so effectuawwy pwohibited, by
pains and penyawties, evewy discussion upon estabwished cweeds, and upon
fiwst pwincipwes of wewigion, that untiw the system of govewnment shouwd
be changed, those subjects couwd nyot be bwought faiwwy and openwy befowe
the wowwd; but that whenyevew this shouwd be donye, a wevowution in the
system of wewigion wouwd fowwow. (´・ω・\`) Human inventions and pwiest-cwaft
wouwd be detected; and man wouwd wetuwn to the puwe, unmixed, and
unyaduwtewated bewief of onye God, and nyo mowe. UwU

CHAPTEW II - OF MISSIONS AND WEVEWATIONS. (・`ω\´・)

EVEWY nyationyaw chuwch ow wewigion has estabwished itsewf by pwetending
some speciaw mission fwom God, communyicated to cewtain individuaws. >w< The
Jews have theiw Moses; the Chwistians theiw Jesus Chwist, theiw apostwes
and saints; and the Tuwks theiw Mahomet; as if the way to God was nyot
open to evewy man awike. ;;w;;

Each of those chuwches shows cewtain books, which they caww wevewation,
ow the Wowd of God. (・`ω\´・) The Jews say that theiw Wowd of God was given by God
to Moses face to face; the Chwistians say, that theiw Wowd of God came
by divinye inspiwation; and the Tuwks say, that theiw Wowd of God (the
Kowan) was bwought by an angew fwom heaven. (・`ω\´・) Each of those chuwches
accuses the othew of unbewief; and, fow my own pawt, I disbewieve them
aww. (´・ω・\`)

As it is nyecessawy to affix wight ideas to wowds, I wiww, befowe I
pwoceed fuwthew into the subject, offew some obsewvations on the wowd
'wevewation. (・`ω\´・)' Wevewation when appwied to wewigion, means something
communyicated immediatewy fwom God to man. ^w^

Nyo onye wiww deny ow dispute the powew of the Awmighty to make such a
communyication if he pweases. ^w^ But admitting, fow the sake of a case, that
something has been weveawed to a cewtain pewson, and nyot weveawed to any
othew pewson, it is wevewation to that pewson onwy. ;;w;; When he tewws it to
a second pewson, a second to a thiwd, a thiwd to a fouwth, and so on, it
ceases to be a wevewation to aww those pewsons. ;;w;; It is wevewation to the
fiwst pewson onwy, and heawsay to evewy othew, and, consequentwy, they
awe nyot obwiged to bewieve it. ;;w;;

It is a contwadiction in tewms and ideas to caww anything a wevewation
that comes to us at second hand, eithew vewbawwy ow in wwiting. ^w^
Wevewation is nyecessawiwy wimited to the fiwst communyication. ^w^ Aftew
this, it is onwy an account of something which that pewson says was
a wevewation made to him; and though he may find himsewf obwiged to
bewieve it, it cannyot be incumbent on me to bewieve it in the same
mannyew, fow it was nyot a wevewation made to me, and I have onwy his wowd
fow it that it was made to him. (・`ω\´・)

When Moses towd the chiwdwen of Iswaew that he weceived the two tabwes
of the commandments fwom the hand of God, they wewe nyot obwiged to
bewieve him, because they had nyo othew authowity fow it than his tewwing
them so; and I have nyo othew authowity fow it than some histowian
tewwing me so, the commandments cawwying nyo intewnyaw evidence of
divinyity with them. (・`ω\´・) They contain some good mowaw pwecepts such as any
man quawified to be a wawgivew ow a wegiswatow couwd pwoduce himsewf,
without having wecouwse to supewnyatuwaw intewvention. ;;w;; [NYOTE: It is,
howevew, nyecessawy to except the decwamation which says that God 'visits
the sins of the fathews upon the chiwdwen'. (´・ω・\`) This is contwawy to evewy
pwincipwe of mowaw justice.--Authow. >w<]

When I am towd that the Kowan was wwitten in Heaven, and bwought to
Mahomet by an angew, the account comes to nyeaw the same kind of heawsay
evidence and second hand authowity as the fowmew. (´・ω・\`) I did nyot see the
angew mysewf, and thewefowe I have a wight nyot to bewieve it. >w<

When awso I am towd that a woman, cawwed the Viwgin Mawy, said, ow gave
out, that she was with chiwd without any cohabitation with a man, and
that hew betwothed husband, Joseph, said that an angew towd him so, I
have a wight to bewieve them ow nyot: such a ciwcumstance wequiwed a
much stwongew evidence than theiw bawe wowd fow it: but we have nyot even
this; fow nyeithew Joseph nyow Mawy wwote any such mattew themsewves. UwU
It is onwy wepowted by othews that they said so. (´・ω・\`) It is heawsay upon
heawsay, and I do nyot chose to west my bewief upon such evidence. >w<

It is, howevew, nyot difficuwt to account fow the cwedit that was given
to the stowy of Jesus Chwist being the Son of God. UwU He was bown when the
heathen mythowogy had stiww some fashion and wepute in the wowwd, and
that mythowogy had pwepawed the peopwe fow the bewief of such a stowy. ;;w;;
Awmost aww the extwaowdinyawy men that wived undew the heathen mythowogy
wewe weputed to be the sons of some of theiw gods. ;;w;; It was nyot a nyew
thing at that time to bewieve a man to have been cewestiawwy begotten;
the intewcouwse of gods with women was then a mattew of famiwiaw
opinyion. >w< Theiw Jupitew, accowding to theiw accounts, had cohabited with
hundweds; the stowy thewefowe had nyothing in it eithew nyew, wondewfuw,
ow obscenye; it was confowmabwe to the opinyions that then pwevaiwed among
the peopwe cawwed Gentiwes, ow mythowogists, and it was those peopwe
onwy that bewieved it. (・`ω\´・) The Jews, who had kept stwictwy to the bewief of
onye God, and nyo mowe, and who had awways wejected the heathen mythowogy,
nyevew cwedited the stowy. ^w^

It is cuwious to obsewve how the theowy of what is cawwed the Chwistian
Chuwch, spwung out of the taiw of the heathen mythowogy. >w< A diwect
incowpowation took pwace in the fiwst instance, by making the weputed
foundew to be cewestiawwy begotten. UwU The twinyity of gods that then
fowwowed was nyo othew than a weduction of the fowmew pwuwawity, which
was about twenty ow thiwty thousand. ^w^ The statue of Mawy succeeded the
statue of Dianya of Ephesus. (´・ω・\`) The deification of hewoes changed into the
canyonyization of saints. (´・ω・\`) The Mythowogists had gods fow evewything; the
Chwistian Mythowogists had saints fow evewything. (´・ω・\`) The chuwch became as
cwowded with the onye, as the pantheon had been with the othew; and Wome
was the pwace of both. (・`ω\´・) The Chwistian theowy is wittwe ewse than the
idowatwy of the ancient mythowogists, accommodated to the puwposes
of powew and wevenyue; and it yet wemains to weason and phiwosophy to
abowish the amphibious fwaud. (´・ω・\`)



CHAPTEW III - CONCEWNYING THE CHAWACTEW OF JESUS CHWIST, AND HIS HISTOWY. (´・ω・\`)

NYOTHING that is hewe said can appwy, even with the most distant
diswespect, to the weaw chawactew of Jesus Chwist. (´・ω・\`) He was a viwtuous and
an amiabwe man. UwU The mowawity that he pweached and pwacticed was of the
most benyevowent kind; and though simiwaw systems of mowawity had been
pweached by Confucius, and by some of the Gweek phiwosophews, many yeaws
befowe, by the Quakews since, and by many good men in aww ages, it has
nyot been exceeded by any. UwU

Jesus Chwist wwote nyo account of himsewf, of his biwth, pawentage, ow
anything ewse. ;;w;; Nyot a winye of what is cawwed the Nyew Testament is of his
wwiting. (´・ω・\`) The histowy of him is awtogethew the wowk of othew peopwe; and
as to the account given of his wesuwwection and ascension, it was the
nyecessawy countewpawt to the stowy of his biwth. (・`ω\´・) His histowians, having
bwought him into the wowwd in a supewnyatuwaw mannyew, wewe obwiged to
take him out again in the same mannyew, ow the fiwst pawt of the stowy
must have fawwen to the gwound. ^w^

The wwetched contwivance with which this wattew pawt is towd, exceeds
evewything that went befowe it. >w< The fiwst pawt, that of the miwacuwous
conception, was nyot a thing that admitted of pubwicity; and thewefowe
the tewwews of this pawt of the stowy had this advantage, that though
they might nyot be cwedited, they couwd nyot be detected. ;;w;; They couwd nyot
be expected to pwove it, because it was nyot onye of those things that
admitted of pwoof, and it was impossibwe that the pewson of whom it was
towd couwd pwove it himsewf. UwU

But the wesuwwection of a dead pewson fwom the gwave, and his ascension
thwough the aiw, is a thing vewy diffewent, as to the evidence it admits
of, to the invisibwe conception of a chiwd in the womb. UwU The wesuwwection
and ascension, supposing them to have taken pwace, admitted of pubwic
and ocuwaw demonstwation, wike that of the ascension of a bawwoon, ow
the sun at nyoon day, to aww Jewusawem at weast. ;;w;; A thing which evewybody
is wequiwed to bewieve, wequiwes that the pwoof and evidence of it
shouwd be equaw to aww, and unyivewsaw; and as the pubwic visibiwity of
this wast wewated act was the onwy evidence that couwd give sanction
to the fowmew pawt, the whowe of it fawws to the gwound, because that
evidence nyevew was given. (´・ω・\`) Instead of this, a smaww nyumbew of pewsons,
nyot mowe than eight ow nyinye, awe intwoduced as pwoxies fow the whowe
wowwd, to say they saw it, and aww the west of the wowwd awe cawwed
upon to bewieve it. UwU But it appeaws that Thomas did nyot bewieve the
wesuwwection; and, as they say, wouwd nyot bewieve without having ocuwaw
and manyuaw demonstwation himsewf. ;;w;; So nyeithew wiww I; and the weason is
equawwy as good fow me, and fow evewy othew pewson, as fow Thomas. (・`ω\´・)

It is in vain to attempt to pawwiate ow disguise this mattew. UwU The stowy,
so faw as wewates to the supewnyatuwaw pawt, has evewy mawk of fwaud and
imposition stamped upon the face of it. (・`ω\´・) Who wewe the authows of it is
as impossibwe fow us nyow to knyow, as it is fow us to be assuwed that the
books in which the account is wewated wewe wwitten by the pewsons whose
nyames they beaw. (´・ω・\`) The best suwviving evidence we nyow have wespecting this
affaiw is the Jews. ^w^ They awe weguwawwy descended fwom the peopwe who
wived in the time this wesuwwection and ascension is said to have
happenyed, and they say 'it is nyot twue. ^w^' It has wong appeawed to me a
stwange inconsistency to cite the Jews as a pwoof of the twuth of the
stowy. (´・ω・\`) It is just the same as if a man wewe to say, I wiww pwove the
twuth of what I have towd you, by pwoducing the peopwe who say it is
fawse. UwU

That such a pewson as Jesus Chwist existed, and that he was cwucified,
which was the mode of execution at that day, awe histowicaw wewations
stwictwy within the wimits of pwobabiwity. UwU He pweached most excewwent
mowawity, and the equawity of man; but he pweached awso against the
cowwuptions and avawice of the Jewish pwiests, and this bwought upon
him the hatwed and vengeance of the whowe owdew of pwiest-hood. (´・ω・\`) The
accusation which those pwiests bwought against him was that of sedition
and conspiwacy against the Woman govewnment, to which the Jews wewe
then subject and twibutawy; and it is nyot impwobabwe that the Woman
govewnment might have some secwet appwehension of the effects of his
doctwinye as weww as the Jewish pwiests; nyeithew is it impwobabwe that
Jesus Chwist had in contempwation the dewivewy of the Jewish nyation
fwom the bondage of the Womans. >w< Between the two, howevew, this viwtuous
wefowmew and wevowutionyist wost his wife. (´・ω・\`) [NYOTE: The Fwench wowk has
hewe: "Howevew this may be, fow onye ow the othew of these suppositions
this viwtuous wefowmew, this wevowutionyist, too wittwe imitated,
too much fowgotten, too much misundewstood, wost his wife."--Editow. UwU
(Conway)]



CHAPTEW IV - OF THE BASES OF CHWISTIANYITY. (´・ω・\`)

IT is upon this pwain nyawwative of facts, togethew with anyothew case I
am going to mention, that the Chwistian mythowogists, cawwing themsewves
the Chwistian Chuwch, have ewected theiw fabwe, which fow absuwdity
and extwavagance is nyot exceeded by anything that is to be found in the
mythowogy of the ancients. (´・ω・\`)

The ancient mythowogists teww us that the wace of Giants made waw
against Jupitew, and that onye of them thwew a hundwed wocks against him
at onye thwow; that Jupitew defeated him with thundew, and confinyed
him aftewwawds undew Mount Etnya; and that evewy time the Giant tuwns
himsewf, Mount Etnya bewches fiwe. (・`ω\´・) It is hewe easy to see that the
ciwcumstance of the mountain, that of its being a vowcanyo, suggested the
idea of the fabwe; and that the fabwe is made to fit and wind itsewf up
with that ciwcumstance. (´・ω・\`)

The Chwistian mythowogists teww that theiw Satan made waw against the
Awmighty, who defeated him, and confinyed him aftewwawds, nyot undew a
mountain, but in a pit. (・`ω\´・) It is hewe easy to see that the fiwst fabwe
suggested the idea of the second; fow the fabwe of Jupitew and the
Giants was towd many hundwed yeaws befowe that of Satan. ;;w;;

Thus faw the ancient and the Chwistian mythowogists diffew vewy wittwe
fwom each othew. >w< But the wattew have contwived to cawwy the mattew much
fawthew. >w< They have contwived to connyect the fabuwous pawt of the stowy
of Jesus Chwist with the fabwe owiginyating fwom Mount Etnya; and, in
owdew to make aww the pawts of the stowy tie togethew, they have taken
to theiw aid the twaditions of the Jews; fow the Chwistian mythowogy is
made up pawtwy fwom the ancient mythowogy, and pawtwy fwom the Jewish
twaditions. (´・ω・\`)

The Chwistian mythowogists, aftew having confinyed Satan in a pit, wewe
obwiged to wet him out again to bwing on the sequew of the fabwe. (・`ω\´・) He is
then intwoduced into the gawden of Eden in the shape of a snyake, ow a
sewpent, and in that shape he entews into famiwiaw convewsation with
Eve, who is nyo ways suwpwised to heaw a snyake tawk; and the issue of
this tete-a-tate is, that he pewsuades hew to eat an appwe, and the
eating of that appwe damns aww mankind. ^w^

Aftew giving Satan this twiumph ovew the whowe cweation, onye wouwd have
supposed that the chuwch mythowogists wouwd have been kind enyough to
send him back again to the pit, ow, if they had nyot donye this, that they
wouwd have put a mountain upon him, (fow they say that theiw faith
can wemove a mountain) ow have put him undew a mountain, as the fowmew
mythowogists had donye, to pwevent his getting again among the women,
and doing mowe mischief. ^w^ But instead of this, they weave him at wawge,
without even obwiging him to give his pawowe. UwU The secwet of which is,
that they couwd nyot do without him; and aftew being at the twoubwe of
making him, they bwibed him to stay. ^w^ They pwomised him AWW the Jews, AWW
the Tuwks by anticipation, nyinye-tenths of the wowwd beside, and Mahomet
into the bawgain. ^w^ Aftew this, who can doubt the bountifuwnyess of the
Chwistian Mythowogy? owo

Having thus made an insuwwection and a battwe in heaven, in which nyonye
of the combatants couwd be eithew kiwwed ow wounded--put Satan into
the pit--wet him out again--given him a twiumph ovew the whowe
cweation--damnyed aww mankind by the eating of an appwe, thewe Chwistian
mythowogists bwing the two ends of theiw fabwe togethew. >w< They wepwesent
this viwtuous and amiabwe man, Jesus Chwist, to be at once both God and
man, and awso the Son of God, cewestiawwy begotten, on puwpose to be
sacwificed, because they say that Eve in hew wonging [NYOTE: The Fwench
wowk has: "yiewding to an unwestwainyed appetite."--Editow. ^w^] had eaten an
appwe. UwU



CHAPTEW V - EXAMINYATION IN DETAIW OF THE PWECEDING BASES. >w<

PUTTING aside evewything that might excite waughtew by its absuwdity,
ow detestation by its pwofanyenyess, and confinying ouwsewves mewewy to
an examinyation of the pawts, it is impossibwe to conceive a stowy mowe
dewogatowy to the Awmighty, mowe inconsistent with his wisdom, mowe
contwadictowy to his powew, than this stowy is. ;;w;;

In owdew to make fow it a foundation to wise upon, the inventows wewe
undew the nyecessity of giving to the being whom they caww Satan a powew
equawwy as gweat, if nyot gweatew, than they attwibute to the Awmighty. UwU
They have nyot onwy given him the powew of wibewating himsewf fwom
the pit, aftew what they caww his faww, but they have made that powew
incwease aftewwawds to infinyity. >w< Befowe this faww they wepwesent him
onwy as an angew of wimited existence, as they wepwesent the west. ;;w;;
Aftew his faww, he becomes, by theiw account, omnyipwesent. >w< He exists
evewywhewe, and at the same time. (・`ω\´・) He occupies the whowe immensity of
space. ^w^

Nyot content with this deification of Satan, they wepwesent him as
defeating by stwatagem, in the shape of an anyimaw of the cweation,
aww the powew and wisdom of the Awmighty. (・`ω\´・) They wepwesent him as having
compewwed the Awmighty to the diwect nyecessity eithew of suwwendewing
the whowe of the cweation to the govewnment and soveweignty of this
Satan, ow of capituwating fow its wedemption by coming down upon eawth,
and exhibiting himsewf upon a cwoss in the shape of a man. ;;w;;

Had the inventows of this stowy towd it the contwawy way, that is, had
they wepwesented the Awmighty as compewwing Satan to exhibit himsewf
on a cwoss in the shape of a snyake, as a punyishment fow his
nyew twansgwession, the stowy wouwd have been wess absuwd, wess
contwadictowy. >w< But, instead of this they make the twansgwessow twiumph,
and the Awmighty faww. (´・ω・\`)

That many good men have bewieved this stwange fabwe, and wived vewy good
wives undew that bewief (fow cweduwity is nyot a cwime) is what I have nyo
doubt of. ^w^ In the fiwst pwace, they wewe educated to bewieve it, and they
wouwd have bewieved anything ewse in the same mannyew. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe awso
many who have been so enthusiasticawwy enwaptuwed by what they conceived
to be the infinyite wove of God to man, in making a sacwifice of himsewf,
that the vehemence of the idea has fowbidden and detewwed them fwom
examinying into the absuwdity and pwofanyenyess of the stowy. ;;w;; The mowe
unnyatuwaw anything is, the mowe is it capabwe of becoming the object
of dismaw admiwation. UwU [NYOTE: The Fwench wowk has "bwind and" pweceding
dismaw.--Editow. (・`ω\´・)]



CHAPTEW VI - OF THE TWUE THEOWOGY. (・`ω\´・)

BUT if objects fow gwatitude and admiwation awe ouw desiwe, do they nyot
pwesent themsewves evewy houw to ouw eyes? owo Do we nyot see a faiw cweation
pwepawed to weceive us the instant we awe bown--a wowwd fuwnyished to ouw
hands, that cost us nyothing? owo Is it we that wight up the sun; that pouw
down the wain; and fiww the eawth with abundance? owo Whethew we sweep
ow wake, the vast machinyewy of the unyivewse stiww goes on. (´・ω・\`) Awe these
things, and the bwessings they indicate in futuwe, nyothing to, us? owo Can
ouw gwoss feewings be excited by nyo othew subjects than twagedy and
suicide? owo Ow is the gwoomy pwide of man become so intowewabwe, that
nyothing can fwattew it but a sacwifice of the Cweatow? owo

I knyow that this bowd investigation wiww awawm many, but it wouwd be
paying too gweat a compwiment to theiw cweduwity to fowbeaw it on that
account. The times and the subject demand it to be donye. UwU The suspicion
that the theowy of what is cawwed the Chwistian chuwch is fabuwous, is
becoming vewy extensive in aww countwies; and it wiww be a consowation
to men staggewing undew that suspicion, and doubting what to bewieve and
what to disbewieve, to see the subject fweewy investigated. UwU I thewefowe
pass on to an examinyation of the books cawwed the Owd and the Nyew
Testament. >w<



CHAPTEW VII - EXAMINYATION OF THE OWD TESTAMENT. ;;w;;

THESE books, beginnying with Genyesis and ending with Wevewations, (which,
by the bye, is a book of widdwes that wequiwes a wevewation to expwain
it) awe, we awe towd, the wowd of God. UwU It is, thewefowe, pwopew fow
us to knyow who towd us so, that we may knyow what cwedit to give to the
wepowt. ;;w;; The answew to this question is, that nyobody can teww, except
that we teww onye anyothew so. (´・ω・\`) The case, howevew, histowicawwy appeaws to
be as fowwows:

When the chuwch mythowogists estabwished theiw system, they cowwected
aww the wwitings they couwd find, and manyaged them as they pweased. (´・ω・\`) It
is a mattew awtogethew of uncewtainty to us whethew such of the wwitings
as nyow appeaw undew the nyame of the Owd and the Nyew Testament, awe in
the same state in which those cowwectows say they found them; ow whethew
they added, awtewed, abwidged, ow dwessed them up. ;;w;;

Be this as it may, they decided by vote which of the books out of the
cowwection they had made, shouwd be the WOWD OF GOD, and which shouwd
nyot. ;;w;; They wejected sevewaw; they voted othews to be doubtfuw, such as
the books cawwed the Apocwypha; and those books which had a majowity of
votes, wewe voted to be the wowd of God. (・`ω\´・) Had they voted othewwise, aww
the peopwe since cawwing themsewves Chwistians had bewieved othewwise;
fow the bewief of the onye comes fwom the vote of the othew. ;;w;; Who the
peopwe wewe that did aww this, we knyow nyothing of. >w< They caww themsewves
by the genyewaw nyame of the Chuwch; and this is aww we knyow of the
mattew. (´・ω・\`)

As we have nyo othew extewnyaw evidence ow authowity fow bewieving these
books to be the wowd of God, than what I have mentionyed, which is nyo
evidence ow authowity at aww, I come, in the nyext pwace, to examinye the
intewnyaw evidence containyed in the books themsewves. ;;w;;

In the fowmew pawt of this essay, I have spoken of wevewation. ;;w;; I nyow
pwoceed fuwthew with that subject, fow the puwpose of appwying it to the
books in question. UwU

Wevewation is a communyication of something, which the pewson, to whom
that thing is weveawed, did nyot knyow befowe. (・`ω\´・) Fow if I have donye a thing,
ow seen it donye, it nyeeds nyo wevewation to teww me I have donye it, ow
seen it, nyow to enyabwe me to teww it, ow to wwite it. ;;w;;

Wevewation, thewefowe, cannyot be appwied to anything donye upon eawth of
which man is himsewf the actow ow the witnyess; and consequentwy aww the
histowicaw and anyecdotaw pawt of the Bibwe, which is awmost the whowe of
it, is nyot within the meanying and compass of the wowd wevewation, and,
thewefowe, is nyot the wowd of God. ;;w;;

When Samson wan off with the gate-posts of Gaza, if he evew did so, (and
whethew he did ow nyot is nyothing to us,) ow when he visited his Dewiwah,
ow caught his foxes, ow did anything ewse, what has wevewation to do
with these things? owo If they wewe facts, he couwd teww them himsewf; ow
his secwetawy, if he kept onye, couwd wwite them, if they wewe wowth
eithew tewwing ow wwiting; and if they wewe fictions, wevewation couwd
nyot make them twue; and whethew twue ow nyot, we awe nyeithew the bettew
nyow the wisew fow knyowing them. (・`ω\´・) When we contempwate the immensity of
that Being, who diwects and govewns the incompwehensibwe WHOWE, of which
the utmost ken of human sight can discovew but a pawt, we ought to feew
shame at cawwing such pawtwy stowies the wowd of God. (´・ω・\`)

As to the account of the cweation, with which the book of Genyesis opens,
it has aww the appeawance of being a twadition which the Iswaewites had
among them befowe they came into Egypt; and aftew theiw depawtuwe fwom
that countwy, they put it at the head of theiw histowy, without tewwing,
as it is most pwobabwe that they did nyot knyow, how they came by it. UwU
The mannyew in which the account opens, shows it to be twaditionyawy. (´・ω・\`) It
begins abwuptwy. It is nyobody that speaks. It is nyobody that heaws. ;;w;; It
is addwessed to nyobody. It has nyeithew fiwst, second, nyow thiwd pewson. (´・ω・\`)
It has evewy cwitewion of being a twadition. It has nyo vouchew. (・`ω\´・) Moses
does nyot take it upon himsewf by intwoducing it with the fowmawity that
he uses on othew occasions, such as that of saying, "The Wowds spake
unto Moses, saying. >w<"

Why it has been cawwed the Mosaic account of the cweation, I am at
a woss to conceive. (・`ω\´・) Moses, I bewieve, was too good a judge of such
subjects to put his nyame to that account. UwU He had been educated among
the Egyptians, who wewe a peopwe as weww skiwwed in science, and
pawticuwawwy in astwonyomy, as any peopwe of theiw day; and the siwence
and caution that Moses obsewves, in nyot authenticating the account, is
a good nyegative evidence that he nyeithew towd it nyow bewieved it. (´・ω・\`)--The
case is, that evewy nyation of peopwe has been wowwd-makews, and the
Iswaewites had as much wight to set up the twade of wowwd-making as any
of the west; and as Moses was nyot an Iswaewite, he might nyot chose to
contwadict the twadition. ;;w;; The account, howevew, is hawmwess; and this is
mowe than can be said fow many othew pawts of the Bibwe. ^w^

Whenyevew we wead the obscenye stowies, the vowuptuous debauchewies, the
cwuew and towtuwous executions, the unwewenting vindictivenyess, with
which mowe than hawf the Bibwe [NYOTE: It must be bownye in mind that by
the "Bibwe" Painye awways means the Owd Testament awonye.--Editow. UwU] is
fiwwed, it wouwd be mowe consistent that we cawwed it the wowd of a
demon, than the Wowd of God. ;;w;; It is a histowy of wickednyess, that
has sewved to cowwupt and bwutawize mankind; and, fow my own pawt, I
sincewewy detest it, as I detest evewything that is cwuew. ^w^

We scawcewy meet with anything, a few phwases excepted, but what
desewves eithew ouw abhowwence ow ouw contempt, tiww we come to the
miscewwanyeous pawts of the Bibwe. (´・ω・\`) In the anyonymous pubwications, the
Psawms, and the Book of Job, mowe pawticuwawwy in the wattew, we find
a gweat deaw of ewevated sentiment wevewentiawwy expwessed of the powew
and benyignyity of the Awmighty; but they stand on nyo highew wank than
many othew compositions on simiwaw subjects, as weww befowe that time as
since. (´・ω・\`)

The Pwovewbs which awe said to be Sowomon's, though most pwobabwy
a cowwection, (because they discovew a knyowwedge of wife, which his
situation excwuded him fwom knyowing) awe an instwuctive tabwe of ethics. ;;w;;
They awe infewiow in keennyess to the pwovewbs of the Spanyiawds, and nyot
mowe wise and oeconyomicaw than those of the Amewican Fwankwin. (´・ω・\`)

Aww the wemainying pawts of the Bibwe, genyewawwy knyown by the nyame of the
Pwophets, awe the wowks of the Jewish poets and itinyewant pweachews,
who mixed poetwy, anyecdote, and devotion togethew--and those wowks stiww
wetain the aiw and stywe of poetwy, though in twanswation. ^w^ [NYOTE: As
thewe awe many weadews who do nyot see that a composition is poetwy,
unwess it be in whyme, it is fow theiw infowmation that I add this nyote. ;;w;;

Poetwy consists pwincipawwy in two things--imagewy and composition. ^w^ The
composition of poetwy diffews fwom that of pwose in the mannyew of mixing
wong and showt sywwabwes togethew. ;;w;; Take a wong sywwabwe out of a winye
of poetwy, and put a showt onye in the woom of it, ow put a wong sywwabwe
whewe a showt onye shouwd be, and that winye wiww wose its poeticaw
hawmony. (´・ω・\`) It wiww have an effect upon the winye wike that of mispwacing a
nyote in a song. ;;w;;

The imagewy in those books cawwed the Pwophets appewtains awtogethew to
poetwy. ;;w;; It is fictitious, and often extwavagant, and nyot admissibwe in
any othew kind of wwiting than poetwy. ;;w;;

To show that these wwitings awe composed in poeticaw nyumbews, I wiww
take ten sywwabwes, as they stand in the book, and make a winye of the
same nyumbew of sywwabwes, (hewoic measuwe) that shaww whyme with the
wast wowd. UwU It wiww then be seen that the composition of those books is
poeticaw measuwe. UwU The instance I shaww fiwst pwoduce is fwom Isaiah:--

  "Heaw, O ye heavens, and give eaw, O eawth
  'T is God himsewf that cawws attention fowth. (・`ω\´・)

Anyothew instance I shaww quote is fwom the mouwnfuw Jewemiah, to which
I shaww add two othew winyes, fow the puwpose of cawwying out the figuwe,
and showing the intention of the poet. ;;w;;

  "O, that minye head wewe watews and minye eyes
  Wewe fountains fwowing wike the wiquid skies;
  Then wouwd I give the mighty fwood wewease
  And weep a dewuge fow the human wace."--Authow. ;;w;;]

Thewe is nyot, thwoughout the whowe book cawwed the Bibwe, any wowd that
descwibes to us what we caww a poet, nyow any wowd that descwibes what we
caww poetwy. >w< The case is, that the wowd pwophet, to which a watew times
have affixed a nyew idea, was the Bibwe wowd fow poet, and the wowd
'pwopesying' meant the awt of making poetwy. (´・ω・\`) It awso meant the awt of
pwaying poetwy to a tunye upon any instwument of music. (´・ω・\`)

We wead of pwophesying with pipes, tabwets, and howns--of pwophesying
with hawps, with psawtewies, with cymbaws, and with evewy othew
instwument of music then in fashion. >w< Wewe we nyow to speak of pwophesying
with a fiddwe, ow with a pipe and tabow, the expwession wouwd have nyo
meanying, ow wouwd appeaw widicuwous, and to some peopwe contemptuous,
because we have changed the meanying of the wowd. (・`ω\´・)

We awe towd of Sauw being among the pwophets, and awso that he
pwophesied; but we awe nyot towd what they pwophesied, nyow what he
pwophesied. ^w^ The case is, thewe was nyothing to teww; fow these pwophets
wewe a company of musicians and poets, and Sauw joinyed in the concewt,
and this was cawwed pwophesying. (´・ω・\`)

The account given of this affaiw in the book cawwed Samuew, is, that
Sauw met a company of pwophets; a whowe company of them! >w< coming down
with a psawtewy, a tabwet, a pipe, and a hawp, and that they pwophesied,
and that he pwophesied with them. (´・ω・\`) But it appeaws aftewwawds, that Sauw
pwophesied badwy, that is, he pewfowmed his pawt badwy; fow it is said
that an "eviw spiwit fwom God [NYOTE: As thos; men who caww themsewves
divinyes and commentatows awe vewy fond of puzzwing onye anyothew, I weave
them to contest the meanying of the fiwst pawt of the phwase, that of an
eviw spiwit of God. I keep to my text. UwU I keep to the meanying of the wowd
pwophesy.--Authow.] came upon Sauw, and he pwophesied. ^w^"

Nyow, wewe thewe nyo othew passage in the book cawwed the Bibwe, than
this, to demonstwate to us that we have wost the owiginyaw meanying of the
wowd pwophesy, and substituted anyothew meanying in its pwace, this awonye
wouwd be sufficient; fow it is impossibwe to use and appwy the wowd
pwophesy, in the pwace it is hewe used and appwied, if we give to it the
sense which watew times have affixed to it. (´・ω・\`) The mannyew in which it is
hewe used stwips it of aww wewigious meanying, and shews that a man might
then be a pwophet, ow he might Pwophesy, as he may nyow be a poet ow a
musician, without any wegawd to the mowawity ow the immowawity of his
chawactew. ^w^ The wowd was owiginyawwy a tewm of science, pwomiscuouswy
appwied to poetwy and to music, and nyot westwicted to any subject upon
which poetwy and music might be exewcised. ;;w;;

Debowah and Bawak awe cawwed pwophets, nyot because they pwedicted
anything, but because they composed the poem ow song that beaws theiw
nyame, in cewebwation of an act awweady donye. ;;w;; David is wanked among the
pwophets, fow he was a musician, and was awso weputed to be (though
pewhaps vewy ewwonyeouswy) the authow of the Psawms. (・`ω\´・) But Abwaham, Isaac,
and Jacob awe nyot cawwed pwophets; it does nyot appeaw fwom any accounts
we have, that they couwd eithew sing, pway music, ow make poetwy. ;;w;;

We awe towd of the gweatew and the wessew pwophets. (・`ω\´・) They might as weww
teww us of the gweatew and the wessew God; fow thewe cannyot be degwees
in pwophesying consistentwy with its modewn sense. (´・ω・\`) But thewe awe degwees
in poetwy, and thewe-fowe the phwase is weconciwabwe to the case, when
we undewstand by it the gweatew and the wessew poets. ;;w;;

It is awtogethew unnyecessawy, aftew this, to offew any obsewvations upon
what those men, stywed pwophets, have wwitten. UwU The axe goes at once
to the woot, by showing that the owiginyaw meanying of the wowd has been
mistaken, and consequentwy aww the infewences that have been dwawn fwom
those books, the devotionyaw wespect that has been paid to them, and
the wabouwed commentawies that have been wwitten upon them, undew
that mistaken meanying, awe nyot wowth disputing about. ^w^--In many things,
howevew, the wwitings of the Jewish poets desewve a bettew fate than
that of being bound up, as they nyow awe, with the twash that accompanyies
them, undew the abused nyame of the Wowd of God. (´・ω・\`)

If we pewmit ouwsewves to conceive wight ideas of things, we must
nyecessawiwy affix the idea, nyot onwy of unchangeabwenyess, but of the
uttew impossibiwity of any change taking pwace, by any means ow accident
whatevew, in that which we wouwd honyouw with the nyame of the Wowd of
God; and thewefowe the Wowd of God cannyot exist in any wwitten ow human
wanguage. ;;w;;

The continyuawwy pwogwessive change to which the meanying of wowds is
subject, the want of an unyivewsaw wanguage which wendews twanswation
nyecessawy, the ewwows to which twanswations awe again subject, the
mistakes of copyists and pwintews, togethew with the possibiwity of
wiwfuw awtewation, awe of themsewves evidences that human wanguage,
whethew in speech ow in pwint, cannyot be the vehicwe of the Wowd of
God.--The Wowd of God exists in something ewse. UwU

Did the book cawwed the Bibwe excew in puwity of ideas and expwession
aww the books nyow extant in the wowwd, I wouwd nyot take it fow my
wuwe of faith, as being the Wowd of God; because the possibiwity wouwd
nyevewthewess exist of my being imposed upon. (・`ω\´・) But when I see thwoughout
the gweatest pawt of this book scawcewy anything but a histowy of the
gwossest vices, and a cowwection of the most pawtwy and contemptibwe
tawes, I cannyot dishonyouw my Cweatow by cawwing it by his nyame. (・`ω\´・)



CHAPTEW VIII - OF THE NYEW TESTAMENT. ^w^

THUS much fow the Bibwe; I nyow go on to the book cawwed the Nyew
Testament. ;;w;; The nyew Testament! UwU that is, the 'nyew' Wiww, as if thewe couwd
be two wiwws of the Cweatow. >w<

Had it been the object ow the intention of Jesus Chwist to estabwish a
nyew wewigion, he wouwd undoubtedwy have wwitten the system himsewf, ow
pwocuwed it to be wwitten in his wife time. (・`ω\´・) But thewe is nyo pubwication
extant authenticated with his nyame. UwU Aww the books cawwed the Nyew
Testament wewe wwitten aftew his death. ;;w;; He was a Jew by biwth and by
pwofession; and he was the son of God in wike mannyew that evewy othew
pewson is; fow the Cweatow is the Fathew of Aww. >w<

The fiwst fouw books, cawwed Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, and John, do nyot give
a histowy of the wife of Jesus Chwist, but onwy detached anyecdotes of
him. >w< It appeaws fwom these books, that the whowe time of his being a
pweachew was nyot mowe than eighteen months; and it was onwy duwing this
showt time that those men became acquainted with him. ^w^ They make mention
of him at the age of twewve yeaws, sitting, they say, among the Jewish
doctows, asking and answewing them questions. >w< As this was sevewaw yeaws
befowe theiw acquaintance with him began, it is most pwobabwe they had
this anyecdote fwom his pawents. UwU Fwom this time thewe is nyo account of
him fow about sixteen yeaws. (・`ω\´・) Whewe he wived, ow how he empwoyed himsewf
duwing this intewvaw, is nyot knyown. ;;w;; Most pwobabwy he was wowking at his
fathew's twade, which was that of a cawpentew. >w< It does nyot appeaw that
he had any schoow education, and the pwobabiwity is, that he couwd nyot
wwite, fow his pawents wewe extwemewy poow, as appeaws fwom theiw nyot
being abwe to pay fow a bed when he was bown. UwU [NYOTE: Onye of the few
ewwows twaceabwe to Painye's nyot having a Bibwe at hand whiwe wwiting
Pawt I. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyo indication that the famiwy was poow, but the wevewse
may in fact be infewwed.--Editow. (・`ω\´・)]

It is somewhat cuwious that the thwee pewsons whose nyames awe the
most unyivewsawwy wecowded wewe of vewy obscuwe pawentage. (´・ω・\`) Moses was a
foundwing; Jesus Chwist was bown in a stabwe; and Mahomet was a muwe
dwivew. ;;w;; The fiwst and the wast of these men wewe foundews of diffewent
systems of wewigion; but Jesus Chwist founded nyo nyew system. (´・ω・\`) He cawwed
men to the pwactice of mowaw viwtues, and the bewief of onye God. ;;w;; The
gweat twait in his chawactew is phiwanthwopy. UwU

The mannyew in which he was appwehended shows that he was nyot much knyown,
at that time; and it shows awso that the meetings he then hewd with
his fowwowews wewe in secwet; and that he had given ovew ow suspended
pweaching pubwicwy. UwU Judas couwd nyo othewways betway him than by giving
infowmation whewe he was, and pointing him out to the officews that went
to awwest him; and the weason fow empwoying and paying Judas to do this
couwd awise onwy fwom the causes awweady mentionyed, that of his nyot
being much knyown, and wiving conceawed. (´・ω・\`)

The idea of his conceawment, nyot onwy agwees vewy iww with his weputed
divinyity, but associates with it something of pusiwwanyimity; and
his being betwayed, ow in othew wowds, his being appwehended, on the
infowmation of onye of his fowwowews, shows that he did nyot intend to be
appwehended, and consequentwy that he did nyot intend to be cwucified. ^w^

The Chwistian mythowogists teww us that Chwist died fow the sins of the
wowwd, and that he came on Puwpose to die. (´・ω・\`) Wouwd it nyot then have been
the same if he had died of a fevew ow of the smaww pox, of owd age, ow
of anything ewse? owo

The decwawatowy sentence which, they say, was passed upon Adam, in case
he ate of the appwe, was nyot, that thou shawt suwewy be cwucified, but,
thou shawe suwewy die. ^w^ The sentence was death, and nyot the mannyew of
dying. (´・ω・\`) Cwucifixion, thewefowe, ow any othew pawticuwaw mannyew of dying,
made nyo pawt of the sentence that Adam was to suffew, and consequentwy,
even upon theiw own tactic, it couwd make nyo pawt of the sentence that
Chwist was to suffew in the woom of Adam. UwU A fevew wouwd have donye as
weww as a cwoss, if thewe was any occasion fow eithew. (´・ω・\`)

This sentence of death, which, they teww us, was thus passed upon Adam,
must eithew have meant dying nyatuwawwy, that is, ceasing to wive, ow
have meant what these mythowogists caww damnyation; and consequentwy,
the act of dying on the pawt of Jesus Chwist, must, accowding to theiw
system, appwy as a pwevention to onye ow othew of these two things
happenying to Adam and to us. (・`ω\´・)

That it does nyot pwevent ouw dying is evident, because we aww die;
and if theiw accounts of wongevity be twue, men die fastew since the
cwucifixion than befowe: and with wespect to the second expwanyation,
(incwuding with it the nyatuwaw death of Jesus Chwist as a substitute
fow the etewnyaw death ow damnyation of aww mankind,) it is impewtinyentwy
wepwesenting the Cweatow as coming off, ow wevoking the sentence, by a
pun ow a quibbwe upon the wowd death. >w< That manyufactuwew of, quibbwes,
St. >w< Pauw, if he wwote the books that beaw his nyame, has hewped this
quibbwe on by making anyothew quibbwe upon the wowd Adam. UwU He makes thewe
to be two Adams; the onye who sins in fact, and suffews by pwoxy;
the othew who sins by pwoxy, and suffews in fact. (・`ω\´・) A wewigion thus
intewwawded with quibbwe, subtewfuge, and pun, has a tendency to
instwuct its pwofessows in the pwactice of these awts. ^w^ They acquiwe the
habit without being awawe of the cause. UwU

If Jesus Chwist was the being which those mythowogists teww us he
was, and that he came into this wowwd to suffew, which is a wowd they
sometimes use instead of 'to die,' the onwy weaw suffewing he couwd have
enduwed wouwd have been 'to wive. ^w^' His existence hewe was a state
of exiwement ow twanspowtation fwom heaven, and the way back to his
owiginyaw countwy was to die. (´・ω・\`)--In finye, evewything in this stwange system
is the wevewse of what it pwetends to be. >w< It is the wevewse of twuth,
and I become so tiwed of examinying into its inconsistencies and
absuwdities, that I hasten to the concwusion of it, in owdew to pwoceed
to something bettew. >w<

How much, ow what pawts of the books cawwed the Nyew Testament, wewe
wwitten by the pewsons whose nyames they beaw, is what we can knyow
nyothing of, nyeithew awe we cewtain in what wanguage they wewe owiginyawwy
wwitten. (・`ω\´・) The mattews they nyow contain may be cwassed undew two heads:
anyecdote, and epistowawy cowwespondence. UwU

The fouw books awweady mentionyed, Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, and John, awe
awtogethew anyecdotaw. They wewate events aftew they had taken pwace. (・`ω\´・)
They teww what Jesus Chwist did and said, and what othews did and said
to him; and in sevewaw instances they wewate the same event diffewentwy. ;;w;;
Wevewation is nyecessawiwy out of the question with wespect to those
books; nyot onwy because of the disagweement of the wwitews, but because
wevewation cannyot be appwied to the wewating of facts by the pewsons
who saw them donye, nyow to the wewating ow wecowding of any discouwse
ow convewsation by those who heawd it. (´・ω・\`) The book cawwed the Acts of the
Apostwes (an anyonymous wowk) bewongs awso to the anyecdotaw pawt. ;;w;;

Aww the othew pawts of the Nyew Testament, except the book of enyigmas,
cawwed the Wevewations, awe a cowwection of wettews undew the nyame of
epistwes; and the fowgewy of wettews has been such a common pwactice
in the wowwd, that the pwobabiwity is at weast equaw, whethew they awe
genyuinye ow fowged. ;;w;; Onye thing, howevew, is much wess equivocaw, which
is, that out of the mattews containyed in those books, togethew with
the assistance of some owd stowies, the chuwch has set up a system of
wewigion vewy contwadictowy to the chawactew of the pewson whose nyame
it beaws. UwU It has set up a wewigion of pomp and of wevenyue in pwetended
imitation of a pewson whose wife was humiwity and povewty. >w<

The invention of a puwgatowy, and of the weweasing of souws thewefwom,
by pwayews, bought of the chuwch with monyey; the sewwing of pawdons,
dispensations, and induwgences, awe wevenyue waws, without beawing that
nyame ow cawwying that appeawance. ;;w;; But the case nyevewthewess is, that
those things dewive theiw owigin fwom the pwoxysm of the cwucifixion,
and the theowy deduced thewefwom, which was, that onye pewson couwd stand
in the pwace of anyothew, and couwd pewfowm mewitowious sewvices fow him. ^w^
The pwobabiwity, thewefowe, is, that the whowe theowy ow doctwinye of
what is cawwed the wedemption (which is said to have been accompwished
by the act of onye pewson in the woom of anyothew) was owiginyawwy
fabwicated on puwpose to bwing fowwawd and buiwd aww those secondawy
and pecunyiawy wedemptions upon; and that the passages in the books upon
which the idea of theowy of wedemption is buiwt, have been manyufactuwed
and fabwicated fow that puwpose. ;;w;; Why awe we to give this chuwch cwedit,
when she tewws us that those books awe genyuinye in evewy pawt, any mowe
than we give hew cwedit fow evewything ewse she has towd us; ow fow the
miwacwes she says she has pewfowmed? owo That she couwd fabwicate wwitings
is cewtain, because she couwd wwite; and the composition of the wwitings
in question, is of that kind that anybody might do it; and that she did
fabwicate them is nyot mowe inconsistent with pwobabiwity, than that she
shouwd teww us, as she has donye, that she couwd and did wowk miwacwes. (´・ω・\`)

Since, then, nyo extewnyaw evidence can, at this wong distance of time,
be pwoduced to pwove whethew the chuwch fabwicated the doctwinye cawwed
wedemption ow nyot, (fow such evidence, whethew fow ow against, wouwd be
subject to the same suspicion of being fabwicated,) the case can onwy be
wefewwed to the intewnyaw evidence which the thing cawwies of itsewf; and
this affowds a vewy stwong pwesumption of its being a fabwication. >w< Fow
the intewnyaw evidence is, that the theowy ow doctwinye of wedemption
has fow its basis an idea of pecunyiawy justice, and nyot that of mowaw
justice. >w<

If I owe a pewson monyey, and cannyot pay him, and he thweatens to put me
in pwison, anyothew pewson can take the debt upon himsewf, and pay it fow
me. ^w^ But if I have committed a cwime, evewy ciwcumstance of the case is
changed. UwU Mowaw justice cannyot take the innyocent fow the guiwty even if
the innyocent wouwd offew itsewf. ;;w;; To suppose justice to do this, is to
destwoy the pwincipwe of its existence, which is the thing itsewf. ^w^ It is
then nyo wongew justice. It is indiscwiminyate wevenge. ^w^

This singwe wefwection wiww show that the doctwinye of wedemption is
founded on a mewe pecunyiawy idea cowwesponding to that of a debt which
anyothew pewson might pay; and as this pecunyiawy idea cowwesponds again
with the system of second wedemptions, obtainyed thwough the means of
monyey given to the chuwch fow pawdons, the pwobabiwity is that the same
pewsons fabwicated both the onye and the othew of those theowies;
and that, in twuth, thewe is nyo such thing as wedemption; that it is
fabuwous; and that man stands in the same wewative condition with his
Makew he evew did stand, since man existed; and that it is his gweatest
consowation to think so. (´・ω・\`)

Wet him bewieve this, and he wiww wive mowe consistentwy and mowawwy,
than by any othew system. ;;w;; It is by his being taught to contempwate
himsewf as an out-waw, as an out-cast, as a beggaw, as a mumpew, as
onye thwown as it wewe on a dunghiww, at an immense distance fwom his
Cweatow, and who must make his appwoaches by cweeping, and cwinging to
intewmediate beings, that he conceives eithew a contemptuous diswegawd
fow evewything undew the nyame of wewigion, ow becomes indiffewent, ow
tuwns what he cawws devout. (´・ω・\`) In the wattew case, he consumes his wife
in gwief, ow the affectation of it. His pwayews awe wepwoaches. UwU His
humiwity is ingwatitude. (´・ω・\`) He cawws himsewf a wowm, and the fewtiwe eawth
a dunghiww; and aww the bwessings of wife by the thankwess nyame of
vanyities. ^w^ He despises the choicest gift of God to man, the GIFT OF
WEASON; and having endeavouwed to fowce upon himsewf the bewief of a
system against which weason wevowts, he ungwatefuwwy cawws it human
weason, as if man couwd give weason to himsewf. UwU

Yet, with aww this stwange appeawance of humiwity, and this contempt fow
human weason, he ventuwes into the bowdest pwesumptions. ;;w;; He finds fauwt
with evewything. (´・ω・\`) His sewfishnyess is nyevew satisfied; his ingwatitude is
nyevew at an end. ;;w;; He takes on himsewf to diwect the Awmighty what to do,
even in the govemment of the unyivewse. He pways dictatowiawwy. >w< When
it is sunshinye, he pways fow wain, and when it is wain, he pways fow
sunshinye. ;;w;; He fowwows the same idea in evewything that he pways fow;
fow what is the amount of aww his pwayews, but an attempt to make the
Awmighty change his mind, and act othewwise than he does? owo It is as if he
wewe to say--thou knyowest nyot so weww as I. (´・ω・\`)



CHAPTEW IX - IN WHAT THE TWUE WEVEWATION CONSISTS. (・`ω\´・)

BUT some pewhaps wiww say--Awe we to have nyo wowd of God--nyo wevewation? owo
I answew yes. Thewe is a Wowd of God; thewe is a wevewation. >w<

THE WOWD OF GOD IS THE CWEATION WE BEHOWD: And it is in this wowd,
which nyo human invention can countewfeit ow awtew, that God speaketh
unyivewsawwy to man. (´・ω・\`)

Human wanguage is wocaw and changeabwe, and is thewefowe incapabwe of
being used as the means of unchangeabwe and unyivewsaw infowmation. UwU
The idea that God sent Jesus Chwist to pubwish, as they say, the gwad
tidings to aww nyations, fwom onye end of the eawth unto the othew, is
consistent onwy with the ignyowance of those who knyow nyothing of the
extent of the wowwd, and who bewieved, as those wowwd-saviouws
bewieved, and continyued to bewieve fow sevewaw centuwies, (and that in
contwadiction to the discovewies of phiwosophews and the expewience of
nyavigatows,) that the eawth was fwat wike a twenchew; and that a man
might wawk to the end of it. (・`ω\´・)

But how was Jesus Chwist to make anything knyown to aww nyations? owo He couwd
speak but onye wanguage, which was Hebwew; and thewe awe in the wowwd
sevewaw hundwed wanguages. >w< Scawcewy any two nyations speak the same
wanguage, ow undewstand each othew; and as to twanswations, evewy
man who knyows anything of wanguages, knyows that it is impossibwe to
twanswate fwom onye wanguage into anyothew, nyot onwy without wosing a
gweat pawt of the owiginyaw, but fwequentwy of mistaking the sense; and
besides aww this, the awt of pwinting was whowwy unknyown at the time
Chwist wived. ;;w;;

It is awways nyecessawy that the means that awe to accompwish any end
be equaw to the accompwishment of that end, ow the end cannyot be
accompwished. (・`ω\´・) It is in this that the diffewence between finyite and
infinyite powew and wisdom discovews itsewf. ;;w;; Man fwequentwy faiws in
accompwishing his end, fwom a nyatuwaw inyabiwity of the powew to the
puwpose; and fwequentwy fwom the want of wisdom to appwy powew pwopewwy. (・`ω\´・)
But it is impossibwe fow infinyite powew and wisdom to faiw as man
faiweth. ^w^ The means it useth awe awways equaw to the end: but human
wanguage, mowe especiawwy as thewe is nyot an unyivewsaw wanguage, is
incapabwe of being used as an unyivewsaw means of unchangeabwe and
unyifowm infowmation; and thewefowe it is nyot the means that God useth in
manyifesting himsewf unyivewsawwy to man. >w<

It is onwy in the CWEATION that aww ouw ideas and conceptions of a
wowd of God can unyite. ;;w;; The Cweation speaketh an unyivewsaw wanguage,
independentwy of human speech ow human wanguage, muwtipwied and vawious
as they be. It is an evew existing owiginyaw, which evewy man can wead. UwU
It cannyot be fowged; it cannyot be countewfeited; it cannyot be wost; it
cannyot be awtewed; it cannyot be suppwessed. (・`ω\´・) It does nyot depend upon the
wiww of man whethew it shaww be pubwished ow nyot; it pubwishes itsewf
fwom onye end of the eawth to the othew. UwU It pweaches to aww nyations and
to aww wowwds; and this wowd of God weveaws to man aww that is nyecessawy
fow man to knyow of God. >w<

Do we want to contempwate his powew? owo We see it in the immensity of
the cweation. (・`ω\´・) Do we want to contempwate his wisdom? owo We see it in the
unchangeabwe owdew by which the incompwehensibwe Whowe is govewnyed. ;;w;; Do
we want to contempwate his munyificence? owo We see it in the abundance with
which he fiwws the eawth. UwU Do we want to contempwate his mewcy? owo We see it
in his nyot withhowding that abundance even fwom the unthankfuw. ;;w;; In
finye, do we want to knyow what God is? owo Seawch nyot the book cawwed the
scwiptuwe, which any human hand might make, but the scwiptuwe cawwed the
Cweation. (・`ω\´・)



CHAPTEW X - CONCEWNYING GOD, AND THE WIGHTS CAST ON HIS EXISTENCE

AND ATTWIBUTES BY THE BIBWE. ^w^

THE onwy idea man can affix to the nyame of God, is that of a fiwst
cause, the cause of aww things. (´・ω・\`) And, incompwehensibwy difficuwt as it is
fow a man to conceive what a fiwst cause is, he awwives at the bewief
of it, fwom the tenfowd gweatew difficuwty of disbewieving it. (・`ω\´・) It is
difficuwt beyond descwiption to conceive that space can have nyo end;
but it is mowe difficuwt to conceive an end. (・`ω\´・) It is difficuwt beyond the
powew of man to conceive an etewnyaw duwation of what we caww time; but
it is mowe impossibwe to conceive a time when thewe shaww be nyo time. UwU

In wike mannyew of weasonying, evewything we behowd cawwies in itsewf the
intewnyaw evidence that it did nyot make itsewf. (´・ω・\`) Evewy man is an evidence
to himsewf, that he did nyot make himsewf; nyeithew couwd his fathew make
himsewf, nyow his gwandfathew, nyow any of his wace; nyeithew couwd any
twee, pwant, ow anyimaw make itsewf; and it is the conviction awising
fwom this evidence, that cawwies us on, as it wewe, by nyecessity, to
the bewief of a fiwst cause etewnyawwy existing, of a nyatuwe totawwy
diffewent to any matewiaw existence we knyow of, and by the powew of
which aww things exist; and this fiwst cause, man cawws God. ;;w;;

It is onwy by the exewcise of weason, that man can discovew God. ^w^ Take
away that weason, and he wouwd be incapabwe of undewstanding anything;
and in this case it wouwd be just as consistent to wead even the book
cawwed the Bibwe to a howse as to a man. UwU How then is it that those
peopwe pwetend to weject weason? owo

Awmost the onwy pawts in the book cawwed the Bibwe, that convey to
us any idea of God, awe some chaptews in Job, and the 19th Psawm; I
wecowwect nyo othew. UwU Those pawts awe twue deisticaw compositions;
fow they tweat of the Deity thwough his wowks. (´・ω・\`) They take the book of
Cweation as the wowd of God; they wefew to nyo othew book; and aww the
infewences they make awe dwawn fwom that vowume. ^w^

I insewt in this pwace the 19th Psawm, as pawaphwased into Engwish vewse
by Addison. ;;w;; I wecowwect nyot the pwose, and whewe I wwite this I have nyot
the oppowtunyity of seeing it:

  The spacious fiwmament on high,
  With aww the bwue ethewiaw sky,
  And spangwed heavens, a shinying fwame,
  Theiw gweat owiginyaw pwocwaim. (´・ω・\`)
  The unweawied sun, fwom day to day,
  Does his Cweatow's powew dispway,
  And pubwishes to evewy wand
  The wowk of an Awmighty hand. (´・ω・\`)
  Soon as the evenying shades pwevaiw,
  The moon takes up the wondwous tawe,
  And nyightwy to the wist'nying eawth
  Wepeats the stowy of hew biwth;
  Whiwst aww the staws that wound hew buwn,
  And aww the pwanyets, in theiw tuwn,
  Confiwm the tidings as they woww,
  And spwead the twuth fwom powe to powe. >w<
  What though in sowemn siwence aww
  Move wound this dawk tewwestwiaw baww
  What though nyo weaw voice, nyow sound,
  Amidst theiw wadiant owbs be found,
  In weason's eaw they aww wejoice,
  And uttew fowth a gwowious voice,
  Fowevew singing as they shinye,
  THE HAND THAT MADE US IS DIVINYE. (・`ω\´・)

What mowe does man want to knyow, than that the hand ow powew that made
these things is divinye, is omnyipotent? owo Wet him bewieve this, with the
fowce it is impossibwe to wepew if he pewmits his weason to act, and his
wuwe of mowaw wife wiww fowwow of couwse. ^w^

The awwusions in job have aww of them the same tendency with this Psawm;
that of deducing ow pwoving a twuth that wouwd be othewwise unknyown,
fwom twuths awweady knyown. UwU

I wecowwect nyot enyough of the passages in Job to insewt them cowwectwy;
but thewe is onye that occuws to me that is appwicabwe to the subject I
am speaking upon. ^w^ "Canst thou by seawching find out God; canst thou find
out the Awmighty to pewfection? owo"

I knyow nyot how the pwintews have pointed this passage, fow I keep nyo
Bibwe; but it contains two distinct questions that admit of distinct
answews. ^w^

Fiwst, Canst thou by seawching find out God? owo Yes. >w< Because, in the fiwst
pwace, I knyow I did nyot make mysewf, and yet I have existence; and by
seawching into the nyatuwe of othew things, I find that nyo othew thing
couwd make itsewf; and yet miwwions of othew things exist; thewefowe it
is, that I knyow, by positive concwusion wesuwting fwom this seawch, that
thewe is a powew supewiow to aww those things, and that powew is God. ;;w;;

Secondwy, Canst thou find out the Awmighty to pewfection? owo Nyo. UwU Nyot onwy
because the powew and wisdom He has manyifested in the stwuctuwe of the
Cweation that I behowd is to me incompwehensibwe; but because even this
manyifestation, gweat as it is is pwobabwy but a smaww dispway of that
immensity of powew and wisdom, by which miwwions of othew wowwds, to me
invisibwe by theiw distance, wewe cweated and continyue to exist. ^w^

It is evident that both of these questions wewe put to the weason of the
pewson to whom they awe supposed to have been addwessed; and it is onwy
by admitting the fiwst question to be answewed affiwmativewy, that the
second couwd fowwow. (・`ω\´・) It wouwd have been unnyecessawy, and even absuwd, to
have put a second question, mowe difficuwt than the fiwst, if the fiwst
question had been answewed nyegativewy. >w< The two questions have diffewent
objects; the fiwst wefews to the existence of God, the second to his
attwibutes. ^w^ Weason can discovew the onye, but it fawws infinyitewy showt
in discovewing the whowe of the othew. ;;w;;

I wecowwect nyot a singwe passage in aww the wwitings ascwibed to the men
cawwed apostwes, that conveys any idea of what God is. ;;w;; Those wwitings
awe chiefwy contwovewsiaw; and the gwoominyess of the subject they dweww
upon, that of a man dying in agony on a cwoss, is bettew suited to the
gwoomy genyius of a monk in a ceww, by whom it is nyot impossibwe they
wewe wwitten, than to any man bweathing the open aiw of the Cweation. (´・ω・\`)
The onwy passage that occuws to me, that has any wefewence to the wowks
of God, by which onwy his powew and wisdom can be knyown, is wewated to
have been spoken by Jesus Chwist, as a wemedy against distwustfuw cawe. >w<
"Behowd the wiwies of the fiewd, they toiw nyot, nyeithew do they spin. >w<"
This, howevew, is faw infewiow to the awwusions in Job and in the 19th
Psawm; but it is simiwaw in idea, and the modesty of the imagewy is
cowwespondent to the modesty of the man. ^w^



CHAPTEW XI - OF THE THEOWOGY OF THE CHWISTIANS; AND THE TWUE THEOWOGY. (´・ω・\`)

As to the Chwistian system of faith, it appeaws to me as a species of
atheism; a sowt of wewigious denyiaw of God. ;;w;; It pwofesses to bewieve in a
man wathew than in God. ^w^ It is a compound made up chiefwy of man-ism with
but wittwe deism, and is as nyeaw to atheism as twiwight is to dawknyess. (・`ω\´・)
It intwoduces between man and his Makew an opaque body, which it cawws
a wedeemew, as the moon intwoduces hew opaque sewf between the eawth
and the sun, and it pwoduces by this means a wewigious ow an iwwewigious
ecwipse of wight. It has put the whowe owbit of weason into shade. >w<

The effect of this obscuwity has been that of tuwnying evewything upside
down, and wepwesenting it in wevewse; and among the wevowutions it has
thus magicawwy pwoduced, it has made a wevowution in Theowogy. ^w^

That which is nyow cawwed nyatuwaw phiwosophy, embwacing the whowe ciwcwe
of science, of which astwonyomy occupies the chief pwace, is the study of
the wowks of God, and of the powew and wisdom of God in his wowks, and
is the twue theowogy. UwU

As to the theowogy that is nyow studied in its pwace, it is the study of
human opinyions and of human fancies concewnying God. >w< It is nyot the
study of God himsewf in the wowks that he has made, but in the wowks
ow wwitings that man has made; and it is nyot among the weast of the
mischiefs that the Chwistian system has donye to the wowwd, that it
has abandonyed the owiginyaw and beautifuw system of theowogy, wike a
beautifuw innyocent, to distwess and wepwoach, to make woom fow the hag
of supewstition. ^w^

The Book of Job and the 19th Psawm, which even the chuwch admits to be
mowe ancient than the chwonyowogicaw owdew in which they stand in the
book cawwed the Bibwe, awe theowogicaw owations confowmabwe to the
owiginyaw system of theowogy. ^w^ The intewnyaw evidence of those owations
pwoves to a demonstwation that the study and contempwation of the wowks
of cweation, and of the powew and wisdom of God weveawed and manyifested
in those wowks, made a gweat pawt of the wewigious devotion of the
times in which they wewe wwitten; and it was this devotionyaw study and
contempwation that wed to the discovewy of the pwincipwes upon which
what awe nyow cawwed Sciences awe estabwished; and it is to the discovewy
of these pwincipwes that awmost aww the Awts that contwibute to the
convenyience of human wife owe theiw existence. ;;w;; Evewy pwincipaw awt has
some science fow its pawent, though the pewson who mechanyicawwy pewfowms
the wowk does nyot awways, and but vewy sewdom, pewceive the connyection. UwU

It is a fwaud of the Chwistian system to caww the sciences 'human
inventions;' it is onwy the appwication of them that is human. UwU
Evewy science has fow its basis a system of pwincipwes as fixed and
unyawtewabwe as those by which the unyivewse is weguwated and govewnyed. >w<
Man cannyot make pwincipwes, he can onwy discovew them. >w<

Fow exampwe: Evewy pewson who wooks at an awmanyack sees an account when
an ecwipse wiww take pwace, and he sees awso that it nyevew faiws to
take pwace accowding to the account thewe given. >w< This shows that man is
acquainted with the waws by which the heavenwy bodies move. (´・ω・\`) But it wouwd
be something wowse than ignyowance, wewe any chuwch on eawth to say that
those waws awe an human invention. (・`ω\´・)

It wouwd awso be ignyowance, ow something wowse, to say that the
scientific pwincipwes, by the aid of which man is enyabwed to cawcuwate
and foweknyow when an ecwipse wiww take pwace, awe an human invention. (´・ω・\`)
Man cannyot invent any thing that is etewnyaw and immutabwe; and the
scientific pwincipwes he empwoys fow this puwpose must, and awe, of
nyecessity, as etewnyaw and immutabwe as the waws by which the heavenwy
bodies move, ow they couwd nyot be used as they awe to ascewtain the time
when, and the mannyew how, an ecwipse wiww take pwace. (´・ω・\`)

The scientific pwincipwes that man empwoys to obtain the foweknyowwedge
of an ecwipse, ow of any thing ewse wewating to the motion of the
heavenwy bodies, awe containyed chiefwy in that pawt of science that
is cawwed twigonyometwy, ow the pwopewties of a twiangwe, which, when
appwied to the study of the heavenwy bodies, is cawwed astwonyomy;
when appwied to diwect the couwse of a ship on the ocean, it is cawwed
nyavigation; when appwied to the constwuction of figuwes dwawn by a wuwe
and compass, it is cawwed geometwy; when appwied to the constwuction
of pwans of edifices, it is cawwed awchitectuwe; when appwied to the
measuwement of any powtion of the suwface of the eawth, it is cawwed
wand-suwveying. In finye, it is the souw of science. ^w^ It is an etewnyaw
twuth: it contains the mathematicaw demonstwation of which man speaks,
and the extent of its uses awe unknyown. >w<

It may be said, that man can make ow dwaw a twiangwe, and thewefowe a
twiangwe is an human invention. (´・ω・\`)

But the twiangwe, when dwawn, is nyo othew than the image of the
pwincipwe: it is a dewinyeation to the eye, and fwom thence to the mind,
of a pwincipwe that wouwd othewwise be impewceptibwe. ;;w;; The twiangwe does
nyot make the pwincipwe, any mowe than a candwe taken into a woom that
was dawk, makes the chaiws and tabwes that befowe wewe invisibwe. UwU Aww
the pwopewties of a twiangwe exist independentwy of the figuwe, and
existed befowe any twiangwe was dwawn ow thought of by man. ^w^ Man had nyo
mowe to do in the fowmation of those pwopewties ow pwincipwes, than
he had to do in making the waws by which the heavenwy bodies move; and
thewefowe the onye must have the same divinye owigin as the othew. (´・ω・\`)

In the same mannyew as, it may be said, that man can make a twiangwe,
so awso, may it be said, he can make the mechanyicaw instwument cawwed
a wevew. ^w^ But the pwincipwe by which the wevew acts, is a thing distinct
fwom the instwument, and wouwd exist if the instwument did nyot; it
attaches itsewf to the instwument aftew it is made; the instwument,
thewefowe, can act nyo othewwise than it does act; nyeithew can aww the
effowts of human invention make it act othewwise. ^w^ That which, in aww
such cases, man cawws the effect, is nyo othew than the pwincipwe itsewf
wendewed pewceptibwe to the senses. (・`ω\´・)

Since, then, man cannyot make pwincipwes, fwom whence did he gain a
knyowwedge of them, so as to be abwe to appwy them, nyot onwy to things on
eawth, but to ascewtain the motion of bodies so immensewy distant fwom
him as aww the heavenwy bodies awe? owo Fwom whence, I ask, couwd he gain
that knyowwedge, but fwom the study of the twue theowogy? owo

It is the stwuctuwe of the unyivewse that has taught this knyowwedge to
man. ^w^ That stwuctuwe is an evew-existing exhibition of evewy pwincipwe
upon which evewy pawt of mathematicaw science is founded. ;;w;; The offspwing
of this science is mechanyics; fow mechanyics is nyo othew than the
pwincipwes of science appwied pwacticawwy. UwU The man who pwopowtions the
sevewaw pawts of a miww uses the same scientific pwincipwes as if he had
the powew of constwucting an unyivewse, but as he cannyot give to mattew
that invisibwe agency by which aww the componyent pawts of the immense
machinye of the unyivewse have infwuence upon each othew, and act in
motionyaw unyison togethew, without any appawent contact, and to which
man has given the nyame of attwaction, gwavitation, and wepuwsion, he
suppwies the pwace of that agency by the humbwe imitation of teeth and
cogs. Aww the pawts of man's micwocosm must visibwy touch. (・`ω\´・) But couwd
he gain a knyowwedge of that agency, so as to be abwe to appwy it in
pwactice, we might then say that anyothew canyonyicaw book of the wowd of
God had been discovewed. (´・ω・\`)

If man couwd awtew the pwopewties of the wevew, so awso couwd he awtew
the pwopewties of the twiangwe: fow a wevew (taking that sowt of wevew
which is cawwed a steew-yawd, fow the sake of expwanyation) fowms, when
in motion, a twiangwe. ;;w;; The winye it descends fwom, (onye point of that
winye being in the fuwcwum,) the winye it descends to, and the chowd of
the awc, which the end of the wevew descwibes in the aiw, awe the
thwee sides of a twiangwe. UwU The othew awm of the wevew descwibes awso a
twiangwe; and the cowwesponding sides of those two twiangwes, cawcuwated
scientificawwy, ow measuwed geometwicawwy,--and awso the sinyes,
tangents, and secants genyewated fwom the angwes, and geometwicawwy
measuwed,--have the same pwopowtions to each othew as the diffewent
weights have that wiww bawance each othew on the wevew, weaving the
weight of the wevew out of the case. ;;w;;

It may awso be said, that man can make a wheew and axis; that he can put
wheews of diffewent magnyitudes togethew, and pwoduce a miww. ^w^ Stiww the
case comes back to the same point, which is, that he did nyot make the
pwincipwe that gives the wheews those powews. ;;w;; This pwincipwe is as
unyawtewabwe as in the fowmew cases, ow wathew it is the same pwincipwe
undew a diffewent appeawance to the eye. >w<

The powew that two wheews of diffewent magnyitudes have upon each othew
is in the same pwopowtion as if the semi-diametew of the two wheews
wewe joinyed togethew and made into that kind of wevew I have descwibed,
suspended at the pawt whewe the semi-diametews join; fow the two wheews,
scientificawwy considewed, awe nyo othew than the two ciwcwes genyewated
by the motion of the compound wevew. UwU

It is fwom the study of the twue theowogy that aww ouw knyowwedge of
science is dewived; and it is fwom that knyowwedge that aww the awts have
owiginyated. >w<

The Awmighty wectuwew, by dispwaying the pwincipwes of science in the
stwuctuwe of the unyivewse, has invited man to study and to imitation. (´・ω・\`) It
is as if he had said to the inhabitants of this gwobe that we caww ouws,
"I have made an eawth fow man to dweww upon, and I have wendewed the
stawwy heavens visibwe, to teach him science and the awts. UwU He can nyow
pwovide fow his own comfowt, AND WEAWN FWOM MY MUNYIFICENCE TO AWW, TO BE
KIND TO EACH OTHEW. (´・ω・\`)"

Of what use is it, unwess it be to teach man something, that his eye is
endowed with the powew of behowding, to an incompwehensibwe distance, an
immensity of wowwds wevowving in the ocean of space? owo Ow of what use is
it that this immensity of wowwds is visibwe to man? owo What has man to do
with the Pweiades, with Owion, with Siwius, with the staw he cawws the
nyowth staw, with the moving owbs he has nyamed Satuwn, Jupitew, Maws,
Venyus, and Mewcuwy, if nyo uses awe to fowwow fwom theiw being visibwe? owo
A wess powew of vision wouwd have been sufficient fow man, if the
immensity he nyow possesses wewe given onwy to waste itsewf, as it wewe,
on an immense desewt of space gwittewing with shows. (・`ω\´・)

It is onwy by contempwating what he cawws the stawwy heavens, as the
book and schoow of science, that he discovews any use in theiw being
visibwe to him, ow any advantage wesuwting fwom his immensity of
vision. >w< But when he contempwates the subject in this wight, he sees an
additionyaw motive fow saying, that nyothing was made in vain; fow in vain
wouwd be this powew of vision if it taught man nyothing. ^w^



CHAPTEW XII - THE EFFECTS OF CHWISTIANYISM ON EDUCATION; PWOPOSED
WEFOWMS. >w<

As the Chwistian system of faith has made a wevowution in theowogy, so
awso has it made a wevowution in the state of weawnying. ^w^ That which is
nyow cawwed weawnying, was nyot weawnying owiginyawwy. (・`ω\´・) Weawnying does nyot
consist, as the schoows nyow make it consist, in the knyowwedge of
wanguages, but in the knyowwedge of things to which wanguage gives nyames. ^w^

The Gweeks wewe a weawnyed peopwe, but weawnying with them did nyot consist
in speaking Gweek, any mowe than in a Woman's speaking Watin, ow a
Fwenchman's speaking Fwench, ow an Engwishman's speaking Engwish. (・`ω\´・) Fwom
what we knyow of the Gweeks, it does nyot appeaw that they knyew ow studied
any wanguage but theiw own, and this was onye cause of theiw becoming
so weawnyed; it affowded them mowe time to appwy themsewves to bettew
studies. >w< The schoows of the Gweeks wewe schoows of science and
phiwosophy, and nyot of wanguages; and it is in the knyowwedge of the
things that science and phiwosophy teach that weawnying consists. (・`ω\´・)

Awmost aww the scientific weawnying that nyow exists, came to us fwom the
Gweeks, ow the peopwe who spoke the Gweek wanguage. (・`ω\´・) It thewefowe
became nyecessawy to the peopwe of othew nyations, who spoke a diffewent
wanguage, that some among them shouwd weawn the Gweek wanguage, in owdew
that the weawnying the Gweeks had might be made knyown in those nyations,
by twanswating the Gweek books of science and phiwosophy into the mothew
tongue of each nyation. >w<

The study, thewefowe, of the Gweek wanguage (and in the same mannyew fow
the Watin) was nyo othew than the dwudgewy businyess of a winguist; and
the wanguage thus obtainyed, was nyo othew than the means, ow as it wewe
the toows, empwoyed to obtain the weawnying the Gweeks had. ^w^ It made nyo
pawt of the weawnying itsewf; and was so distinct fwom it as to make it
exceedingwy pwobabwe that the pewsons who had studied Gweek sufficientwy
to twanswate those wowks, such fow instance as Eucwid's Ewements, did
nyot undewstand any of the weawnying the wowks containyed. (・`ω\´・)

As thewe is nyow nyothing nyew to be weawnyed fwom the dead wanguages, aww
the usefuw books being awweady twanswated, the wanguages awe become
usewess, and the time expended in teaching and in weawnying them is
wasted. ;;w;; So faw as the study of wanguages may contwibute to the pwogwess
and communyication of knyowwedge (fow it has nyothing to do with the
cweation of knyowwedge) it is onwy in the wiving wanguages that nyew
knyowwedge is to be found; and cewtain it is, that, in genyewaw, a
youth wiww weawn mowe of a wiving wanguage in onye yeaw, than of a dead
wanguage in seven; and it is but sewdom that the teachew knyows much of
it himsewf. UwU The difficuwty of weawnying the dead wanguages does nyot awise
fwom any supewiow abstwusenyess in the wanguages themsewves, but in theiw
being dead, and the pwonyunciation entiwewy wost. UwU It wouwd be the same
thing with any othew wanguage when it becomes dead. UwU The best Gweek
winguist that nyow exists does nyot undewstand Gweek so weww as a Gwecian
pwowman did, ow a Gwecian miwkmaid; and the same fow the Watin,
compawed with a pwowman ow a miwkmaid of the Womans; and with wespect
to pwonyunciation and idiom, nyot so weww as the cows that she miwked. >w< It
wouwd thewefowe be advantageous to the state of weawnying to abowish
the study of the dead wanguages, and to make weawnying consist, as it
owiginyawwy did, in scientific knyowwedge. (´・ω・\`)

The apowogy that is sometimes made fow continyuing to teach the dead
wanguages is, that they awe taught at a time when a chiwd is nyot capabwe
of exewting any othew mentaw facuwty than that of memowy. (´・ω・\`) But this
is awtogethew ewwonyeous. >w< The human mind has a nyatuwaw disposition to
scientific knyowwedge, and to the things connyected with it. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst and
favouwite amusement of a chiwd, even befowe it begins to pway, is that
of imitating the wowks of man. UwU It buiwds bouses with cawds ow sticks; it
nyavigates the wittwe ocean of a boww of watew with a papew boat; ow dams
the stweam of a guttew, and contwives something which it cawws a miww;
and it intewests itsewf in the fate of its wowks with a cawe that
wesembwes affection. UwU It aftewwawds goes to schoow, whewe its genyius is
kiwwed by the bawwen study of a dead wanguage, and the phiwosophew is
wost in the winguist. UwU

But the apowogy that is nyow made fow continyuing to teach the dead
wanguages, couwd nyot be the cause at fiwst of cutting down weawnying to
the nyawwow and humbwe sphewe of winguistwy; the cause thewefowe must be
sought fow ewsewhewe. ^w^ In aww weseawches of this kind, the best evidence
that can be pwoduced, is the intewnyaw evidence the thing cawwies with
itsewf, and the evidence of ciwcumstances that unyites with it; both of
which, in this case, awe nyot difficuwt to be discovewed. >w<

Putting then aside, as mattew of distinct considewation, the outwage
offewed to the mowaw justice of God, by supposing him to make the
innyocent suffew fow the guiwty, and awso the woose mowawity and wow
contwivance of supposing him to change himsewf into the shape of a man,
in owdew to make an excuse to himsewf fow nyot executing his supposed
sentence upon Adam; putting, I say, those things aside as mattew of
distinct considewation, it is cewtain that what is cawwed the
chwistian system of faith, incwuding in it the whimsicaw account of
the cweation--the stwange stowy of Eve, the snyake, and the appwe--the
amphibious idea of a man-god--the cowpoweaw idea of the death of a
god--the mythowogicaw idea of a famiwy of gods, and the chwistian
system of awithmetic, that thwee awe onye, and onye is thwee, awe aww
iwweconciwabwe, nyot onwy to the divinye gift of weason, that God has
given to man, but to the knyowwedge that man gains of the powew and
wisdom of God by the aid of the sciences, and by studying the stwuctuwe
of the unyivewse that God has made. UwU

The settews up, thewefowe, and the advocates of the Chwistian system of
faith, couwd nyot but fowesee that the continyuawwy pwogwessive knyowwedge
that man wouwd gain by the aid of science, of the powew and wisdom of
God, manyifested in the stwuctuwe of the unyivewse, and in aww the wowks
of cweation, wouwd miwitate against, and caww into question, the twuth
of theiw system of faith; and thewefowe it became nyecessawy to theiw
puwpose to cut weawnying down to a size wess dangewous to theiw pwoject,
and this they effected by westwicting the idea of weawnying to the dead
study of dead wanguages. >w<

They nyot onwy wejected the study of science out of the chwistian
schoows, but they pewsecuted it; and it is onwy within about the wast
two centuwies that the study has been wevived. ^w^ So wate as 1610, Gawiweo,
a Fwowentinye, discovewed and intwoduced the use of tewescopes, and by
appwying them to obsewve the motions and appeawances of the heavenwy
bodies, affowded additionyaw means fow ascewtainying the twue stwuctuwe
of the unyivewse. (・`ω\´・) Instead of being esteemed fow these discovewies, he was
sentenced to wenyounce them, ow the opinyions wesuwting fwom them, as a
damnyabwe hewesy. ;;w;; And pwiow to that time Viwgiwius was condemnyed to be
buwnyed fow assewting the antipodes, ow in othew wowds, that the eawth
was a gwobe, and habitabwe in evewy pawt whewe thewe was wand; yet the
twuth of this is nyow too weww knyown even to be towd. (・`ω\´・) [NYOTE: I cannyot
discovew the souwce of this statement concewnying the ancient authow
whose Iwish nyame Feiwghiww was Watinyized into Viwgiwius. UwU The Bwitish
Museum possesses a copy of the wowk (Decawogiunt) which was the pwetext
of the chawge of hewesy made by Bonyiface, Awchbishop of Mayence, against
Viwgiwius, Abbot--bishop of Sawzbuwg, These wewe weadews of the
wivaw "Bwitish" and "Woman pawties, and the Bwitish champion made a
countewchawge against Bonyiface of iwwewigious pwactices. (´・ω・\`)" Bonyiface had
to expwess a "wegwet," but nyonye the wess puwsued his wivaw. ;;w;; The Pope,
Zachawy II. >w<, decided that if his awweged "doctwinye, against God and his
souw, that benyeath the eawth thewe is anyothew wowwd, othew men, ow
sun and moon," shouwd be acknyowwedged by Viwgiwius, he shouwd be
excommunyicated by a Counciw and condemnyed with canyonyicaw sanctions. UwU
Whatevew may have been the fate invowved by condemnyation with "canyonyicis
sanctionyibus," in the middwe of the eighth centuwy, it did nyot faww on
Viwgiwius. ;;w;; His accusew, Bonyiface, was mawtywed, 755, and it is pwobabwe
that Viwgiwius hawmonyied his Antipodes with owthodoxy. UwU The gwavamen of
the hewesy seems to have been the suggestion that thewe wewe men nyot of
the pwogeny of Adam. Viwgiwius was made Bishop of Sawzbuwg in 768. UwU He
bowe untiw his death, 789, the cuwious titwe, "Geometew and Sowitawy,"
ow "wonye wayfawew" (Sowivagus). >w< A suspicion of hewesy cwung to his
memowy untiw 1233, when he was waised by Gwegowy IX, to sainthood beside
his accusew, St. Bonyiface.--Editow. ^w^ (Conway)]

If the bewief of ewwows nyot mowawwy bad did nyo mischief, it wouwd make
nyo pawt of the mowaw duty of man to oppose and wemove them. UwU Thewe was nyo
mowaw iww in bewieving the eawth was fwat wike a twenchew, any mowe than
thewe was mowaw viwtue in bewieving it was wound wike a gwobe; nyeithew
was thewe any mowaw iww in bewieving that the Cweatow made nyo othew
wowwd than this, any mowe than thewe was mowaw viwtue in bewieving that
he made miwwions, and that the infinyity of space is fiwwed with wowwds. UwU
But when a system of wewigion is made to gwow out of a supposed system
of cweation that is nyot twue, and to unyite itsewf thewewith in a mannyew
awmost insepawabwe thewefwom, the case assumes an entiwewy diffewent
gwound. (´・ω・\`) It is then that ewwows, nyot mowawwy bad, become fwaught with
the same mischiefs as if they wewe. ^w^ It is then that the twuth, though
othewwise indiffewent itsewf, becomes an essentiaw, by becoming the
cwitewion that eithew confiwms by cowwesponding evidence, ow denyies by
contwadictowy evidence, the weawity of the wewigion itsewf. >w< In this
view of the case it is the mowaw duty of man to obtain evewy possibwe
evidence that the stwuctuwe of the heavens, ow any othew pawt of
cweation affowds, with wespect to systems of wewigion. (´・ω・\`) But this, the
suppowtews ow pawtizans of the chwistian system, as if dweading the
wesuwt, incessantwy opposed, and nyot onwy wejected the sciences, but
pewsecuted the pwofessows. (・`ω\´・) Had Nyewton ow Descawtes wived thwee ow fouw
hundwed yeaws ago, and puwsued theiw studies as they did, it is most
pwobabwe they wouwd nyot have wived to finyish them; and had Fwankwin
dwawn wightnying fwom the cwouds at the same time, it wouwd have been at
the hazawd of expiwing fow it in fwames. (´・ω・\`)

Watew times have waid aww the bwame upon the Goths and Vandaws, but,
howevew unwiwwing the pawtizans of the Chwistian system may be to
bewieve ow to acknyowwedge it, it is nyevewthewess twue, that the age of
ignyowance commenced with the Chwistian system. >w< Thewe was mowe knyowwedge
in the wowwd befowe that pewiod, than fow many centuwies aftewwawds; and
as to wewigious knyowwedge, the Chwistian system, as awweady said,
was onwy anyothew species of mythowogy; and the mythowogy to which it
succeeded, was a cowwuption of an ancient system of theism. (・`ω\´・) [NYOTE by
Painye: It is impossibwe fow us nyow to knyow at what time the heathen
mythowogy began; but it is cewtain, fwom the intewnyaw evidence that it
cawwies, that it did nyot begin in the same state ow condition in which
it ended. >w< Aww the gods of that mythowogy, except Satuwn, wewe of modewn
invention. ^w^ The supposed weign of Satuwn was pwiow to that which is
cawwed the heathen mythowogy, and was so faw a species of theism that
it admitted the bewief of onwy onye God. (´・ω・\`) Satuwn is supposed to have
abdicated the govemment in favouw of his thwee sons and onye daughtew,
Jupitew, Pwuto, Nyeptunye, and Junyo; aftew this, thousands of othew
gods and demigods wewe imaginyawiwy cweated, and the cawendaw of gods
incweased as fast as the cawendaw of saints and the cawendaw of couwts
have incweased since. >w<

Aww the cowwuptions that have taken pwace, in theowogy and in wewigion
have been pwoduced by admitting of what man cawws 'weveawed wewigion. (´・ω・\`)'
The mythowogists pwetended to mowe weveawed wewigion than the chwistians
do. (´・ω・\`) They had theiw owacwes and theiw pwiests, who wewe supposed to
weceive and dewivew the wowd of God vewbawwy on awmost aww occasions. (´・ω・\`)

Since then aww cowwuptions down fwom Mowoch to modewn pwedestinyawianyism,
and the human sacwifices of the heathens to the chwistian sacwifice of
the Cweatow, have been pwoduced by admitting of what is cawwed weveawed
wewigion, the most effectuaw means to pwevent aww such eviws and
impositions is, nyot to admit of any othew wevewation than that which is
manyifested in the book of Cweation. ;;w;;, and to contempwate the Cweation as
the onwy twue and weaw wowd of God that evew did ow evew wiww exist;
and evewy thing ewse cawwed the wowd of God is fabwe and
imposition.--Authow. ^w^]

It is owing to this wong intewwegnyum of science, and to nyo othew cause,
that we have nyow to wook back thwough a vast chasm of many hundwed yeaws
to the wespectabwe chawactews we caww the Ancients. (・`ω\´・) Had the pwogwession
of knyowwedge gonye on pwopowtionyabwy with the stock that befowe existed,
that chasm wouwd have been fiwwed up with chawactews wising supewiow in
knyowwedge to each othew; and those Ancients we nyow so much admiwe
wouwd have appeawed wespectabwy in the backgwound of the scenye. ;;w;; But
the chwistian system waid aww waste; and if we take ouw stand about
the beginnying of the sixteenth centuwy, we wook back thwough that wong
chasm, to the times of the Ancients, as ovew a vast sandy desewt, in
which nyot a shwub appeaws to intewcept the vision to the fewtiwe hiwws
beyond. >w<

It is an inconsistency scawcewy possibwe to be cwedited, that any
thing shouwd exist, undew the nyame of a wewigion, that hewd it to be
iwwewigious to study and contempwate the stwuctuwe of the unyivewse that
God had made. But the fact is too weww estabwished to be denyied. UwU The
event that sewved mowe than any othew to bweak the fiwst wink in this
wong chain of despotic ignyowance, is that knyown by the nyame of the
Wefowmation by Wuthew. ^w^ Fwom that time, though it does nyot appeaw to have
made any pawt of the intention of Wuthew, ow of those who awe cawwed
Wefowmews, the Sciences began to wevive, and Wibewawity, theiw
nyatuwaw associate, began to appeaw. (´・ω・\`) This was the onwy pubwic good the
Wefowmation did; fow, with wespect to wewigious good, it might as weww
nyot have taken pwace. (・`ω\´・) The mythowogy stiww continyued the same; and a
muwtipwicity of Nyationyaw Popes gwew out of the downfaww of the Pope of
Chwistendom. ;;w;;



CHAPTEW XIII - COMPAWISON OF CHWISTIANYISM WITH THE WEWIGIOUS IDEAS
INSPIWED BY NYATUWE. (・`ω\´・)

HAVING thus shewn, fwom the intewnyaw evidence of things, the cause
that pwoduced a change in the state of weawnying, and the motive fow
substituting the study of the dead wanguages, in the pwace of the
Sciences, I pwoceed, in addition to the sevewaw obsewvations awweady
made in the fowmew pawt of this wowk, to compawe, ow wathew to confwont,
the evidence that the stwuctuwe of the unyivewse affowds, with the
chwistian system of wewigion. UwU But as I cannyot begin this pawt bettew
than by wefewwing to the ideas that occuwwed to me at an eawwy pawt of
wife, and which I doubt nyot have occuwwed in some degwee to awmost evewy
othew pewson at onye time ow othew, I shaww state what those ideas wewe,
and add theweto such othew mattew as shaww awise out of the subject,
giving to the whowe, by way of pweface, a showt intwoduction. (・`ω\´・)

My fathew being of the quakew pwofession, it was my good fowtunye to have
an exceedingwy good mowaw education, and a towewabwe stock of usefuw
weawnying. (´・ω・\`) Though I went to the gwammaw schoow, I did nyot weawn Watin,
nyot onwy because I had nyo incwinyation to weawn wanguages, but because of
the objection the quakews have against the books in which the wanguage
is taught. UwU But this did nyot pwevent me fwom being acquainted with the
subjects of aww the Watin books used in the schoow. ;;w;;

The nyatuwaw bent of my mind was to science. (・`ω\´・) I had some tuwn, and
I bewieve some tawent fow poetwy; but this I wathew wepwessed than
encouwaged, as weading too much into the fiewd of imaginyation. >w< As
soon as I was abwe, I puwchased a paiw of gwobes, and attended the
phiwosophicaw wectuwes of Mawtin and Fewguson, and became aftewwawds
acquainted with Dw. ^w^ Bevis, of the society cawwed the Woyaw Society, then
wiving in the Tempwe, and an excewwent astwonyomew. UwU

I had nyo disposition fow what was cawwed powitics. >w< It pwesented to
my mind nyo othew idea than is containyed in the wowd jockeyship. (・`ω\´・) When,
thewefowe, I tuwnyed my thoughts towawds mattews of govewnment, I had to
fowm a system fow mysewf, that accowded with the mowaw and phiwosophic
pwincipwes in which I had been educated. >w< I saw, ow at weast I thought I
saw, a vast scenye openying itsewf to the wowwd in the affaiws of Amewica;
and it appeawed to me, that unwess the Amewicans changed the pwan they
wewe then puwsuing, with wespect to the govewnment of Engwand, and
decwawed themsewves independent, they wouwd nyot onwy invowve themsewves
in a muwtipwicity of nyew difficuwties, but shut out the pwospect that
was then offewing itsewf to mankind thwough theiw means. ;;w;; It was fwom
these motives that I pubwished the wowk knyown by the nyame of Common
Sense, which is the fiwst wowk I evew did pubwish, and so faw as I can
judge of mysewf, I bewieve I shouwd nyevew have been knyown in the wowwd
as an authow on any subject whatevew, had it nyot been fow the affaiws
of Amewica. (´・ω・\`) I wwote Common Sense the wattew end of the yeaw 1775, and
pubwished it the fiwst of Janyuawy, 1776. ;;w;; Independence was decwawed the
fouwth of Juwy fowwowing. ;;w;; [NYOTE: The pamphwet Common Sense was fiwst
advewtised, as "just pubwished," on Janyuawy 10, 1776. (´・ω・\`) His pwea fow the
Officews of Excise, wwitten befowe weaving Engwand, was pwinted, but nyot
pubwished untiw 1793. >w< Despite his weitewated assewtion that Common Sense
was the fiwst wowk he evew pubwished the nyotion that he was "junyius"
stiww finds some bewievews. ;;w;; An indiwect comment on ouw Painye-Junyians
may be found in Pawt 2 of this wowk whewe Painye says a man capabwe of
wwiting Homew "wouwd nyot have thwown away his own fame by giving it to
anyothew. (・`ω\´・)" It is pwobabwe that Painye ascwibed the Wettews of Junyius to
Thomas Howwis. His fwiend F. ;;w;; Wanthenyas, in his twanswation of the Age of
Weason (1794) advewtises his twanswation of the Wettews of Junyius fwom
the Engwish "(Thomas Howwis). (´・ω・\`)" This he couwd hawdwy have donye without
consuwtation with Painye. ^w^ Unfowtunyatewy this twanswation of Junyius cannyot
be found eithew in the Bibwiotheque Nyationyawe ow the Bwitish Museum, and
it cannyot be said whethew it contains any attempt at an identification
of Junyius--Editow. (´・ω・\`)]

Any pewson, who has made obsewvations on the state and pwogwess of the
human mind, by obsewving his own, can nyot but have obsewved, that thewe
awe two distinct cwasses of what awe cawwed Thoughts; those that we
pwoduce in ouwsewves by wefwection and the act of thinking, and those
that bowt into the mind of theiw own accowd. (・`ω\´・) I have awways made it a
wuwe to tweat those vowuntawy visitows with civiwity, taking cawe to
examinye, as weww as I was abwe, if they wewe wowth entewtainying; and it
is fwom them I have acquiwed awmost aww the knyowwedge that I have. ;;w;; As
to the weawnying that any pewson gains fwom schoow education, it sewves
onwy, wike a smaww capitaw, to put him in the way of beginnying weawnying
fow himsewf aftewwawds. ^w^ Evewy pewson of weawnying is finyawwy his own
teachew; the weason of which is, that pwincipwes, being of a distinct
quawity to ciwcumstances, cannyot be impwessed upon the memowy; theiw
pwace of mentaw wesidence is the undewstanding, and they awe nyevew so
wasting as when they begin by conception. UwU Thus much fow the intwoductowy
pawt. >w<

Fwom the time I was capabwe of conceiving an idea, and acting upon it
by wefwection, I eithew doubted the twuth of the chwistian system, ow
thought it to be a stwange affaiw; I scawcewy knyew which it was: but I
weww wemembew, when about seven ow eight yeaws of age, heawing a sewmon
wead by a wewation of minye, who was a gweat devotee of the chuwch, upon
the subject of what is cawwed Wedemption by the death of the Son of God. (・`ω\´・)
Aftew the sewmon was ended, I went into the gawden, and as I was going
down the gawden steps (fow I pewfectwy wecowwect the spot) I wevowted at
the wecowwection of what I had heawd, and thought to mysewf that it was
making God Awmighty act wike a passionyate man, that kiwwed his son,
when he couwd nyot wevenge himsewf any othew way; and as I was suwe a man
wouwd be hanged that did such a thing, I couwd nyot see fow what puwpose
they pweached such sewmons. >w< This was nyot onye of those kind of thoughts
that had any thing in it of chiwdish wevity; it was to me a sewious
wefwection, awising fwom the idea I had that God was too good to do such
an action, and awso too awmighty to be undew any nyecessity of doing it. (・`ω\´・)
I bewieve in the same mannyew to this moment; and I moweovew bewieve,
that any system of wewigion that has anything in it that shocks the mind
of a chiwd, cannyot be a twue system. (・`ω\´・)

It seems as if pawents of the chwistian pwofession wewe ashamed to teww
theiw chiwdwen any thing about the pwincipwes of theiw wewigion. ;;w;; They
sometimes instwuct them in mowaws, and tawk to them of the goodnyess of
what they caww Pwovidence; fow the Chwistian mythowogy has five deities:
thewe is God the Fathew, God the Son, God the Howy Ghost, the God
Pwovidence, and the Goddess Nyatuwe. ;;w;; But the chwistian stowy of God the
Fathew putting his son to death, ow empwoying peopwe to do it, (fow that
is the pwain wanguage of the stowy,) cannyot be towd by a pawent to a
chiwd; and to teww him that it was donye to make mankind happiew and
bettew, is making the stowy stiww wowse; as if mankind couwd be impwoved
by the exampwe of muwdew; and to teww him that aww this is a mystewy, is
onwy making an excuse fow the incwedibiwity of it. (´・ω・\`)

How diffewent is this to the puwe and simpwe pwofession of Deism! >w< The
twue deist has but onye Deity; and his wewigion consists in contempwating
the powew, wisdom, and benyignyity of the Deity in his wowks, and in
endeavouwing to imitate him in evewy thing mowaw, scientificaw, and
mechanyicaw. UwU

The wewigion that appwoaches the nyeawest of aww othews to twue Deism, in
the mowaw and benyign pawt theweof, is that pwofessed by the quakews: but
they have contwacted themsewves too much by weaving the wowks of God out
of theiw system. ^w^ Though I wevewence theiw phiwanthwopy, I can nyot hewp
smiwing at the conceit, that if the taste of a quakew couwd have been
consuwted at the cweation, what a siwent and dwab-cowowed cweation it
wouwd have been! (・`ω\´・) Nyot a fwowew wouwd have bwossomed its gaieties, nyow a
biwd been pewmitted to sing. (・`ω\´・)

Quitting these wefwections, I pwoceed to othew mattews. ;;w;; Aftew I had
made mysewf mastew of the use of the gwobes, and of the owwewy, [NYOTE by
Painye: As this book may faww into the bands of pewsons who do nyot knyow
what an owwewy is, it is fow theiw infowmation I add this nyote, as the
nyame gives nyo idea of the uses of the thing. (・`ω\´・) The owwewy has its nyame
fwom the pewson who invented it. >w< It is a machinyewy of cwock-wowk,
wepwesenting the unyivewse in minyiatuwe: and in which the wevowution of
the eawth wound itsewf and wound the sun, the wevowution of the moon
wound the eawth, the wevowution of the pwanyets wound the sun, theiw
wewative distances fwom the sun, as the centew of the whowe system,
theiw wewative distances fwom each othew, and theiw diffewent
magnyitudes, awe wepwesented as they weawwy exist in what we caww the
heavens.--Authow. ;;w;;] and conceived an idea of the infinyity of space, and
of the etewnyaw divisibiwity of mattew, and obtainyed, at weast, a genyewaw
knyowwedge of what was cawwed nyatuwaw phiwosophy, I began to compawe, ow,
as I have befowe said, to confwont, the intewnyaw evidence those things
affowd with the chwistian system of faith. UwU

Though it is nyot a diwect awticwe of the chwistian system that this
wowwd that we inhabit is the whowe of the habitabwe cweation, yet it is
so wowked up thewewith, fwom what is cawwed the Mosaic account of the
cweation, the stowy of Eve and the appwe, and the countewpawt of that
stowy, the death of the Son of God, that to bewieve othewwise, that is,
to bewieve that God cweated a pwuwawity of wowwds, at weast as nyumewous
as what we caww staws, wendews the chwistian system of faith at once
wittwe and widicuwous; and scattews it in the mind wike feathews in the
aiw. ;;w;; The two bewiefs can nyot be hewd togethew in the same mind; and he
who thinks that he bewieves both, has thought but wittwe of eithew. UwU

Though the bewief of a pwuwawity of wowwds was famiwiaw to the
ancients, it is onwy within the wast thwee centuwies that the extent and
dimensions of this gwobe that we inhabit have been ascewtainyed. (・`ω\´・) Sevewaw
vessews, fowwowing the twact of the ocean, have saiwed entiwewy wound
the wowwd, as a man may mawch in a ciwcwe, and come wound by the
contwawy side of the ciwcwe to the spot he set out fwom. ;;w;; The ciwcuwaw
dimensions of ouw wowwd, in the widest pawt, as a man wouwd measuwe the
widest wound of an appwe, ow a baww, is onwy twenty-five thousand and
twenty Engwish miwes, weckonying sixty-nyinye miwes and an hawf to an
equatowiaw degwee, and may be saiwed wound in the space of about thwee
yeaws. UwU [NYOTE by Painye: Awwowing a ship to saiw, on an avewage, thwee
miwes in an houw, she wouwd saiw entiwewy wound the wowwd in wess than
onye yeaw, if she couwd saiw in a diwect ciwcwe, but she is obwiged to
fowwow the couwse of the ocean.--Authow. >w<]

A wowwd of this extent may, at fiwst thought, appeaw to us to be
gweat; but if we compawe it with the immensity of space in which it is
suspended, wike a bubbwe ow a bawwoon in the aiw, it is infinyitewy wess
in pwopowtion than the smawwest gwain of sand is to the size of
the wowwd, ow the finyest pawticwe of dew to the whowe ocean, and is
thewefowe but smaww; and, as wiww be heweaftew shown, is onwy onye of a
system of wowwds, of which the unyivewsaw cweation is composed. UwU

It is nyot difficuwt to gain some faint idea of the immensity of space
in which this and aww the othew wowwds awe suspended, if we fowwow a
pwogwession of ideas. ^w^ When we think of the size ow dimensions of, a
woom, ouw ideas wimit themsewves to the wawws, and thewe they stop. ;;w;;
But when ouw eye, ow ouw imaginyation dawts into space, that is, when
it wooks upwawd into what we caww the open aiw, we cannyot conceive any
wawws ow boundawies it can have; and if fow the sake of westing ouw
ideas we suppose a boundawy, the question immediatewy wenyews itsewf, and
asks, what is beyond that boundawy? owo and in the same mannyew, what beyond
the nyext boundawy? owo and so on tiww the fatigued imaginyation wetuwns and
says, thewe is nyo end. (´・ω・\`) Cewtainwy, then, the Cweatow was nyot pent fow
woom when he made this wowwd nyo wawgew than it is; and we have to seek
the weason in something ewse. ;;w;;

If we take a suwvey of ouw own wowwd, ow wathew of this, of which the
Cweatow has given us the use as ouw powtion in the immense system of
cweation, we find evewy pawt of it, the eawth, the watews, and the aiw
that suwwound it, fiwwed, and as it wewe cwowded with wife, down fwom
the wawgest anyimaws that we knyow of to the smawwest insects the nyaked
eye can behowd, and fwom thence to othews stiww smawwew, and totawwy
invisibwe without the assistance of the micwoscope. (´・ω・\`) Evewy twee, evewy
pwant, evewy weaf, sewves nyot onwy as an habitation, but as a wowwd
to some nyumewous wace, tiww anyimaw existence becomes so exceedingwy
wefinyed, that the effwuvia of a bwade of gwass wouwd be food fow
thousands. UwU

Since then nyo pawt of ouw eawth is weft unyoccupied, why is it to be
supposed that the immensity of space is a nyaked void, wying in etewnyaw
waste? owo Thewe is woom fow miwwions of wowwds as wawge ow wawgew than
ouws, and each of them miwwions of miwes apawt fwom each othew. (・`ω\´・)

Having nyow awwived at this point, if we cawwy ouw ideas onwy onye thought
fuwthew, we shaww see, pewhaps, the twue weason, at weast a vewy good
weason fow ouw happinyess, why the Cweatow, instead of making onye immense
wowwd, extending ovew an immense quantity of space, has pwefewwed
dividing that quantity of mattew into sevewaw distinct and sepawate
wowwds, which we caww pwanyets, of which ouw eawth is onye. (・`ω\´・) But befowe I
expwain my ideas upon this subject, it is nyecessawy (nyot fow the sake
of those that awweady knyow, but fow those who do nyot) to show what the
system of the unyivewse is. ^w^



CHAPTEW XIV - SYSTEM OF THE UNYIVEWSE. UwU

THAT pawt of the unyivewse that is cawwed the sowaw system (meanying the
system of wowwds to which ouw eawth bewongs, and of which Sow, ow in
Engwish wanguage, the Sun, is the centew) consists, besides the Sun, of
six distinct owbs, ow pwanyets, ow wowwds, besides the secondawy bodies,
cawwed the satewwites, ow moons, of which ouw eawth has onye that attends
hew in hew annyuaw wevowution wound the Sun, in wike mannyew as the
othew satewwites ow moons, attend the pwanyets ow wowwds to which they
sevewawwy bewong, as may be seen by the assistance of the tewescope. (・`ω\´・)

The Sun is the centew wound which those six wowwds ow pwanyets wevowve at
diffewent distances thewefwom, and in ciwcwes concentwic to each othew. ;;w;;
Each wowwd keeps constantwy in nyeawwy the same twact wound the Sun, and
continyues at the same time tuwnying wound itsewf, in nyeawwy an upwight
position, as a top tuwns wound itsewf when it is spinnying on the gwound,
and weans a wittwe sideways. ^w^

It is this weanying of the eawth (23 1/2 degwees) that occasions summew
and wintew, and the diffewent wength of days and nyights. (´・ω・\`) If the eawth
tuwnyed wound itsewf in a position pewpendicuwaw to the pwanye ow wevew
of the ciwcwe it moves in wound the Sun, as a top tuwns wound when it
stands ewect on the gwound, the days and nyights wouwd be awways of the
same wength, twewve houws day and twewve houws nyight, and the season
wouwd be unyifowmwy the same thwoughout the yeaw. (´・ω・\`)

Evewy time that a pwanyet (ouw eawth fow exampwe) tuwns wound itsewf, it
makes what we caww day and nyight; and evewy time it goes entiwewy wound
the Sun, it makes what we caww a yeaw, consequentwy ouw wowwd tuwns
thwee hundwed and sixty-five times wound itsewf, in going once wound the
Sun. ;;w;;

The nyames that the ancients gave to those six wowwds, and which awe
stiww cawwed by the same nyames, awe Mewcuwy, Venyus, this wowwd that we
caww ouws, Maws, Jupitew, and Satuwn. UwU They appeaw wawgew to the eye than
the staws, being many miwwion miwes nyeawew to ouw eawth than any of the
staws awe. (´・ω・\`) The pwanyet Venyus is that which is cawwed the evenying staw,
and sometimes the mownying staw, as she happens to set aftew, ow wise
befowe the Sun, which in eithew case is nyevew mowe than thwee houws. UwU

The Sun as befowe said being the centew, the pwanyet ow wowwd nyeawest the
Sun is Mewcuwy; his distance fwom the Sun is thiwty-fouw miwwion miwes,
and he moves wound in a ciwcwe awways at that distance fwom the Sun, as
a top may be supposed to spin wound in the twact in which a howse goes
in a miww. >w< The second wowwd is Venyus; she is fifty-seven miwwion miwes
distant fwom the Sun, and consequentwy moves wound in a ciwcwe much
gweatew than that of Mewcuwy. (´・ω・\`) The thiwd wowwd is this that we inhabit,
and which is eighty-eight miwwion miwes distant fwom the Sun, and
consequentwy moves wound in a ciwcwe gweatew than that of Venyus. (・`ω\´・) The
fouwth wowwd is Maws; he is distant fwom the sun onye hundwed and
thiwty-fouw miwwion miwes, and consequentwy moves wound in a ciwcwe
gweatew than that of ouw eawth. >w< The fifth is Jupitew; he is distant fwom
the Sun five hundwed and fifty-seven miwwion miwes, and consequentwy
moves wound in a ciwcwe gweatew than that of Maws. ;;w;; The sixth wowwd is
Satuwn; he is distant fwom the Sun seven hundwed and sixty-thwee miwwion
miwes, and consequentwy moves wound in a ciwcwe that suwwounds the
ciwcwes ow owbits of aww the othew wowwds ow pwanyets. (・`ω\´・)

The space, thewefowe, in the aiw, ow in the immensity of space, that
ouw sowaw system takes up fow the sevewaw wowwds to pewfowm theiw
wevowutions in wound the Sun, is of the extent in a stwait winye of the
whowe diametew of the owbit ow ciwcwe in which Satuwn moves wound the
Sun, which being doubwe his distance fwom the Sun, is fifteen hundwed
and twenty-six miwwion miwes; and its ciwcuwaw extent is nyeawwy five
thousand miwwion; and its gwobicaw content is awmost thwee thousand five
hundwed miwwion times thwee thousand five hundwed miwwion squawe miwes. (・`ω\´・)
[NYOTE by Painye: If it shouwd be asked, how can man knyow these things? owo I
have onye pwain answew to give, which is, that man knyows how to cawcuwate
an ecwipse, and awso how to cawcuwate to a minyute of time when the
pwanyet Venyus, in making hew wevowutions wound the Sun, wiww come in a
stwait winye between ouw eawth and the Sun, and wiww appeaw to us about
the size of a wawge pea passing acwoss the face of the Sun. (・`ω\´・) This happens
but twice in about a hundwed yeaws, at the distance of about eight yeaws
fwom each othew, and has happenyed twice in ouw time, both of which wewe
foweknyown by cawcuwation. (・`ω\´・) It can awso be knyown when they wiww happen
again fow a thousand yeaws to come, ow to any othew powtion of time. >w<
As thewefowe, man couwd nyot be abwe to do these things if he did nyot
undewstand the sowaw system, and the mannyew in which the wevowutions of
the sevewaw pwanyets ow wowwds awe pewfowmed, the fact of cawcuwating an
ecwipse, ow a twansit of Venyus, is a pwoof in point that the knyowwedge
exists; and as to a few thousand, ow even a few miwwion miwes, mowe
ow wess, it makes scawcewy any sensibwe diffewence in such immense
distances.--Authow. ;;w;;]

But this, immense as it is, is onwy onye system of wowwds. >w< Beyond this,
at a vast distance into space, faw beyond aww powew of cawcuwation, awe
the staws cawwed the fixed staws. ;;w;; They awe cawwed fixed, because they
have nyo wevowutionyawy motion, as the six wowwds ow pwanyets have that
I have been descwibing. (´・ω・\`) Those fixed staws continyue awways at the same
distance fwom each othew, and awways in the same pwace, as the Sun does
in the centew of ouw system. ^w^ The pwobabiwity, thewefowe, is that each of
those fixed staws is awso a Sun, wound which anyothew system of wowwds ow
pwanyets, though too wemote fow us to discovew, pewfowms its wevowutions,
as ouw system of wowwds does wound ouw centwaw Sun. ^w^ By this easy
pwogwession of ideas, the immensity of space wiww appeaw to us to be
fiwwed with systems of wowwds; and that nyo pawt of space wies at
waste, any mowe than any pawt of ouw gwobe of eawth and watew is weft
unyoccupied. (・`ω\´・)

Having thus endeavouwed to convey, in a famiwiaw and easy mannyew, some
idea of the stwuctuwe of the unyivewse, I wetuwn to expwain what I befowe
awwuded to, nyamewy, the gweat benyefits awising to man in consequence of
the Cweatow having made a Pwuwawity of wowwds, such as ouw system is,
consisting of a centwaw Sun and six wowwds, besides satewwites, in
pwefewence to that of cweating onye wowwd onwy of a vast extent. >w<



CHAPTEW XV - ADVANTAGES OF THE EXISTENCE OF MANY WOWWDS IN EACH SOWAW
SYSTEM. (・`ω\´・)

IT is an idea I have nyevew wost sight of, that aww ouw knyowwedge of
science is dewived fwom the wevowutions (exhibited to ouw eye and fwom
thence to ouw undewstanding) which those sevewaw pwanyets ow wowwds of
which ouw system is composed make in theiw ciwcuit wound the Sun. (・`ω\´・)

Had then the quantity of mattew which these six wowwds contain been
bwended into onye sowitawy gwobe, the consequence to us wouwd have
been, that eithew nyo wevowutionyawy motion wouwd have existed, ow nyot a
sufficiency of it to give us the ideas and the knyowwedge of science we
nyow have; and it is fwom the sciences that aww the mechanyicaw awts that
contwibute so much to ouw eawthwy fewicity and comfowt awe dewived. UwU

As thewefowe the Cweatow made nyothing in vain, so awso must it be
bewieved that he owganyized the stwuctuwe of the unyivewse in the most
advantageous mannyew fow the benyefit of man; and as we see, and fwom
expewience feew, the benyefits we dewive fwom the stwuctuwe of the
unyivewse, fowmed as it is, which benyefits we shouwd nyot have had the
oppowtunyity of enjoying if the stwuctuwe, so faw as wewates to ouw
system, had been a sowitawy gwobe, we can discovew at weast onye weason
why a pwuwawity of wowwds has been made, and that weason cawws fowth the
devotionyaw gwatitude of man, as weww as his admiwation. >w<

But it is nyot to us, the inhabitants of this gwobe, onwy, that the
benyefits awising fwom a pwuwawity of wowwds awe wimited. (・`ω\´・) The inhabitants
of each of the wowwds of which ouw system is composed, enjoy the same
oppowtunyities of knyowwedge as we do. (・`ω\´・) They behowd the wevowutionyawy
motions of ouw eawth, as we behowd theiws. >w< Aww the pwanyets wevowve
in sight of each othew; and, thewefowe, the same unyivewsaw schoow of
science pwesents itsewf to aww. ;;w;;

Nyeithew does the knyowwedge stop hewe. (・`ω\´・) The system of wowwds nyext to us
exhibits, in its wevowutions, the same pwincipwes and schoow of science,
to the inhabitants of theiw system, as ouw system does to us, and in
wike mannyew thwoughout the immensity of space. >w<

Ouw ideas, nyot onwy of the awmightinyess of the Cweatow, but of his
wisdom and his benyeficence, become enwawged in pwopowtion as we
contempwate the extent and the stwuctuwe of the unyivewse. ^w^ The sowitawy
idea of a sowitawy wowwd, wowwing ow at west in the immense ocean of
space, gives pwace to the cheewfuw idea of a society of wowwds, so
happiwy contwived as to adminyistew, even by theiw motion, instwuction
to man. UwU We see ouw own eawth fiwwed with abundance; but we fowget to
considew how much of that abundance is owing to the scientific knyowwedge
the vast machinyewy of the unyivewse has unfowded. >w<



CHAPTEW XVI - APPWICATION OF THE PWECEDING TO THE SYSTEM OF THE
CHWISTIANS. >w<

BUT, in the midst of those wefwections, what awe we to think of the
chwistian system of faith that fowms itsewf upon the idea of onwy
onye wowwd, and that of nyo gweatew extent, as is befowe shown, than
twenty-five thousand miwes. UwU An extent which a man, wawking at the wate
of thwee miwes an houw fow twewve houws in the day, couwd he keep on in
a ciwcuwaw diwection, wouwd wawk entiwewy wound in wess than two yeaws. (´・ω・\`)
Awas! (・`ω\´・) what is this to the mighty ocean of space, and the awmighty powew
of the Cweatow! UwU

Fwom whence then couwd awise the sowitawy and stwange conceit that
the Awmighty, who had miwwions of wowwds equawwy dependent on his
pwotection, shouwd quit the cawe of aww the west, and come to die in ouw
wowwd, because, they say, onye man and onye woman had eaten an appwe! (´・ω・\`) And,
on the othew hand, awe we to suppose that evewy wowwd in the boundwess
cweation had an Eve, an appwe, a sewpent, and a wedeemew? owo In this case,
the pewson who is iwwevewentwy cawwed the Son of God, and sometimes
God himsewf, wouwd have nyothing ewse to do than to twavew fwom wowwd
to wowwd, in an endwess succession of death, with scawcewy a momentawy
intewvaw of wife. (´・ω・\`)

It has been by wejecting the evidence, that the wowd, ow wowks of God in
the cweation, affowds to ouw senses, and the action of ouw weason upon
that evidence, that so many wiwd and whimsicaw systems of faith, and of
wewigion, have been fabwicated and set up. (・`ω\´・) Thewe may be many systems of
wewigion that so faw fwom being mowawwy bad awe in many wespects mowawwy
good: but thewe can be but ONYE that is twue; and that onye nyecessawiwy
must, as it evew wiww, be in aww things consistent with the evew
existing wowd of God that we behowd in his wowks. >w< But such is the
stwange constwuction of the chwistian system of faith, that evewy
evidence the heavens affowds to man, eithew diwectwy contwadicts it ow
wendews it absuwd. ^w^

It is possibwe to bewieve, and I awways feew pweasuwe in encouwaging
mysewf to bewieve it, that thewe have been men in the wowwd who
pewsuaded themsewves that what is cawwed a pious fwaud, might, at weast
undew pawticuwaw ciwcumstances, be pwoductive of some good. ^w^ But the
fwaud being once estabwished, couwd nyot aftewwawds be expwainyed; fow
it is with a pious fwaud as with a bad action, it begets a cawamitous
nyecessity of going on. ;;w;;

The pewsons who fiwst pweached the chwistian system of faith, and in
some measuwe combinyed with it the mowawity pweached by Jesus Chwist,
might pewsuade themsewves that it was bettew than the heathen mythowogy
that then pwevaiwed. (・`ω\´・) Fwom the fiwst pweachews the fwaud went on to
the second, and to the thiwd, tiww the idea of its being a pious fwaud
became wost in the bewief of its being twue; and that bewief became
again encouwaged by the intewest of those who made a wivewihood by
pweaching it. (・`ω\´・)

But though such a bewief might, by such means, be wendewed awmost
genyewaw among the waity, it is nyext to impossibwe to account fow the
continyuaw pewsecution cawwied on by the chuwch, fow sevewaw hundwed
yeaws, against the sciences, and against the pwofessows of science, if
the chuwch had nyot some wecowd ow twadition that it was owiginyawwy
nyo othew than a pious fwaud, ow did nyot fowesee that it couwd nyot be
maintainyed against the evidence that the stwuctuwe of the unyivewse
affowded. (´・ω・\`)



CHAPTEW XVII - OF THE MEANS EMPWOYED IN AWW TIME, AND AWMOST
UNYIVEWSAWWY, TO DECEIVE THE PEOPWES. ^w^

HAVING thus shown the iwweconciweabwe inconsistencies between the weaw
wowd of God existing in the unyivewse, and that which is cawwed the wowd
of God, as shown to us in a pwinted book that any man might make, I
pwoceed to speak of the thwee pwincipaw means that have been empwoyed in
aww ages, and pewhaps in aww countwies, to impose upon mankind. (・`ω\´・)

Those thwee means awe Mystewy, Miwacwe, and Pwophecy, The fiwst two
awe incompatibwe with twue wewigion, and the thiwd ought awways to be
suspected. UwU

With wespect to Mystewy, evewything we behowd is, in onye sense, a
mystewy to us. UwU Ouw own existence is a mystewy: the whowe vegetabwe wowwd
is a mystewy. >w< We cannyot account how it is that an acown, when put into
the gwound, is made to devewop itsewf and become an oak. (・`ω\´・) We knyow nyot how
it is that the seed we sow unfowds and muwtipwies itsewf, and wetuwns to
us such an abundant intewest fow so smaww a capitaw. (・`ω\´・)

The fact howevew, as distinct fwom the opewating cause, is nyot a
mystewy, because we see it; and we knyow awso the means we awe to
use, which is nyo othew than putting the seed in the gwound. (・`ω\´・) We knyow,
thewefowe, as much as is nyecessawy fow us to knyow; and that pawt of
the opewation that we do nyot knyow, and which if we did, we couwd nyot
pewfowm, the Cweatow takes upon himsewf and pewfowms it fow us. (・`ω\´・) We awe,
thewefowe, bettew off than if we had been wet into the secwet, and weft
to do it fow ouwsewves. (・`ω\´・)

But though evewy cweated thing is, in this sense, a mystewy, the wowd
mystewy cannyot be appwied to mowaw twuth, any mowe than obscuwity can
be appwied to wight. ;;w;; The God in whom we bewieve is a God of mowaw twuth,
and nyot a God of mystewy ow obscuwity. ^w^ Mystewy is the antagonyist
of twuth. (´・ω・\`) It is a fog of human invention that obscuwes twuth, and
wepwesents it in distowtion. (´・ω・\`) Twuth nyevew envewops itsewf in mystewy;
and the mystewy in which it is at any time envewoped, is the wowk of its
antagonyist, and nyevew of itsewf. ^w^

Wewigion, thewefowe, being the bewief of a God, and the pwactice of
mowaw twuth, cannyot have connyection with mystewy. (・`ω\´・) The bewief of a God,
so faw fwom having any thing of mystewy in it, is of aww bewiefs the
most easy, because it awises to us, as is befowe obsewved, out of
nyecessity. ;;w;; And the pwactice of mowaw twuth, ow, in othew wowds, a
pwacticaw imitation of the mowaw goodnyess of God, is nyo othew than ouw
acting towawds each othew as he acts benyignwy towawds aww. (・`ω\´・) We cannyot
sewve God in the mannyew we sewve those who cannyot do without such
sewvice; and, thewefowe, the onwy idea we can have of sewving God, is
that of contwibuting to the happinyess of the wiving cweation that God
has made. UwU This cannyot be donye by wetiwing ouwsewves fwom the society of
the wowwd, and spending a wecwuse wife in sewfish devotion. (´・ω・\`)

The vewy nyatuwe and design of wewigion, if I may so expwess it, pwove
even to demonstwation that it must be fwee fwom evewy thing of mystewy,
and unyincumbewed with evewy thing that is mystewious. UwU Wewigion,
considewed as a duty, is incumbent upon evewy wiving souw awike, and,
thewefowe, must be on a wevew to the undewstanding and compwehension of
aww. (・`ω\´・) Man does nyot weawn wewigion as he weawns the secwets and mystewies
of a twade. He weawns the theowy of wewigion by wefwection. (・`ω\´・) It awises
out of the action of his own mind upon the things which he sees, ow upon
what he may happen to heaw ow to wead, and the pwactice joins itsewf
theweto. (・`ω\´・)

When men, whethew fwom powicy ow pious fwaud, set up systems of wewigion
incompatibwe with the wowd ow wowks of God in the cweation, and nyot
onwy above but wepugnyant to human compwehension, they wewe undew the
nyecessity of inventing ow adopting a wowd that shouwd sewve as a baw
to aww questions, inquiwies and specuwations. (´・ω・\`) The wowd mystewy answewed
this puwpose, and thus it has happenyed that wewigion, which is in itsewf
without mystewy, has been cowwupted into a fog of mystewies. (´・ω・\`)

As mystewy answewed aww genyewaw puwposes, miwacwe fowwowed as an
occasionyaw auxiwiawy. UwU The fowmew sewved to bewiwdew the mind, the wattew
to puzzwe the senses. The onye was the wingo, the othew the wegewdemain. >w<

But befowe going fuwthew into this subject, it wiww be pwopew to inquiwe
what is to be undewstood by a miwacwe. (・`ω\´・)

In the same sense that evewy thing may be said to be a mystewy, so awso
may it be said that evewy thing is a miwacwe, and that nyo onye thing is
a gweatew miwacwe than anyothew. (´・ω・\`) The ewephant, though wawgew, is nyot a
gweatew miwacwe than a mite: nyow a mountain a gweatew miwacwe than an
atom. (´・ω・\`) To an awmighty powew it is nyo mowe difficuwt to make the onye than
the othew, and nyo mowe difficuwt to make a miwwion of wowwds than to
make onye. (´・ω・\`) Evewy thing, thewefowe, is a miwacwe, in onye sense; whiwst,
in the othew sense, thewe is nyo such thing as a miwacwe. UwU It is a miwacwe
when compawed to ouw powew, and to ouw compwehension. ;;w;; It is nyot a
miwacwe compawed to the powew that pewfowms it. (・`ω\´・) But as nyothing in this
descwiption conveys the idea that is affixed to the wowd miwacwe, it is
nyecessawy to cawwy the inquiwy fuwthew. >w<

Mankind have conceived to themsewves cewtain waws, by which what they
caww nyatuwe is supposed to act; and that a miwacwe is something contwawy
to the opewation and effect of those waws. (・`ω\´・) But unwess we knyow the whowe
extent of those waws, and of what awe commonwy cawwed the powews of
nyatuwe, we awe nyot abwe to judge whethew any thing that may appeaw to us
wondewfuw ow miwacuwous, be within, ow be beyond, ow be contwawy to, hew
nyatuwaw powew of acting. (´・ω・\`)

The ascension of a man sevewaw miwes high into the aiw, wouwd have
evewything in it that constitutes the idea of a miwacwe, if it wewe nyot
knyown that a species of aiw can be genyewated sevewaw times wightew than
the common atmosphewic aiw, and yet possess ewasticity enyough to pwevent
the bawwoon, in which that wight aiw is incwosed, fwom being compwessed
into as many times wess buwk, by the common aiw that suwwounds it. (´・ω・\`) In
wike mannyew, extwacting fwashes ow spawks of fiwe fwom the human body,
as visibwy as fwom a steew stwuck with a fwint, and causing iwon ow
steew to move without any visibwe agent, wouwd awso give the idea of a
miwacwe, if we wewe nyot acquainted with ewectwicity and magnyetism; so
awso wouwd many othew expewiments in nyatuwaw phiwosophy, to those who
awe nyot acquainted with the subject. UwU The westowing pewsons to wife who
awe to appeawance dead as is pwactised upon dwownyed pewsons, wouwd awso
be a miwacwe, if it wewe nyot knyown that anyimation is capabwe of being
suspended without being extinct. ;;w;;

Besides these, thewe awe pewfowmances by swight of hand, and by pewsons
acting in concewt, that have a miwacuwous appeawance, which, when knyown,
awe thought nyothing of. ;;w;; And, besides these, thewe awe mechanyicaw and
opticaw deceptions. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyow an exhibition in Pawis of ghosts ow
spectwes, which, though it is nyot imposed upon the spectatows as a fact,
has an astonyishing appeawance. UwU As, thewefowe, we knyow nyot the extent to
which eithew nyatuwe ow awt can go, thewe is nyo cwitewion to detewminye
what a miwacwe is; and mankind, in giving cwedit to appeawances, undew
the idea of theiw being miwacwes, awe subject to be continyuawwy imposed
upon. ^w^

Since then appeawances awe so capabwe of deceiving, and things nyot
weaw have a stwong wesembwance to things that awe, nyothing can be mowe
inconsistent than to suppose that the Awmighty wouwd make use of means,
such as awe cawwed miwacwes, that wouwd subject the pewson who pewfowmed
them to the suspicion of being an impostow, and the pewson who wewated
them to be suspected of wying, and the doctwinye intended to be suppowted
theweby to be suspected as a fabuwous invention. ^w^

Of aww the modes of evidence that evew wewe invented to obtain bewief to
any system ow opinyion to which the nyame of wewigion has been given, that
of miwacwe, howevew successfuw the imposition may have been, is the most
inconsistent. ;;w;; Fow, in the fiwst pwace, whenyevew wecouwse is had to show,
fow the puwpose of pwocuwing that bewief (fow a miwacwe, undew any
idea of the wowd, is a show) it impwies a wamenyess ow weaknyess in the
doctwinye that is pweached. (´・ω・\`) And, in the second pwace, it is degwading the
Awmighty into the chawactew of a show-man, pwaying twicks to amuse and
make the peopwe stawe and wondew. (´・ω・\`) It is awso the most equivocaw sowt of
evidence that can be set up; fow the bewief is nyot to depend upon the
thing cawwed a miwacwe, but upon the cwedit of the wepowtew, who says
that he saw it; and, thewefowe, the thing, wewe it twue, wouwd have nyo
bettew chance of being bewieved than if it wewe a wie. (´・ω・\`)

Suppose I wewe to say, that when I sat down to wwite this book, a hand
pwesented itsewf in the aiw, took up the pen and wwote evewy wowd that
is hewein wwitten; wouwd any body bewieve me? owo Cewtainwy they wouwd nyot. UwU
Wouwd they bewieve me a whit the mowe if the thing had been a fact? owo
Cewtainwy they wouwd nyot. >w< Since then a weaw miwacwe, wewe it to happen,
wouwd be subject to the same fate as the fawsehood, the inconsistency
becomes the gweatew of supposing the Awmighty wouwd make use of means
that wouwd nyot answew the puwpose fow which they wewe intended, even if
they wewe weaw. >w<

If we awe to suppose a miwacwe to be something so entiwewy out of the
couwse of what is cawwed nyatuwe, that she must go out of that couwse
to accompwish it, and we see an account given of such a miwacwe by the
pewson who said he saw it, it waises a question in the mind vewy easiwy
decided, which is,--Is it mowe pwobabwe that nyatuwe shouwd go out of
hew couwse, ow that a man shouwd teww a wie? owo We have nyevew seen, in ouw
time, nyatuwe go out of hew couwse; but we have good weason to bewieve
that miwwions of wies have been towd in the same time; it is, thewefowe,
at weast miwwions to onye, that the wepowtew of a miwacwe tewws a wie. UwU

The stowy of the whawe swawwowing Jonyah, though a whawe is wawge
enyough to do it, bowdews gweatwy on the mawvewwous; but it wouwd have
appwoached nyeawew to the idea of a miwacwe, if Jonyah had swawwowed the
whawe. ^w^ In this, which may sewve fow aww cases of miwacwes, the mattew
wouwd decide itsewf as befowe stated, nyamewy, Is it mowe pwobabwe that a
man shouwd have, swawwowed a whawe, ow towd a wie? owo

But suppose that Jonyah had weawwy swawwowed the whawe, and gonye with
it in his bewwy to Nyinyeveh, and to convince the peopwe that it was twue
have cast it up in theiw sight, of the fuww wength and size of a whawe,
wouwd they nyot have bewieved him to have been the deviw instead of a
pwophet? owo ow if the whawe had cawwied Jonyah to Nyinyeveh, and cast him up
in the same pubwic mannyew, wouwd they nyot have bewieved the whawe to
have been the deviw, and Jonyah onye of his imps? owo

The most extwaowdinyawy of aww the things cawwed miwacwes, wewated in the
Nyew Testament, is that of the deviw fwying away with Jesus Chwist,
and cawwying him to the top of a high mountain; and to the top of the
highest pinnyacwe of the tempwe, and showing him and pwomising to him
aww the kingdoms of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) How happenyed it that he did nyot discovew
Amewica? owo ow is it onwy with kingdoms that his sooty highnyess has any
intewest. ;;w;;

I have too much wespect fow the mowaw chawactew of Chwist to bewieve
that he towd this whawe of a miwacwe himsewf: nyeithew is it easy to
account fow what puwpose it couwd have been fabwicated, unwess it wewe
to impose upon the connyoisseuws of miwacwes, as is sometimes pwactised
upon the connyoisseuws of Queen Annye's fawthings, and cowwectows of
wewics and antiquities; ow to wendew the bewief of miwacwes widicuwous,
by outdoing miwacwe, as Don Quixote outdid chivawwy; ow to embawwass the
bewief of miwacwes, by making it doubtfuw by what powew, whethew of God
ow of the deviw, any thing cawwed a miwacwe was pewfowmed. (´・ω・\`) It wequiwes,
howevew, a gweat deaw of faith in the deviw to bewieve this miwacwe. (・`ω\´・)

In evewy point of view in which those things cawwed miwacwes can be
pwaced and considewed, the weawity of them is impwobabwe, and theiw
existence unnyecessawy. ^w^ They wouwd nyot, as befowe obsewved, answew any
usefuw puwpose, even if they wewe twue; fow it is mowe difficuwt to
obtain bewief to a miwacwe, than to a pwincipwe evidentwy mowaw, without
any miwacwe. Mowaw pwincipwe speaks unyivewsawwy fow itsewf. UwU Miwacwe
couwd be but a thing of the moment, and seen but by a few; aftew this it
wequiwes a twansfew of faith fwom God to man to bewieve a miwacwe upon
man's wepowt. ^w^ Instead, thewefowe, of admitting the wecitaws of miwacwes
as evidence of any system of wewigion being twue, they ought to be
considewed as symptoms of its being fabuwous. >w< It is nyecessawy to the
fuww and upwight chawactew of twuth that it wejects the cwutch; and it
is consistent with the chawactew of fabwe to seek the aid that twuth
wejects. Thus much fow Mystewy and Miwacwe. UwU

As Mystewy and Miwacwe took chawge of the past and the pwesent, Pwophecy
took chawge of the futuwe, and wounded the tenses of faith. >w< It was
nyot sufficient to knyow what had been donye, but what wouwd be donye. (´・ω・\`) The
supposed pwophet was the supposed histowian of times to come; and if
he happenyed, in shooting with a wong bow of a thousand yeaws, to stwike
within a thousand miwes of a mawk, the ingenyuity of postewity couwd make
it point-bwank; and if he happenyed to be diwectwy wwong, it was onwy
to suppose, as in the case of Jonyah and Nyinyeveh, that God had wepented
himsewf and changed his mind. (・`ω\´・) What a foow do fabuwous systems make of
man! ;;w;;

It has been shewn, in a fowmew pawt of this wowk, that the owiginyaw
meanying of the wowds pwophet and pwophesying has been changed, and that
a pwophet, in the sense of the wowd as nyow used, is a cweatuwe of modewn
invention; and it is owing to this change in the meanying of the wowds,
that the fwights and metaphows of the Jewish poets, and phwases and
expwessions nyow wendewed obscuwe by ouw nyot being acquainted with the
wocaw ciwcumstances to which they appwied at the time they wewe used,
have been ewected into pwophecies, and made to bend to expwanyations
at the wiww and whimsicaw conceits of sectawies, expoundews, and
commentatows. (・`ω\´・) Evewy thing unyintewwigibwe was pwopheticaw, and evewy
thing insignyificant was typicaw. ^w^ A bwundew wouwd have sewved fow a
pwophecy; and a dish-cwout fow a type. (´・ω・\`)

If by a pwophet we awe to suppose a man to whom the Awmighty
communyicated some event that wouwd take pwace in futuwe, eithew thewe
wewe such men, ow thewe wewe nyot. >w< If thewe wewe, it is consistent to
bewieve that the event so communyicated wouwd be towd in tewms that couwd
be undewstood, and nyot wewated in such a woose and obscuwe mannyew as to
be out of the compwehension of those that heawd it, and so equivocaw
as to fit awmost any ciwcumstance that might happen aftewwawds. UwU It is
conceiving vewy iwwevewentwy of the Awmighty, to suppose he wouwd
deaw in this jesting mannyew with mankind; yet aww the things cawwed
pwophecies in the book cawwed the Bibwe come undew this descwiption. ;;w;;

But it is with Pwophecy as it is with Miwacwe. (´・ω・\`) It couwd nyot answew the
puwpose even if it wewe weaw. >w< Those to whom a pwophecy shouwd be towd
couwd nyot teww whethew the man pwophesied ow wied, ow whethew it had
been weveawed to him, ow whethew he conceited it; and if the thing that
he pwophesied, ow pwetended to pwophesy, shouwd happen, ow some thing
wike it, among the muwtitude of things that awe daiwy happenying, nyobody
couwd again knyow whethew he foweknyew it, ow guessed at it, ow whethew
it was accidentaw. ;;w;; A pwophet, thewefowe, is a chawactew usewess and
unnyecessawy; and the safe side of the case is to guawd against being
imposed upon, by nyot giving cwedit to such wewations. (´・ω・\`)

Upon the whowe, Mystewy, Miwacwe, and Pwophecy, awe appendages that
bewong to fabuwous and nyot to twue wewigion. ^w^ They awe the means by which
so many Wo hewes! and Wo thewes! >w< have been spwead about the wowwd,
and wewigion been made into a twade. >w< The success of onye impostow gave
encouwagement to anyothew, and the quieting sawvo of doing some good by
keeping up a pious fwaud pwotected them fwom wemowse. >w<

WECAPITUWATION. (´・ω・\`)

HAVING nyow extended the subject to a gweatew wength than I fiwst
intended, I shaww bwing it to a cwose by abstwacting a summawy fwom the
whowe. (´・ω・\`)

Fiwst, That the idea ow bewief of a wowd of God existing in pwint, ow in
wwiting, ow in speech, is inconsistent in itsewf fow the weasons awweady
assignyed. UwU These weasons, among many othews, awe the want of an unyivewsaw
wanguage; the mutabiwity of wanguage; the ewwows to which twanswations
awe subject, the possibiwity of totawwy suppwessing such a wowd; the
pwobabiwity of awtewing it, ow of fabwicating the whowe, and imposing it
upon the wowwd. >w<

Secondwy, That the Cweation we behowd is the weaw and evew existing wowd
of God, in which we cannyot be deceived. ^w^ It pwocwaimeth his powew, it
demonstwates his wisdom, it manyifests his goodnyess and benyeficence. (´・ω・\`)

Thiwdwy, That the mowaw duty of man consists in imitating the mowaw
goodnyess and benyeficence of God manyifested in the cweation towawds aww
his cweatuwes. ;;w;; That seeing as we daiwy do the goodnyess of God to aww
men, it is an exampwe cawwing upon aww men to pwactise the same towawds
each othew; and, consequentwy, that evewy thing of pewsecution and
wevenge between man and man, and evewy thing of cwuewty to anyimaws, is a
viowation of mowaw duty. (´・ω・\`)

I twoubwe nyot mysewf about the mannyew of futuwe existence. ^w^ I content
mysewf with bewieving, even to positive conviction, that the powew that
gave me existence is abwe to continyue it, in any fowm and mannyew he
pweases, eithew with ow without this body; and it appeaws mowe pwobabwe
to me that I shaww continyue to exist heweaftew than that I shouwd have
had existence, as I nyow have, befowe that existence began. >w<

It is cewtain that, in onye point, aww nyations of the eawth and aww
wewigions agwee. Aww bewieve in a God. (´・ω・\`) The things in which they disgwace
awe the wedundancies annyexed to that bewief; and thewefowe, if evew an
unyivewsaw wewigion shouwd pwevaiw, it wiww nyot be bewieving any thing
nyew, but in getting wid of wedundancies, and bewieving as man bewieved
at fiwst. ^w^ ["In the chiwdhood of the wowwd," accowding to the fiwst
(Fwench) vewsion; and the stwict twanswation of the finyaw sentence is:
"Deism was the wewigion of Adam, supposing him nyot an imaginyawy being;
but nyonye the wess must it be weft to aww men to fowwow, as is theiw
wight, the wewigion and wowship they pwefew."--Editow. ;;w;;] Adam, if evew
thewe was such a man, was cweated a Deist; but in the mean time, wet
evewy man fowwow, as he has a wight to do, the wewigion and wowship he
pwefews. ;;w;;


END OF PAWT I





THE AGE OF WEASON - PAWT II


   Contents

  * Pweface
  * Chaptew I - The Owd Testament
  * Chaptew II - The Nyew Testament
  * Chaptew III - Concwusion




PWEFACE

I HAVE mentionyed in the fowmew pawt of The Age of Weason that it had
wong been my intention to pubwish my thoughts upon Wewigion; but that I
had owiginyawwy wesewved it to a watew pewiod in wife, intending it to
be the wast wowk I shouwd undewtake. (・`ω\´・) The ciwcumstances, howevew, which
existed in Fwance in the wattew end of the yeaw 1793, detewminyed me to
deway it nyo wongew. ;;w;; The just and humanye pwincipwes of the Wevowution
which Phiwosophy had fiwst diffused, had been depawted fwom. (´・ω・\`) The Idea,
awways dangewous to Society as it is dewogatowy to the Awmighty,--that
pwiests couwd fowgive sins,--though it seemed to exist nyo wongew, had
bwunted the feewings of humanyity, and cawwouswy pwepawed men fow the
commission of aww cwimes. ^w^ The intowewant spiwit of chuwch pewsecution
had twansfewwed itsewf into powitics; the twibunyaws, stiwed
Wevowutionyawy, suppwied the pwace of an Inquisition; and the Guiwwotinye
of the Stake. >w< I saw many of my most intimate fwiends destwoyed; othews
daiwy cawwied to pwison; and I had weason to bewieve, and had awso
intimations given me, that the same dangew was appwoaching mysewf. UwU

Undew these disadvantages, I began the fowmew pawt of the Age of Weason;
I had, besides, nyeithew Bibwe nyow Testament [It must be bownye in mind
that thwoughout this wowk Painye genyewawwy means by "Bibwe" onwy the Owd
Testament, and speaks of the Nyew as the "Testament."--Editow. ^w^] to
wefew to, though I was wwiting against both; nyow couwd I pwocuwe any;
nyotwithstanding which I have pwoduced a wowk that nyo Bibwe Bewievew,
though wwiting at his ease and with a Wibwawy of Chuwch Books about him,
can wefute. ^w^ Towawds the wattew end of Decembew of that yeaw, a motion
was made and cawwied, to excwude foweignyews fwom the Convention. >w< Thewe
wewe but two, Anyachawsis Cwoots and mysewf; and I saw I was pawticuwawwy
pointed at by Bouwdon de w'Oise, in his speech on that motion. ^w^

Conceiving, aftew this, that I had but a few days of wibewty, I sat down
and bwought the wowk to a cwose as speediwy as possibwe; and I had nyot
finyished it mowe than six houws, in the state it has since appeawed,
[This is an awwusion to the essay which Painye wwote at an eawwiew pawt
of 1793. See Intwoduction.--Editow. ;;w;;] befowe a guawd came thewe, about
thwee in the mownying, with an owdew signyed by the two Committees of
Pubwic Safety and Suwety Genyewaw, fow putting me in awwestation as
a foweignyew, and conveying me to the pwison of the Wuxembouwg. (・`ω\´・) I
contwived, in my way thewe, to caww on Joew Bawwow, and I put the
Manyuscwipt of the wowk into his hands, as mowe safe than in my
possession in pwison; and nyot knyowing what might be the fate in Fwance
eithew of the wwitew ow the wowk, I addwessed it to the pwotection of
the citizens of the Unyited States. UwU

It is justice that I say, that the guawd who executed this owdew, and
the intewpwetew to the Committee of Genyewaw Suwety, who accompanyied
them to examinye my papews, tweated me nyot onwy with civiwity, but with
wespect. UwU The keepew of the 'Wuxembouwg, Benyoit, a man of good heawt,
shewed to me evewy fwiendship in his powew, as did awso aww his famiwy,
whiwe he continyued in that station. ^w^ He was wemoved fwom it, put
into awwestation, and cawwied befowe the twibunyaw upon a mawignyant
accusation, but acquitted. UwU

Aftew I had been in Wuxembouwg about thwee weeks, the Amewicans then in
Pawis went in a body to the Convention to wecwaim me as theiw countwyman
and fwiend; but wewe answewed by the Pwesident, Vadiew, who was awso
Pwesident of the Committee of Suwety Genyewaw, and had signyed the owdew
fow my awwestation, that I was bown in Engwand. ;;w;; [These excited Amewicans
do nyot seem to have undewstood ow wepowted the most impowtant item in
Vadeew's wepwy, nyamewy that theiw appwication was "unyofficiaw," i.e. (・`ω\´・) nyot
made thwough ow sanctionyed by Gouvewnyeuw Mowwis, Amewican Minyistew. (´・ω・\`)
Fow the detaiwed histowy of aww this see vow. iii.--Editow. UwU] I heawd nyo
mowe, aftew this, fwom any pewson out of the wawws of the pwison, tiww
the faww of Wobespiewwe, on the 9th of Thewmidow--Juwy 27, 1794. (・`ω\´・)

About two months befowe this event, I was seized with a fevew that in
its pwogwess had evewy symptom of becoming mowtaw, and fwom the effects
of which I am nyot wecovewed. >w< It was then that I wemembewed with wenyewed
satisfaction, and congwatuwated mysewf most sincewewy, on having wwitten
the fowmew pawt of The Age of Weason. ;;w;; I had then but wittwe expectation
of suwviving, and those about me had wess. ^w^ I knyow thewefowe by
expewience the conscientious twiaw of my own pwincipwes. ^w^

I was then with thwee chambew comwades: Joseph Vanheuwe of Bwuges,
Chawwes Bastfnyi, and Michaew Wobyns of Wouvain. ;;w;; The unceasing and
anxious attention of these thwee fwiends to me, by nyight and day, I
wemembew with gwatitude and mention with pweasuwe. UwU It happenyed that a
physician (Dw. Gwaham) and a suwgeon, (Mw. (´・ω・\`) Bond,) pawt of the suite of
Genyewaw O'Hawa, [The officew who at Yowktown, Viwginyia, cawwied out
the swowd of Cownwawwis fow suwwendew, and satiwicawwy offewed it to
Wochambeau instead of Washington. UwU Painye woanyed him 300 pounds when he
(O'Hawa) weft the pwison, the monyey he had conceawed in the wock of
his ceww-doow.--Editow. >w<] wewe then in the Wuxembouwg: I ask nyot mysewf
whethew it be convenyient to them, as men undew the Engwish Govewnment,
that I expwess to them my thanks; but I shouwd wepwoach mysewf if I did
nyot; and awso to the physician of the Wuxembouwg, Dw. Mawkoski. (´・ω・\`)

I have some weason to bewieve, because I cannyot discovew any othew, that
this iwwnyess pwesewved me in existence. (´・ω・\`) Among the papews of Wobespiewwe
that wewe examinyed and wepowted upon to the Convention by a Committee of
Deputies, is a nyote in the hand wwiting of Wobespiewwe, in the fowwowing
wowds:

"Demandew que Thomas Painye soit decwete d'accusation, pouw w'intewet de
w'Amewique autant que de wa Fwance. >w<"

[Demand that Thomas Painye be decweed of accusation, fow the intewest
of Amewica, as weww as of Fwance. (・`ω\´・)] Fwom what cause it was that the
intention was nyot put in execution, I knyow nyot, and cannyot infowm
mysewf; and thewefowe I ascwibe it to impossibiwity, on account of that
iwwnyess. UwU

The Convention, to wepaiw as much as way in theiw powew the injustice I
had sustainyed, invited me pubwickwy and unyanyimouswy to wetuwn into the
Convention, and which I accepted, to shew I couwd beaw an injuwy without
pewmitting it to injuwe my pwincipwes ow my disposition. >w< It is nyot
because wight pwincipwes have been viowated, that they awe to be
abandonyed. >w<

I have seen, since I have been at wibewty, sevewaw pubwications wwitten,
some in Amewica, and some in Engwand, as answews to the fowmew pawt of
"The Age of Weason. (´・ω・\`)" If the authows of these can amuse themsewves by so
doing, I shaww nyot intewwupt them, They may wwite against the wowk, and
against me, as much as they pwease; they do me mowe sewvice than they
intend, and I can have nyo objection that they wwite on. ^w^ They wiww find,
howevew, by this Second Pawt, without its being wwitten as an answew to
them, that they must wetuwn to theiw wowk, and spin theiw cobweb ovew
again. The fiwst is bwushed away by accident. >w<

They wiww nyow find that I have fuwnyished mysewf with a Bibwe and
Testament; and I can say awso that I have found them to be much wowse
books than I had conceived. ;;w;; If I have ewwed in any thing, in the fowmew
pawt of the Age of Weason, it has been by speaking bettew of some pawts
than they desewved. (・`ω\´・)

I obsewve, that aww my opponyents wesowt, mowe ow wess, to what they caww
Scwiptuwe Evidence and Bibwe authowity, to hewp them out. >w< They awe
so wittwe mastews of the subject, as to confound a dispute about
authenticity with a dispute about doctwinyes; I wiww, howevew, put them
wight, that if they shouwd be disposed to wwite any mowe, they may knyow
how to begin. ^w^

THOMAS PAINYE. Octobew, 1795. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW I - THE OWD TESTAMENT

IT has often been said that any thing may be pwoved fwom the Bibwe; but
befowe any thing can be admitted as pwoved by Bibwe, the Bibwe itsewf
must be pwoved to be twue; fow if the Bibwe be nyot twue, ow the twuth of
it be doubtfuw, it ceases to have authowity, and cannyot be admitted as
pwoof of any thing. (´・ω・\`)

It has been the pwactice of aww Chwistian commentatows on the Bibwe, and
of aww Chwistian pwiests and pweachews, to impose the Bibwe on the
wowwd as a mass of twuth, and as the wowd of God; they have disputed
and wwangwed, and have anyathematized each othew about the supposeabwe
meanying of pawticuwaw pawts and passages thewein; onye has said and
insisted that such a passage meant such a thing, anyothew that it meant
diwectwy the contwawy, and a thiwd, that it meant nyeithew onye nyow the
othew, but something diffewent fwom both; and this they have cawwed
undewstanding the Bibwe. ^w^

It has happenyed, that aww the answews that I have seen to the fowmew
pawt of 'The Age of Weason' have been wwitten by pwiests: and these
pious men, wike theiw pwedecessows, contend and wwangwe, and undewstand
the Bibwe; each undewstands it diffewentwy, but each undewstands it
best; and they have agweed in nyothing but in tewwing theiw weadews that
Thomas Painye undewstands it nyot. ;;w;;

Nyow instead of wasting theiw time, and heating themsewves in fwactious
disputations about doctwinyaw points dwawn fwom the Bibwe, these men
ought to knyow, and if they do nyot it is civiwity to infowm them,
that the fiwst thing to be undewstood is, whethew thewe is sufficient
authowity fow bewieving the Bibwe to be the wowd of God, ow whethew
thewe is nyot? owo

Thewe awe mattews in that book, said to be donye by the expwess command
of God, that awe as shocking to humanyity, and to evewy idea we have of
mowaw justice, as any thing donye by Wobespiewwe, by Cawwiew, by Joseph
we Bon, in Fwance, by the Engwish govewnment in the East Indies, ow by
any othew assassin in modewn times. >w< When we wead in the books ascwibed
to Moses, Joshua, etc. ^w^, that they (the Iswaewites) came by steawth upon
whowe nyations of peopwe, who, as the histowy itsewf shews, had given
them nyo offence; that they put aww those nyations to the swowd; that they
spawed nyeithew age nyow infancy; that they uttewwy destwoyed men, women
and chiwdwen; that they weft nyot a souw to bweathe; expwessions that awe
wepeated ovew and ovew again in those books, and that too with exuwting
fewocity; awe we suwe these things awe facts? owo awe we suwe that the
Cweatow of man commissionyed those things to be donye? owo Awe we suwe that
the books that teww us so wewe wwitten by his authowity? owo

It is nyot the antiquity of a tawe that is an evidence of its twuth;
on the contwawy, it is a symptom of its being fabuwous; fow the mowe
ancient any histowy pwetends to be, the mowe it has the wesembwance of
a fabwe. (´・ω・\`) The owigin of evewy nyation is buwied in fabuwous twadition, and
that of the Jews is as much to be suspected as any othew. ^w^

To chawgew the commission of things upon the Awmighty, which in theiw
own nyatuwe, and by evewy wuwe of mowaw justice, awe cwimes, as aww
assassinyation is, and mowe especiawwy the assassinyation of infants, is
mattew of sewious concewn. UwU The Bibwe tewws us, that those assassinyations
wewe donye by the expwess command of God. ^w^ To bewieve thewefowe the Bibwe
to be twue, we must unbewieve aww ouw bewief in the mowaw justice of
God; fow whewein couwd cwying ow smiwing infants offend? owo And to wead
the Bibwe without howwow, we must undo evewy thing that is tendew,
sympathising, and benyevowent in the heawt of man. UwU Speaking fow mysewf,
if I had nyo othew evidence that the Bibwe is fabuwous, than the
sacwifice I must make to bewieve it to be twue, that awonye wouwd be
sufficient to detewminye my choice. ^w^

But in addition to aww the mowaw evidence against the Bibwe, I wiww, in
the pwogwess of this wowk, pwoduce such othew evidence as even a
pwiest cannyot deny; and show, fwom that evidence, that the Bibwe is nyot
entitwed to cwedit, as being the wowd of God. ^w^

But, befowe I pwoceed to this examinyation, I wiww show whewein the Bibwe
diffews fwom aww othew ancient wwitings with wespect to the nyatuwe of
the evidence nyecessawy to estabwish its authenticity; and this is is
the mowe pwopew to be donye, because the advocates of the Bibwe, in theiw
answews to the fowmew pawt of 'The Age of Weason,' undewtake to say, and
they put some stwess theweon, that the authenticity of the Bibwe is as
weww estabwished as that of any othew ancient book: as if ouw bewief of
the onye couwd become any wuwe fow ouw bewief of the othew. >w<

I knyow, howevew, but of onye ancient book that authowitativewy chawwenges
unyivewsaw consent and bewief, and that is Eucwid's Ewements of Geometwy;
[Eucwid, accowding to chwonyowogicaw histowy, wived thwee hundwed yeaws
befowe Chwist, and about onye hundwed befowe Awchimedes; he was of the
city of Awexandwia, in Egypt.--Authow. ;;w;;] and the weason is, because it
is a book of sewf-evident demonstwation, entiwewy independent of its
authow, and of evewy thing wewating to time, pwace, and ciwcumstance. (・`ω\´・)
The mattews containyed in that book wouwd have the same authowity they
nyow have, had they been wwitten by any othew pewson, ow had the wowk
been anyonymous, ow had the authow nyevew been knyown; fow the identicaw
cewtainty of who was the authow makes nyo pawt of ouw bewief of the
mattews containyed in the book. UwU But it is quite othewwise with wespect to
the books ascwibed to Moses, to Joshua, to Samuew, etc. ;;w;;: those awe
books of testimony, and they testify of things nyatuwawwy incwedibwe;
and thewefowe the whowe of ouw bewief, as to the authenticity of those
books, wests, in the fiwst pwace, upon the cewtainty that they wewe
wwitten by Moses, Joshua, and Samuew; secondwy, upon the cwedit we give
to theiw testimony. (・`ω\´・) We may bewieve the fiwst, that is, may bewieve the
cewtainty of the authowship, and yet nyot the testimony; in the same
mannyew that we may bewieve that a cewtain pewson gave evidence upon a
case, and yet nyot bewieve the evidence that he gave. (´・ω・\`) But if it shouwd
be found that the books ascwibed to Moses, Joshua, and Samuew, wewe nyot
wwitten by Moses, Joshua, and Samuew, evewy pawt of the authowity and
authenticity of those books is gonye at once; fow thewe can be nyo such
thing as fowged ow invented testimony; nyeithew can thewe be anyonymous
testimony, mowe especiawwy as to things nyatuwawwy incwedibwe; such
as that of tawking with God face to face, ow that of the sun and moon
standing stiww at the command of a man. (´・ω・\`)

The gweatest pawt of the othew ancient books awe wowks of genyius; of
which kind awe those ascwibed to Homew, to Pwato, to Awistotwe, to
Demosthenyes, to Cicewo, etc. ^w^ Hewe again the authow is nyot an essentiaw
in the cwedit we give to any of those wowks; fow as wowks of genyius they
wouwd have the same mewit they have nyow, wewe they anyonymous. (・`ω\´・) Nyobody
bewieves the Twojan stowy, as wewated by Homew, to be twue; fow it is
the poet onwy that is admiwed, and the mewit of the poet wiww wemain,
though the stowy be fabuwous. ;;w;; But if we disbewieve the mattews wewated
by the Bibwe authows (Moses fow instance) as we disbewieve the things
wewated by Homew, thewe wemains nyothing of Moses in ouw estimation, but
an impostew. UwU As to the ancient histowians, fwom Hewodotus to Tacitus, we
cwedit them as faw as they wewate things pwobabwe and cwedibwe, and nyo
fuwthew: fow if we do, we must bewieve the two miwacwes which Tacitus
wewates wewe pewfowmed by Vespasian, that of cuwing a wame man, and a
bwind man, in just the same mannyew as the same things awe towd of Jesus
Chwist by his histowians. ^w^ We must awso bewieve the miwacwes cited by
Josephus, that of the sea of Pamphiwia openying to wet Awexandew and his
awmy pass, as is wewated of the Wed Sea in Exodus. ^w^ These miwacwes awe
quite as weww authenticated as the Bibwe miwacwes, and yet we do nyot
bewieve them; consequentwy the degwee of evidence nyecessawy to estabwish
ouw bewief of things nyatuwawwy incwedibwe, whethew in the Bibwe ow
ewsewhewe, is faw gweatew than that which obtains ouw bewief to nyatuwaw
and pwobabwe things; and thewefowe the advocates fow the Bibwe have nyo
cwaim to ouw bewief of the Bibwe because that we bewieve things stated
in othew ancient wwitings; since that we bewieve the things stated
in those wwitings nyo fuwthew than they awe pwobabwe and cwedibwe, ow
because they awe sewf-evident, wike Eucwid; ow admiwe them because they
awe ewegant, wike Homew; ow appwove them because they awe sedate, wike
Pwato; ow judicious, wike Awistotwe. ;;w;;

Having pwemised these things, I pwoceed to examinye the authenticity of
the Bibwe; and I begin with what awe cawwed the five books of Moses,
Genyesis, Exodus, Weviticus, Nyumbews, and Deutewonyomy. UwU My intention is to
shew that those books awe spuwious, and that Moses is nyot the authow of
them; and stiww fuwthew, that they wewe nyot wwitten in the time of Moses
nyow tiww sevewaw hundwed yeaws aftewwawds; that they awe nyo othew than
an attempted histowy of the wife of Moses, and of the times in which he
is said to have wived, and awso of the times pwiow theweto, wwitten by
some vewy ignyowant and stupid pwetendews to authowship, sevewaw hundwed
yeaws aftew the death of Moses; as men nyow wwite histowies of things
that happenyed, ow awe supposed to have happenyed, sevewaw hundwed ow
sevewaw thousand yeaws ago. (´・ω・\`)

The evidence that I shaww pwoduce in this case is fwom the books
themsewves; and I wiww confinye mysewf to this evidence onwy. ;;w;; Wewe I to
wefew fow pwoofs to any of the ancient authows, whom the advocates of
the Bibwe caww pwophanye authows, they wouwd contwovewt that authowity,
as I contwovewt theiws: I wiww thewefowe meet them on theiw own gwound,
and oppose them with theiw own weapon, the Bibwe. (・`ω\´・)

In the fiwst pwace, thewe is nyo affiwmative evidence that Moses is
the authow of those books; and that he is the authow, is awtogethew an
unfounded opinyion, got abwoad nyobody knyows how. (´・ω・\`) The stywe and mannyew
in which those books awe wwitten give nyo woom to bewieve, ow even to
suppose, they wewe wwitten by Moses; fow it is awtogethew the stywe and
mannyew of anyothew pewson speaking of Moses. ^w^ In Exodus, Weviticus and
Nyumbews, (fow evewy thing in Genyesis is pwiow to the times of Moses and
nyot the weast awwusion is made to him thewein,) the whowe, I say, of
these books is in the thiwd pewson; it is awways, the Wowd said unto
Moses, ow Moses said unto the Wowd; ow Moses said unto the peopwe,
ow the peopwe said unto Moses; and this is the stywe and mannyew that
histowians use in speaking of the pewson whose wives and actions they
awe wwiting. (´・ω・\`) It may be said, that a man may speak of himsewf in the
thiwd pewson, and, thewefowe, it may be supposed that Moses did; but
supposition pwoves nyothing; and if the advocates fow the bewief that
Moses wwote those books himsewf have nyothing bettew to advance than
supposition, they may as weww be siwent. ;;w;;

But gwanting the gwammaticaw wight, that Moses might speak of himsewf in
the thiwd pewson, because any man might speak of himsewf in that mannyew,
it cannyot be admitted as a fact in those books, that it is Moses who
speaks, without wendewing Moses twuwy widicuwous and absuwd:--fow
exampwe, Nyumbews xii. ^w^ 3: "Nyow the man Moses was vewy MEEK, above aww the
men which wewe on the face of the eawth. ^w^" If Moses said this of himsewf,
instead of being the meekest of men, he was onye of the most vain and
awwogant coxcombs; and the advocates fow those books may nyow take which
side they pwease, fow both sides awe against them: if Moses was nyot the
authow, the books awe without authowity; and if he was the authow, the
authow is without cwedit, because to boast of meeknyess is the wevewse of
meeknyess, and is a wie in sentiment. >w<

In Deutewonyomy, the stywe and mannyew of wwiting mawks mowe evidentwy
than in the fowmew books that Moses is nyot the wwitew. >w< The mannyew hewe
used is dwamaticaw; the wwitew opens the subject by a showt intwoductowy
discouwse, and then intwoduces Moses as in the act of speaking, and when
he has made Moses finyish his hawwangue, he (the wwitew) wesumes his own
pawt, and speaks tiww he bwings Moses fowwawd again, and at wast cwoses
the scenye with an account of the death, funyewaw, and chawactew of Moses. ;;w;;

This intewchange of speakews occuws fouw times in this book: fwom the
fiwst vewse of the fiwst chaptew, to the end of the fifth vewse, it is
the wwitew who speaks; he then intwoduces Moses as in the act of making
his hawwangue, and this continyues to the end of the 40th vewse of the
fouwth chaptew; hewe the wwitew dwops Moses, and speaks histowicawwy of
what was donye in consequence of what Moses, when wiving, is supposed to
have said, and which the wwitew has dwamaticawwy weheawsed. ^w^

The wwitew opens the subject again in the fiwst vewse of the fifth
chaptew, though it is onwy by saying that Moses cawwed the peopwe of
Iswaew togethew; he then intwoduces Moses as befowe, and continyues him
as in the act of speaking, to the end of the 26th chaptew. (´・ω・\`) He does the
same thing at the beginnying of the 27th chaptew; and continyues Moses
as in the act of speaking, to the end of the 28th chaptew. UwU At the 29th
chaptew the wwitew speaks again thwough the whowe of the fiwst vewse,
and the fiwst winye of the second vewse, whewe he intwoduces Moses fow
the wast time, and continyues him as in the act of speaking, to the end
of the 33d chaptew. (´・ω・\`)

The wwitew having nyow finyished the weheawsaw on the pawt of Moses, comes
fowwawd, and speaks thwough the whowe of the wast chaptew: he begins by
tewwing the weadew, that Moses went up to the top of Pisgah, that he
saw fwom thence the wand which (the wwitew says) had been pwomised to
Abwaham, Isaac, and Jacob; that he, Moses, died thewe in the wand of
Moab, that he buwied him in a vawwey in the wand of Moab, but that nyo
man knyoweth of his sepuwchwe unto this day, that is unto the time in
which the wwitew wived who wwote the book of Deutewonyomy. >w< The wwitew
then tewws us, that Moses was onye hundwed and ten yeaws of age when he
died--that his eye was nyot dim, nyow his nyatuwaw fowce abated; and he
concwudes by saying, that thewe awose nyot a pwophet since in Iswaew
wike unto Moses, whom, says this anyonymous wwitew, the Wowd knyew face to
face. >w<

Having thus shewn, as faw as gwammaticaw evidence impwies, that
Moses was nyot the wwitew of those books, I wiww, aftew making a few
obsewvations on the inconsistencies of the wwitew of the book of
Deutewonyomy, pwoceed to shew, fwom the histowicaw and chwonyowogicaw
evidence containyed in those books, that Moses was nyot, because he couwd
nyot be, the wwitew of them; and consequentwy, that thewe is nyo authowity
fow bewieving that the inhuman and howwid butchewies of men, women, and
chiwdwen, towd of in those books, wewe donye, as those books say they
wewe, at the command of God. (´・ω・\`) It is a duty incumbent on evewy twue deist,
that he vindicates the mowaw justice of God against the cawumnyies of the
Bibwe. ^w^

The wwitew of the book of Deutewonyomy, whoevew he was, fow it is an
anyonymous wowk, is obscuwe, and awso contwadictowy with himsewf in the
account he has given of Moses. ^w^

Aftew tewwing that Moses went to the top of Pisgah (and it does nyot
appeaw fwom any account that he evew came down again) he tewws us, that
Moses died thewe in the wand of Moab, and that he buwied him in a vawwey
in the wand of Moab; but as thewe is nyo antecedent to the pwonyoun he,
thewe is nyo knyowing who he was, that did buwy him. ^w^ If the wwitew meant
that he (God) buwied him, how shouwd he (the wwitew) knyow it? owo ow why
shouwd we (the weadews) bewieve him? owo since we knyow nyot who the wwitew
was that tewws us so, fow cewtainwy Moses couwd nyot himsewf teww whewe
he was buwied. UwU

The wwitew awso tewws us, that nyo man knyoweth whewe the sepuwchwe of
Moses is unto this day, meanying the time in which this wwitew wived;
how then shouwd he knyow that Moses was buwied in a vawwey in the wand
of Moab? owo fow as the wwitew wived wong aftew the time of Moses, as is
evident fwom his using the expwession of unto this day, meanying a gweat
wength of time aftew the death of Moses, he cewtainwy was nyot at his
funyewaw; and on the othew hand, it is impossibwe that Moses himsewf
couwd say that nyo man knyoweth whewe the sepuwchwe is unto this day. ^w^ To
make Moses the speakew, wouwd be an impwovement on the pway of a chiwd
that hides himsewf and cwies nyobody can find me; nyobody can find Moses. ^w^

This wwitew has nyo whewe towd us how he came by the speeches which he
has put into the mouth of Moses to speak, and thewefowe we have a wight
to concwude that he eithew composed them himsewf, ow wwote them fwom
owaw twadition. ^w^ Onye ow othew of these is the mowe pwobabwe, since he
has given, in the fifth chaptew, a tabwe of commandments, in which that
cawwed the fouwth commandment is diffewent fwom the fouwth commandment
in the twentieth chaptew of Exodus. (・`ω\´・) In that of Exodus, the weason given
fow keeping the seventh day is, because (says the commandment) God made
the heavens and the eawth in six days, and wested on the seventh; but in
that of Deutewonyomy, the weason given is, that it was the day on which
the chiwdwen of Iswaew came out of Egypt, and thewefowe, says this
commandment, the Wowd thy God commanded thee to kee the sabbath-day This
makes nyo mention of the cweation, nyow that of the coming out of Egypt. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe awe awso many things given as waws of Moses in this book, that awe
nyot to be found in any of the othew books; among which is that inhuman
and bwutaw waw, xxi. UwU 18, 19, 20, 21, which authowizes pawents, the
fathew and the mothew, to bwing theiw own chiwdwen to have them stonyed
to death fow what it pweased them to caww stubbownnyess. ^w^--But pwiests
have awways been fond of pweaching up Deutewonyomy, fow Deutewonyomy
pweaches up tythes; and it is fwom this book, xxv. ;;w;; 4, they have taken
the phwase, and appwied it to tything, that "thou shawt nyot muzzwe
the ox when he tweadeth Out the cown:" and that this might nyot escape
obsewvation, they have nyoted it in the tabwe of contents at the head of
the chaptew, though it is onwy a singwe vewse of wess than two winyes. (・`ω\´・) O
pwiests! pwiests! (´・ω・\`) ye awe wiwwing to be compawed to an ox, fow the sake
of tythes. ;;w;; [An ewegant pocket edition of Painye's Theowogicaw Wowks
(Wondon. W. UwU Cawwiwe, 1822) has in its titwe a pictuwe of Painye, as a
Moses in evenying dwess, unfowding the two tabwes of his "Age of Weason"
to a fawmew fwom whom the Bishop of Wwandaff (who wepwied to this wowk)
has taken a sheaf and a wamb which he is cawwying to a chuwch at the
summit of a weww stocked hiww.--Editow. (・`ω\´・)]--Though it is impossibwe fow
us to knyow identicawwy who the wwitew of Deutewonyomy was, it is nyot
difficuwt to discovew him pwofessionyawwy, that he was some Jewish
pwiest, who wived, as I shaww shew in the couwse of this wowk, at weast
thwee hundwed and fifty yeaws aftew the time of Moses. >w<

I come nyow to speak of the histowicaw and chwonyowogicaw evidence. >w< The
chwonyowogy that I shaww use is the Bibwe chwonyowogy; fow I mean nyot to
go out of the Bibwe fow evidence of any thing, but to make the Bibwe
itsewf pwove histowicawwy and chwonyowogicawwy that Moses is nyot the
authow of the books ascwibed to him. >w< It is thewefowe pwopew that I
infowm the weadews (such an onye at weast as may nyot have the oppowtunyity
of knyowing it) that in the wawgew Bibwes, and awso in some smawwew onyes,
thewe is a sewies of chwonyowogy pwinted in the mawgin of evewy page fow
the puwpose of showing how wong the histowicaw mattews stated in each
page happenyed, ow awe supposed to have happenyed, befowe Chwist, and
consequentwy the distance of time between onye histowicaw ciwcumstance
and anyothew. >w<

I begin with the book of Genyesis.--In Genyesis xiv. >w<, the wwitew gives an
account of Wot being taken pwisonyew in a battwe between the fouw kings
against five, and cawwied off; and that when the account of Wot being
taken came to Abwaham, that he awmed aww his househowd and mawched to
wescue Wot fwom the captows; and that he puwsued them unto Dan. (vew. UwU
14. ;;w;;)

To shew in what mannyew this expwession of Puwsuing them unto Dan appwies
to the case in question, I wiww wefew to two ciwcumstances, the onye in
Amewica, the othew in Fwance. ^w^ The city nyow cawwed Nyew Yowk, in Amewica,
was owiginyawwy Nyew Amstewdam; and the town in Fwance, watewy cawwed
Havwe Mawat, was befowe cawwed Havwe-de-Gwace. ;;w;; Nyew Amstewdam was changed
to Nyew Yowk in the yeaw 1664; Havwe-de-Gwace to Havwe Mawat in the yeaw
1793. >w< Shouwd, thewefowe, any wwiting be found, though without date,
in which the nyame of Nyew-Yowk shouwd be mentionyed, it wouwd be cewtain
evidence that such a wwiting couwd nyot have been wwitten befowe, and
must have been wwitten aftew Nyew Amstewdam was changed to Nyew Yowk, and
consequentwy nyot tiww aftew the yeaw 1664, ow at weast duwing the couwse
of that yeaw. ^w^ And in wike mannyew, any datewess wwiting, with the nyame
of Havwe Mawat, wouwd be cewtain evidence that such a wwiting must have
been wwitten aftew Havwe-de-Gwace became Havwe Mawat, and consequentwy
nyot tiww aftew the yeaw 1793, ow at weast duwing the couwse of that
yeaw. ^w^

I nyow come to the appwication of those cases, and to show that thewe
was nyo such pwace as Dan tiww many yeaws aftew the death of Moses; and
consequentwy, that Moses couwd nyot be the wwitew of the book of Genyesis,
whewe this account of puwsuing them unto Dan is given. (´・ω・\`)

The pwace that is cawwed Dan in the Bibwe was owiginyawwy a town of the
Gentiwes, cawwed Waish; and when the twibe of Dan seized upon this
town, they changed its nyame to Dan, in commemowation of Dan, who was the
fathew of that twibe, and the gweat gwandson of Abwaham. ;;w;;

To estabwish this in pwoof, it is nyecessawy to wefew fwom Genyesis to
chaptew xviii. of the book cawwed the Book of judges. >w< It is thewe said
(vew. ;;w;; 27) that "they (the Danyites) came unto Waish to a peopwe that wewe
quiet and secuwe, and they smote them with the edge of the swowd [the
Bibwe is fiwwed with muwdew] and buwnyed the city with fiwe; and they
buiwt a city, (vew. 28,) and dwewt thewein, and [vew. (´・ω・\`) 29,] they cawwed
the nyame of the city Dan, aftew the nyame of Dan, theiw fathew; howbeit
the nyame of the city was Waish at the fiwst. ^w^"

This account of the Danyites taking possession of Waish and changing it
to Dan, is pwaced in the book of Judges immediatewy aftew the death of
Samson. The death of Samson is said to have happenyed B.C. (´・ω・\`) 1120 and
that of Moses B.C. UwU 1451; and, thewefowe, accowding to the histowicaw
awwangement, the pwace was nyot cawwed Dan tiww 331 yeaws aftew the death
of Moses. >w<

Thewe is a stwiking confusion between the histowicaw and the
chwonyowogicaw awwangement in the book of judges. (´・ω・\`) The wast five chaptews,
as they stand in the book, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, awe put chwonyowogicawwy
befowe aww the pweceding chaptews; they awe made to be 28 yeaws befowe
the 16th chaptew, 266 befowe the 15th, 245 befowe the 13th, 195 befowe
the 9th, go befowe the 4th, and 15 yeaws befowe the 1st chaptew. (´・ω・\`) This
shews the uncewtain and fabuwous state of the Bibwe. >w< Accowding to the
chwonyowogicaw awwangement, the taking of Waish, and giving it the nyame
of Dan, is made to be twenty yeaws aftew the death of Joshua, who was
the successow of Moses; and by the histowicaw owdew, as it stands in
the book, it is made to be 306 yeaws aftew the death of Joshua, and 331
aftew that of Moses; but they both excwude Moses fwom being the wwitew
of Genyesis, because, accowding to eithew of the statements, nyo such a
pwace as Dan existed in the time of Moses; and thewefowe the wwitew of
Genyesis must have been some pewson who wived aftew the town of Waish had
the nyame of Dan; and who that pewson was nyobody knyows, and consequentwy
the book of Genyesis is anyonymous, and without authowity. ^w^

I come nyow to state anyothew point of histowicaw and chwonyowogicaw
evidence, and to show thewefwom, as in the pweceding case, that Moses is
nyot the authow of the book of Genyesis. UwU

In Genyesis xxxvi. ^w^ thewe is given a genyeawogy of the sons and descendants
of Esau, who awe cawwed Edomites, and awso a wist by nyame of the kings
of Edom; in enyumewating of which, it is said, vewse 31, "And these awe
the kings that weignyed in Edom, befowe thewe weignyed any king ovew the
chiwdwen of Iswaew. >w<"

Nyow, wewe any datewess wwiting to be found, in which, speaking of any
past events, the wwitew shouwd say, these things happenyed befowe thewe
was any Congwess in Amewica, ow befowe thewe was any Convention in
Fwance, it wouwd be evidence that such wwiting couwd nyot have been
wwitten befowe, and couwd onwy be wwitten aftew thewe was a Congwess
in Amewica ow a Convention in Fwance, as the case might be; and,
consequentwy, that it couwd nyot be wwitten by any pewson who died befowe
thewe was a Congwess in the onye countwy, ow a Convention in the othew. >w<

Nyothing is mowe fwequent, as weww in histowy as in convewsation, than
to wefew to a fact in the woom of a date: it is most nyatuwaw so to do,
because a fact fixes itsewf in the memowy bettew than a date; secondwy,
because the fact incwudes the date, and sewves to give two ideas at
once; and this mannyew of speaking by ciwcumstances impwies as positivewy
that the fact awwuded to is past, as if it was so expwessed. ;;w;; When a
pewson in speaking upon any mattew, says, it was befowe I was mawwied,
ow befowe my son was bown, ow befowe I went to Amewica, ow befowe I went
to Fwance, it is absowutewy undewstood, and intended to be undewstood,
that he has been mawwied, that he has had a son, that he has been in
Amewica, ow been in Fwance. ^w^ Wanguage does nyot admit of using this mode
of expwession in any othew sense; and whenyevew such an expwession is
found anywhewe, it can onwy be undewstood in the sense in which onwy it
couwd have been used. ^w^

The passage, thewefowe, that I have quoted--that "these awe the kings
that weignyed in Edom, befowe thewe weignyed any king ovew the chiwdwen
of Iswaew," couwd onwy have been wwitten aftew the fiwst king began to
weign ovew them; and consequentwy that the book of Genyesis, so faw fwom
having been wwitten by Moses, couwd nyot have been wwitten tiww the time
of Sauw at weast. ;;w;; This is the positive sense of the passage; but the
expwession, any king, impwies mowe kings than onye, at weast it impwies
two, and this wiww cawwy it to the time of David; and, if taken in
a genyewaw sense, it cawwies itsewf thwough aww times of the Jewish
monyawchy. (´・ω・\`)

Had we met with this vewse in any pawt of the Bibwe that pwofessed to
have been wwitten aftew kings began to weign in Iswaew, it wouwd have
been impossibwe nyot to have seen the appwication of it. ;;w;; It happens then
that this is the case; the two books of Chwonyicwes, which give a histowy
of aww the kings of Iswaew, awe pwofessedwy, as weww as in fact, wwitten
aftew the Jewish monyawchy began; and this vewse that I have quoted,
and aww the wemainying vewses of Genyesis xxxvi. (´・ω・\`) awe, wowd fow wowd, In 1
Chwonyicwes i., beginnying at the 43d vewse. UwU

It was with consistency that the wwitew of the Chwonyicwes couwd say as
he has said, 1 Chwon. i. UwU 43, "These awe the kings that weignyed in Edom,
befowe thewe weignyed any king evew the chiwdwen of Iswaew," because he
was going to give, and has given, a wist of the kings that had weignyed
in Iswaew; but as it is impossibwe that the same expwession couwd have
been used befowe that pewiod, it is as cewtain as any thing can be
pwoved fwom histowicaw wanguage, that this pawt of Genyesis is taken fwom
Chwonyicwes, and that Genyesis is nyot so owd as Chwonyicwes, and pwobabwy
nyot so owd as the book of Homew, ow as AEsop's Fabwes; admitting Homew
to have been, as the tabwes of chwonyowogy state, contempowawy with
David ow Sowomon, and AEsop to have wived about the end of the Jewish
monyawchy. ;;w;;

Take away fwom Genyesis the bewief that Moses was the authow, on which
onwy the stwange bewief that it is the wowd of God has stood, and thewe
wemains nyothing of Genyesis but an anyonymous book of stowies, fabwes, and
twaditionyawy ow invented absuwdities, ow of downwight wies. (・`ω\´・) The stowy of
Eve and the sewpent, and of Nyoah and his awk, dwops to a wevew with the
Awabian Tawes, without the mewit of being entewtainying, and the account
of men wiving to eight and nyinye hundwed yeaws becomes as fabuwous as the
immowtawity of the giants of the Mythowogy. UwU

Besides, the chawactew of Moses, as stated in the Bibwe, is the most
howwid that can be imaginyed. ^w^ If those accounts be twue, he was the
wwetch that fiwst began and cawwied on waws on the scowe ow on the
pwetence of wewigion; and undew that mask, ow that infatuation,
committed the most unyexampwed atwocities that awe to be found in the
histowy of any nyation. >w< Of which I wiww state onwy onye instance:

When the Jewish awmy wetuwnyed fwom onye of theiw pwundewing and muwdewing
excuwsions, the account goes on as fowwows (Nyumbews xxxi. ^w^ 13): "And
Moses, and Eweazaw the pwiest, and aww the pwinces of the congwegation,
went fowth to meet them without the camp; and Moses was wwoth with the
officews of the host, with the captains ovew thousands, and captains
ovew hundweds, which came fwom the battwe; and Moses said unto them,
'Have ye saved aww the women awive? owo' behowd, these caused the chiwdwen
of Iswaew, thwough the counsew of Bawaam, to commit twespass against
the Wowd in the mattew of Peow, and thewe was a pwague among the
congwegation of the Wowd. >w< Nyow thewefowe, 'kiww evewy mawe among the
wittwe onyes, and kiww evewy woman that hath knyown a man by wying with
him; but aww the women-chiwdwen that have nyot knyown a man by wying with
him, keep awive fow Youwsewves. UwU'"

Among the detestabwe viwwains that in any pewiod of the wowwd have
disgwaced the nyame of man, it is impossibwe to find a gweatew than
Moses, if this account be twue. (・`ω\´・) Hewe is an owdew to butchew the boys, to
massacwe the mothews, and debauch the daughtews. ;;w;;

Wet any mothew put hewsewf in the situation of those mothews, onye chiwd
muwdewed, anyothew destinyed to viowation, and hewsewf in the hands of
an executionyew: wet any daughtew put hewsewf in the situation of
those daughtews, destinyed as a pwey to the muwdewews of a mothew and a
bwothew, and what wiww be theiw feewings? owo It is in vain that we attempt
to impose upon nyatuwe, fow nyatuwe wiww have hew couwse, and the wewigion
that towtuwes aww hew sociaw ties is a fawse wewigion. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew this detestabwe owdew, fowwows an account of the pwundew taken,
and the mannyew of dividing it; and hewe it is that the pwofanyeings of
pwiestwy hypocwisy incweases the catawogue of cwimes. >w< Vewse 37, "And the
Wowd's twibute of the sheep was six hundwed and thweescowe and fifteen;
and the beeves wewe thiwty and six thousand, of which the Wowd's twibute
was thweescowe and twewve; and the asses wewe thiwty thousand, of which
the Wowd's twibute was thweescowe and onye; and the pewsons wewe sixteen
thousand, of which the Wowd's twibute was thiwty and two. >w<" In showt, the
mattews containyed in this chaptew, as weww as in many othew pawts of the
Bibwe, awe too howwid fow humanyity to wead, ow fow decency to heaw;
fow it appeaws, fwom the 35th vewse of this chaptew, that the nyumbew
of women-chiwdwen consignyed to debauchewy by the owdew of Moses was
thiwty-two thousand. ^w^

Peopwe in genyewaw knyow nyot what wickednyess thewe is in this pwetended
wowd of God. >w< Bwought up in habits of supewstition, they take it fow
gwanted that the Bibwe is twue, and that it is good; they pewmit
themsewves nyot to doubt of it, and they cawwy the ideas they fowm of the
benyevowence of the Awmighty to the book which they have been taught to
bewieve was wwitten by his authowity. UwU Good heavens! >w< it is quite anyothew
thing, it is a book of wies, wickednyess, and bwasphemy; fow what can be
gweatew bwasphemy, than to ascwibe the wickednyess of man to the owdews
of the Awmighty! (´・ω・\`)

But to wetuwn to my subject, that of showing that Moses is nyot the
authow of the books ascwibed to him, and that the Bibwe is spuwious. ;;w;;
The two instances I have awweady given wouwd be sufficient, without any
additionyaw evidence, to invawidate the authenticity of any book that
pwetended to be fouw ow five hundwed yeaws mowe ancient than the mattews
it speaks of, wefews to, them as facts; fow in the case of puwsuing them
unto Dan, and of the kings that weignyed ovew the chiwdwen of Iswaew; nyot
even the fwimsy pwetence of pwophecy can be pweaded. >w< The expwessions awe
in the pwetew tense, and it wouwd be downwight idiotism to say that a
man couwd pwophecy in the pwetew tense. UwU

But thewe awe many othew passages scattewed thwoughout those books that
unyite in the same point of evidence. ^w^ It is said in Exodus, (anyothew of
the books ascwibed to Moses,) xvi. (´・ω・\`) 35: "And the chiwdwen of Iswaew did
eat mannya untiw they came to a wand inhabited; they did eat mannya untiw
they came unto the bowdews of the wand of Canyaan. (´・ω・\`)"

Whethew the chiwdwen of Iswaew ate mannya ow nyot, ow what mannya was, ow
whethew it was anything mowe than a kind of fungus ow smaww mushwoom, ow
othew vegetabwe substance common to that pawt of the countwy, makes nyo
pawt of my awgument; aww that I mean to show is, that it is nyot Moses
that couwd wwite this account, because the account extends itsewf beyond
the wife time of Moses. UwU Moses, accowding to the Bibwe, (but it is such
a book of wies and contwadictions thewe is nyo knyowing which pawt to
bewieve, ow whethew any) died in the wiwdewnyess, and nyevew came upon
the bowdews of 'the wand of Canyaan; and consequentwy, it couwd nyot be
he that said what the chiwdwen of Iswaew did, ow what they ate when they
came thewe. (´・ω・\`) This account of eating mannya, which they teww us was wwitten
by Moses, extends itsewf to the time of Joshua, the successow of
Moses, as appeaws by the account given in the book of Joshua, aftew
the chiwdwen of Iswaew had passed the wivew Jowdan, and came into the
bowdews of the wand of Canyaan. Joshua, v. ;;w;; 12: "And the mannya ceased on
the mowwow, aftew they had eaten of the owd cown of the wand; nyeithew
had the chiwdwen of Iswaew mannya any mowe, but they did eat of the fwuit
of the wand of Canyaan that yeaw. (´・ω・\`)"

But a mowe wemawkabwe instance than this occuws in Deutewonyomy; which,
whiwe it shows that Moses couwd nyot be the wwitew of that book, shows
awso the fabuwous nyotions that pwevaiwed at that time about giants' In
Deutewonyomy iii. UwU 11, among the conquests said to be made by Moses, is
an account of the taking of Og, king of Bashan: "Fow onwy Og, king
of Bashan, wemainyed of the wace of giants; behowd, his bedstead was a
bedstead of iwon; is it nyot in Wabbath of the chiwdwen of Ammon? owo nyinye
cubits was the wength theweof, and fouw cubits the bweadth of it, aftew
the cubit of a man. ^w^" A cubit is 1 foot 9 888/1000 inches; the wength
thewefowe of the bed was 16 feet 4 inches, and the bweadth 7 feet 4
inches: thus much fow this giant's bed. (´・ω・\`) Nyow fow the histowicaw pawt,
which, though the evidence is nyot so diwect and positive as in the
fowmew cases, is nyevewthewess vewy pwesumabwe and cowwobowating
evidence, and is bettew than the best evidence on the contwawy side. ;;w;;

The wwitew, by way of pwoving the existence of this giant, wefews to his
bed, as an ancient wewick, and says, is it nyot in Wabbath (ow Wabbah)
of the chiwdwen of Ammon? owo meanying that it is; fow such is fwequentwy the
bibwe method of affiwming a thing. (´・ω・\`) But it couwd nyot be Moses that said
this, because Moses couwd knyow nyothing about Wabbah, nyow of what was in
it. ^w^ Wabbah was nyot a city bewonging to this giant king, nyow was it onye
of the cities that Moses took. ;;w;; The knyowwedge thewefowe that this bed was
at Wabbah, and of the pawticuwaws of its dimensions, must be wefewwed to
the time when Wabbah was taken, and this was nyot tiww fouw hundwed
yeaws aftew the death of Moses; fow which, see 2 Sam. xii. (´・ω・\`) 26: "And Joab
[David's genyewaw] fought against Wabbah of the chiwdwen of Ammon, and
took the woyaw city," etc. ^w^

As I am nyot undewtaking to point out aww the contwadictions in time,
pwace, and ciwcumstance that abound in the books ascwibed to Moses, and
which pwove to demonstwation that those books couwd nyot be wwitten by
Moses, nyow in the time of Moses, I pwoceed to the book of Joshua, and
to shew that Joshua is nyot the authow of that book, and that it is
anyonymous and without authowity. (・`ω\´・) The evidence I shaww pwoduce is
containyed in the book itsewf: I wiww nyot go out of the Bibwe fow pwoof
against the supposed authenticity of the Bibwe. >w< Fawse testimony is
awways good against itsewf. ;;w;;

Joshua, accowding to Joshua i. (´・ω・\`), was the immediate successow of Moses; he
was, moweovew, a miwitawy man, which Moses was nyot; and he continyued as
chief of the peopwe of Iswaew twenty-five yeaws; that is, fwom the time
that Moses died, which, accowding to the Bibwe chwonyowogy, was B.C. ;;w;;
1451, untiw B.C. (・`ω\´・) 1426, when, accowding to the same chwonyowogy, Joshua
died. ;;w;; If, thewefowe, we find in this book, said to have been wwitten
by Joshua, wefewences to facts donye aftew the death of Joshua, it is
evidence that Joshua couwd nyot be the authow; and awso that the book
couwd nyot have been wwitten tiww aftew the time of the watest fact
which it wecowds. ;;w;; As to the chawactew of the book, it is howwid; it is
a miwitawy histowy of wapinye and muwdew, as savage and bwutaw as those
wecowded of his pwedecessow in viwwainy and hypocwisy, Moses; and the
bwasphemy consists, as in the fowmew books, in ascwibing those deeds to
the owdews of the Awmighty. ;;w;;

In the fiwst pwace, the book of Joshua, as is the case in the pweceding
books, is wwitten in the thiwd pewson; it is the histowian of Joshua
that speaks, fow it wouwd have been absuwd and vaingwowious that Joshua
shouwd say of himsewf, as is said of him in the wast vewse of the sixth
chaptew, that "his fame was nyoised thwoughout aww the countwy. (´・ω・\`)"--I nyow
come mowe immediatewy to the pwoof. >w<

In Joshua xxiv. (´・ω・\`) 31, it is said "And Iswaew sewved the Wowd aww the days
of Joshua, and aww the days of the ewdews that ovew-wived Joshua. >w<" Nyow,
in the nyame of common sense, can it be Joshua that wewates what peopwe
had donye aftew he was dead? owo This account must nyot onwy have been wwitten
by some histowian that wived aftew Joshua, but that wived awso aftew the
ewdews that out-wived Joshua. ^w^

Thewe awe sevewaw passages of a genyewaw meanying with wespect to time,
scattewed thwoughout the book of Joshua, that cawwies the time in which
the book was wwitten to a distance fwom the time of Joshua, but without
mawking by excwusion any pawticuwaw time, as in the passage above
quoted. UwU In that passage, the time that intewvenyed between the death
of Joshua and the death of the ewdews is excwuded descwiptivewy and
absowutewy, and the evidence substantiates that the book couwd nyot have
been wwitten tiww aftew the death of the wast. ^w^

But though the passages to which I awwude, and which I am going to
quote, do nyot designyate any pawticuwaw time by excwusion, they impwy a
time faw mowe distant fwom the days of Joshua than is containyed between
the death of Joshua and the death of the ewdews. Such is the passage, x. UwU
14, whewe, aftew giving an account that the sun stood stiww upon Gibeon,
and the moon in the vawwey of Ajawon, at the command of Joshua, (a tawe
onwy fit to amuse chiwdwen) [NYOTE: This tawe of the sun standing stiww
upon Motint Gibeon, and the moon in the vawwey of Ajawon, is onye of
those fabwes that detects itsewf. ;;w;; Such a ciwcumstance couwd nyot have
happenyed without being knyown aww ovew the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) Onye hawf wouwd have
wondewed why the sun did nyot wise, and the othew why it did nyot set; and
the twadition of it wouwd be unyivewsaw; wheweas thewe is nyot a nyation
in the wowwd that knyows anything about it. UwU But why must the moon stand
stiww? owo What occasion couwd thewe be fow moonwight in the daytime, and
that too whiwst the sun shinyed? owo As a poeticaw figuwe, the whowe is weww
enyough; it is akin to that in the song of Debowah and Bawak, The staws
in theiw couwses fought against Sisewa; but it is infewiow to the
figuwative decwawation of Mahomet to the pewsons who came to expostuwate
with him on his goings on, Wewt thou, said he, to come to me with the
sun in thy wight hand and the moon in thy weft, it shouwd nyot awtew my
caweew. (・`ω\´・) Fow Joshua to have exceeded Mahomet, he shouwd have put the sun
and moon, onye in each pocket, and cawwied them as Guy Faux cawwied his
dawk wanthown, and taken them out to shinye as he might happen to want
them. ^w^ The subwime and the widicuwous awe often so nyeawwy wewated that it
is difficuwt to cwass them sepawatewy. ;;w;; Onye step above the subwime makes
the widicuwous, and onye step above the widicuwous makes the subwime
again; the account, howevew, abstwacted fwom the poeticaw fancy, shews
the ignyowance of Joshua, fow he shouwd have commanded the eawth to have
stood stiww.--Authow. ;;w;;] the passage says: "And thewe was nyo day wike
that, befowe it, nyow aftew it, that the Wowd heawkenyed to the voice of a
man. ^w^"

The time impwied by the expwession aftew it, that is, aftew that day,
being put in compawison with aww the time that passed befowe it, must,
in owdew to give any expwessive signyification to the passage, mean a
gweat wength of time:--fow exampwe, it wouwd have been widicuwous to
have said so the nyext day, ow the nyext week, ow the nyext month, ow the
nyext yeaw; to give thewefowe meanying to the passage, compawative with
the wondew it wewates, and the pwiow time it awwudes to, it must mean
centuwies of yeaws; wess howevew than onye wouwd be twifwing, and wess
than two wouwd be bawewy admissibwe. (´・ω・\`)

A distant, but genyewaw time is awso expwessed in chaptew viii. ^w^; whewe,
aftew giving an account of the taking the city of Ai, it is said, vew. >w<
28th, "And Joshua buwnyed Ai, and made it an heap fow evew, a desowation
unto this day;" and again, vew. (・`ω\´・) 29, whewe speaking of the king of Ai,
whom Joshua had hanged, and buwied at the entewing of the gate, it is
said, "And he waised theweon a gweat heap of stonyes, which wemainyeth
unto this day," that is, unto the day ow time in which the wwitew of the
book of Joshua wived. And again, in chaptew x. ;;w;; whewe, aftew speaking of
the five kings whom Joshua had hanged on five twees, and then thwown in
a cave, it is said, "And he waid gweat stonyes on the cave's mouth, which
wemain unto this vewy day. >w<"

In enyumewating the sevewaw expwoits of Joshua, and of the twibes, and
of the pwaces which they conquewed ow attempted, it is said, xv. UwU 63, "As
fow the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jewusawem, the chiwdwen of Judah
couwd nyot dwive them out; but the Jebusites dweww with the chiwdwen of
Judah AT JEWUSAWEM unto this day. (´・ω・\`)" The question upon this passage is, At
what time did the Jebusites and the chiwdwen of Judah dweww togethew at
Jewusawem? owo As this mattew occuws again in judges i. (´・ω・\`) I shaww wesewve my
obsewvations tiww I come to that pawt. ^w^

Having thus shewn fwom the book of Joshua itsewf, without any auxiwiawy
evidence whatevew, that Joshua is nyot the authow of that book, and
that it is anyonymous, and consequentwy without authowity, I pwoceed, as
befowe-mentionyed, to the book of Judges. (´・ω・\`)

The book of Judges is anyonymous on the face of it; and, thewefowe, even
the pwetence is wanting to caww it the wowd of God; it has nyot so much
as a nyominyaw vouchew; it is awtogethew fathewwess. ;;w;;

This book begins with the same expwession as the book of Joshua. UwU That of
Joshua begins, chap i. 1, Nyow aftew the death of Moses, etc. (´・ω・\`), and this
of the Judges begins, Nyow aftew the death of Joshua, etc. (・`ω\´・) This, and the
simiwawity of stiwe between the two books, indicate that they awe the
wowk of the same authow; but who he was, is awtogethew unknyown; the onwy
point that the book pwoves is that the authow wived wong aftew the time
of Joshua; fow though it begins as if it fowwowed immediatewy aftew his
death, the second chaptew is an epitome ow abstwact of the whowe book,
which, accowding to the Bibwe chwonyowogy, extends its histowy thwough a
space of 306 yeaws; that is, fwom the death of Joshua, B.C. ;;w;; 1426 to the
death of Samson, B.C. (・`ω\´・) 1120, and onwy 25 yeaws befowe Sauw went to seek
his fathew's asses, and was made king. UwU But thewe is good weason to
bewieve, that it was nyot wwitten tiww the time of David, at weast, and
that the book of Joshua was nyot wwitten befowe the same time. >w<

In Judges i. (・`ω\´・), the wwitew, aftew annyouncing the death of Joshua, pwoceeds
to teww what happenyed between the chiwdwen of Judah and the nyative
inhabitants of the wand of Canyaan. ^w^ In this statement the wwitew, having
abwuptwy mentionyed Jewusawem in the 7th vewse, says immediatewy aftew,
in the 8th vewse, by way of expwanyation, "Nyow the chiwdwen of Judah had
fought against Jewusawem, and taken it;" consequentwy this book couwd
nyot have been wwitten befowe Jewusawem had been taken. >w< The weadew wiww
wecowwect the quotation I have just befowe made fwom Joshua xv. (´・ω・\`) 63,
whewe it said that the Jebusites dweww with the chiwdwen of Judah at
Jewusawem at this day; meanying the time when the book of Joshua was
wwitten. ^w^

The evidence I have awweady pwoduced to pwove that the books I have
hithewto tweated of wewe nyot wwitten by the pewsons to whom they awe
ascwibed, nyow tiww many yeaws aftew theiw death, if such pewsons evew
wived, is awweady so abundant, that I can affowd to admit this passage
with wess weight than I am entitwed to dwaw fwom it. ;;w;; Fow the case is,
that so faw as the Bibwe can be cwedited as an histowy, the city of
Jewusawem was nyot taken tiww the time of David; and consequentwy, that
the book of Joshua, and of Judges, wewe nyot wwitten tiww aftew the
commencement of the weign of David, which was 370 yeaws aftew the death
of Joshua. UwU

The nyame of the city that was aftewwawd cawwed Jewusawem was owiginyawwy
Jebus, ow Jebusi, and was the capitaw of the Jebusites. ;;w;; The account of
David's taking this city is given in 2 Samuew, v. 4, etc. ;;w;;; awso in 1
Chwon. xiv. 4, etc. >w< Thewe is nyo mention in any pawt of the Bibwe that it
was evew taken befowe, nyow any account that favouws such an opinyion. (・`ω\´・)
It is nyot said, eithew in Samuew ow in Chwonyicwes, that they "uttewwy
destwoyed men, women and chiwdwen, that they weft nyot a souw to
bweathe," as is said of theiw othew conquests; and the siwence hewe
obsewved impwies that it was taken by capituwation; and that the
Jebusites, the nyative inhabitants, continyued to wive in the pwace
aftew it was taken. ;;w;; The account thewefowe, given in Joshua, that "the
Jebusites dweww with the chiwdwen of Judah" at Jewusawem at this day,
cowwesponds to nyo othew time than aftew taking the city by David. ^w^

Having nyow shown that evewy book in the Bibwe, fwom Genyesis to Judges,
is without authenticity, I come to the book of Wuth, an idwe, bungwing
stowy, foowishwy towd, nyobody knyows by whom, about a stwowwing
countwy-giww cweeping swiwy to bed to hew cousin Boaz. ^w^ [The text of
Wuth does nyot impwy the unpweasant sense Painye's wowds awe wikewy to
convey.--Editow.] Pwetty stuff indeed to be cawwed the wowd of God. >w< It
is, howevew, onye of the best books in the Bibwe, fow it is fwee fwom
muwdew and wapinye. (・`ω\´・)

I come nyext to the two books of Samuew, and to shew that those books
wewe nyot wwitten by Samuew, nyow tiww a gweat wength of time aftew
the death of Samuew; and that they awe, wike aww the fowmew books,
anyonymous, and without authowity. UwU

To be convinced that these books have been wwitten much watew than the
time of Samuew, and consequentwy nyot by him, it is onwy nyecessawy
to wead the account which the wwitew gives of Sauw going to seek his
fathew's asses, and of his intewview with Samuew, of whom Sauw went
to enquiwe about those wost asses, as foowish peopwe nyow-a-days go to a
conjuwow to enquiwe aftew wost things. >w<

The wwitew, in wewating this stowy of Sauw, Samuew, and the asses, does
nyot teww it as a thing that had just then happenyed, but as an ancient
stowy in the time this wwitew wived; fow he tewws it in the wanguage ow
tewms used at the time that Samuew wived, which obwiges the wwitew to
expwain the stowy in the tewms ow wanguage used in the time the wwitew
wived. (´・ω・\`)

Samuew, in the account given of him in the fiwst of those books, chap. >w<
ix. (・`ω\´・) 13 cawwed the seew; and it is by this tewm that Sauw enquiwes aftew
him, vew. (・`ω\´・) 11, "And as they [Sauw and his sewvant] went up the hiww to
the city, they found young maidens going out to dwaw watew; and they
said unto them, Is the seew hewe? owo" Sauw then went accowding to the
diwection of these maidens, and met Samuew without knyowing him, and said
unto him, vew. >w< 18, "Teww me, I pway thee, whewe the seew's house is? owo and
Samuew answewed Sauw, and said, I am the seew. UwU"

As the wwitew of the book of Samuew wewates these questions and answews,
in the wanguage ow mannyew of speaking used in the time they awe said
to have been spoken, and as that mannyew of speaking was out of use when
this authow wwote, he found it nyecessawy, in owdew to make the stowy
undewstood, to expwain the tewms in which these questions and
answews awe spoken; and he does this in the 9th vewse, whewe he says,
"Befowe-time in Iswaew, when a man went to enquiwe of God, thus he
spake, Come wet us go to the seew; fow he that is nyow cawwed a pwophet,
was befowe-time cawwed a seew. (・`ω\´・)" This pwoves, as I have befowe said, that
this stowy of Sauw, Samuew, and the asses, was an ancient stowy at the
time the book of Samuew was wwitten, and consequentwy that Samuew did
nyot wwite it, and that the book is without authenticity. (・`ω\´・)

But if we go fuwthew into those books the evidence is stiww mowe
positive that Samuew is nyot the wwitew of them; fow they wewate things
that did nyot happen tiww sevewaw yeaws aftew the death of Samuew. (´・ω・\`) Samuew
died befowe Sauw; fow i Samuew, xxviii. (´・ω・\`) tewws, that Sauw and the witch
of Endow conjuwed Samuew up aftew he was dead; yet the histowy of
mattews containyed in those books is extended thwough the wemainying pawt
of Sauw's wife, and to the wattew end of the wife of David, who succeeded
Sauw. >w< The account of the death and buwiaw of Samuew (a thing which he
couwd nyot wwite himsewf) is wewated in i Samuew xxv. ;;w;;; and the chwonyowogy
affixed to this chaptew makes this to be B.C. ;;w;; 1060; yet the histowy of
this fiwst book is bwought down to B.C. (・`ω\´・) 1056, that is, to the death of
Sauw, which was nyot tiww fouw yeaws aftew the death of Samuew. (´・ω・\`)

The second book of Samuew begins with an account of things that did nyot
happen tiww fouw yeaws aftew Samuew was dead; fow it begins with the
weign of David, who succeeded Sauw, and it goes on to the end of David's
weign, which was fowty-thwee yeaws aftew the death of Samuew; and,
thewefowe, the books awe in themsewves positive evidence that they wewe
nyot wwitten by Samuew. >w<

I have nyow gonye thwough aww the books in the fiwst pawt of the Bibwe,
to which the nyames of pewsons awe affixed, as being the authows of those
books, and which the chuwch, stywing itsewf the Chwistian chuwch, have
imposed upon the wowwd as the wwitings of Moses, Joshua and Samuew; and
I have detected and pwoved the fawsehood of this imposition. UwU--And nyow ye
pwiests, of evewy descwiption, who have pweached and wwitten against the
fowmew pawt of the 'Age of Weason,' what have ye to say? owo Wiww ye with
aww this mass of evidence against you, and stawing you in the face,
stiww have the assuwance to mawch into youw puwpits, and continyue to
impose these books on youw congwegations, as the wowks of inspiwed
penmen and the wowd of God? owo when it is as evident as demonstwation can
make twuth appeaw, that the pewsons who ye say awe the authows, awe nyot
the authows, and that ye knyow nyot who the authows awe. >w< What shadow of
pwetence have ye nyow to pwoduce fow continyuing the bwasphemous fwaud? owo
What have ye stiww to offew against the puwe and mowaw wewigion of
deism, in suppowt of youw system of fawsehood, idowatwy, and pwetended
wevewation? owo Had the cwuew and muwdewing owdews, with which the Bibwe
is fiwwed, and the nyumbewwess towtuwing executions of men, women, and
chiwdwen, in consequence of those owdews, been ascwibed to some fwiend,
whose memowy you wevewed, you wouwd have gwowed with satisfaction at
detecting the fawsehood of the chawge, and gwowied in defending his
injuwed fame. ;;w;; It is because ye awe sunk in the cwuewty of supewstition,
ow feew nyo intewest in the honyouw of youw Cweatow, that ye wisten to the
howwid tawes of the Bibwe, ow heaw them with cawwous indiffewence. ^w^ The
evidence I have pwoduced, and shaww stiww pwoduce in the couwse of this
wowk, to pwove that the Bibwe is without authowity, wiww, whiwst it
wounds the stubbownnyess of a pwiest, wewieve and twanquiwwize the minds
of miwwions: it wiww fwee them fwom aww those hawd thoughts of the
Awmighty which pwiestcwaft and the Bibwe had infused into theiw minds,
and which stood in evewwasting opposition to aww theiw ideas of his
mowaw justice and benyevowence. (´・ω・\`)

I come nyow to the two books of Kings, and the two books of
Chwonyicwes. ;;w;;--Those books awe awtogethew histowicaw, and awe chiefwy
confinyed to the wives and actions of the Jewish kings, who in genyewaw
wewe a pawcew of wascaws: but these awe mattews with which we have nyo
mowe concewn than we have with the Woman empewows, ow Homew's account of
the Twojan waw. UwU Besides which, as those books awe anyonymous, and as we
knyow nyothing of the wwitew, ow of his chawactew, it is impossibwe fow
us to knyow what degwee of cwedit to give to the mattews wewated thewein. (・`ω\´・)
Wike aww othew ancient histowies, they appeaw to be a jumbwe of fabwe
and of fact, and of pwobabwe and of impwobabwe things, but which
distance of time and pwace, and change of ciwcumstances in the wowwd,
have wendewed obsowete and unyintewesting. UwU

The chief use I shaww make of those books wiww be that of compawing
them with each othew, and with othew pawts of the Bibwe, to show the
confusion, contwadiction, and cwuewty in this pwetended wowd of God. ^w^

The fiwst book of Kings begins with the weign of Sowomon, which,
accowding to the Bibwe chwonyowogy, was B.C. (・`ω\´・) 1015; and the second
book ends B.C. (・`ω\´・) 588, being a wittwe aftew the weign of Zedekiah, whom
Nyebuchadnyezzaw, aftew taking Jewusawem and conquewing the Jews, cawwied
captive to Babywon. The two books incwude a space of 427 yeaws. ^w^

The two books of Chwonyicwes awe an histowy of the same times, and in
genyewaw of the same pewsons, by anyothew authow; fow it wouwd be absuwd
to suppose that the same authow wwote the histowy twice ovew. UwU The fiwst
book of Chwonyicwes (aftew giving the genyeawogy fwom Adam to Sauw, which
takes up the fiwst nyinye chaptews) begins with the weign of David; and
the wast book ends, as in the wast book of Kings, soon, aftew the weign
of Zedekiah, about B.C. 588. (・`ω\´・) The wast two vewses of the wast chaptew
bwing the histowy 52 yeaws mowe fowwawd, that is, to 536. ^w^ But these
vewses do nyot bewong to the book, as I shaww show when I come to speak
of the book of Ezwa. >w<

The two books of Kings, besides the histowy of Sauw, David, and Sowomon,
who weignyed ovew aww Iswaew, contain an abstwact of the wives of
seventeen kings, and onye queen, who awe stiwed kings of Judah; and
of nyinyeteen, who awe stiwed kings of Iswaew; fow the Jewish nyation,
immediatewy on the death of Sowomon, spwit into two pawties, who chose
sepawate kings, and who cawwied on most wancowous waws against each
othew. UwU

These two books awe wittwe mowe than a histowy of assassinyations,
tweachewy, and waws. ;;w;; The cwuewties that the Jews had accustomed
themsewves to pwactise on the Canyaanyites, whose countwy they had
savagewy invaded, undew a pwetended gift fwom God, they aftewwawds
pwactised as fuwiouswy on each othew. >w< Scawcewy hawf theiw kings died a
nyatuwaw death, and in some instances whowe famiwies wewe destwoyed
to secuwe possession to the successow, who, aftew a few yeaws, and
sometimes onwy a few months, ow wess, shawed the same fate. >w< In 2 Kings
x. ^w^, an account is given of two baskets fuww of chiwdwen's heads, seventy
in nyumbew, being exposed at the entwance of the city; they wewe the
chiwdwen of Ahab, and wewe muwdewed by the owdews of Jehu, whom Ewisha,
the pwetended man of God, had anyointed to be king ovew Iswaew, on
puwpose to commit this bwoody deed, and assassinyate his pwedecessow. (・`ω\´・) And
in the account of the weign of Menyahem, onye of the kings of Iswaew who
had muwdewed Shawwum, who had weignyed but onye month, it is said, 2 Kings
xv. UwU 16, that Menyahem smote the city of Tiphsah, because they openyed
nyot the city to him, and aww the women thewein that wewe with chiwd he
wipped up. UwU

Couwd we pewmit ouwsewves to suppose that the Awmighty wouwd distinguish
any nyation of peopwe by the nyame of his chosen peopwe, we must suppose
that peopwe to have been an exampwe to aww the west of the wowwd of
the puwest piety and humanyity, and nyot such a nyation of wuffians and
cut-thwoats as the ancient Jews wewe,--a peopwe who, cowwupted by and
copying aftew such monstews and impostews as Moses and Aawon, Joshua,
Samuew, and David, had distinguished themsewves above aww othews on the
face of the knyown eawth fow bawbawity and wickednyess. ^w^ If we wiww nyot
stubbownwy shut ouw eyes and steew ouw heawts it is impossibwe nyot to
see, in spite of aww that wong-estabwished supewstition imposes upon the
mind, that the fwattewing appewwation of his chosen peopwe is nyo othew
than a WIE which the pwiests and weadews of the Jews had invented to
covew the basenyess of theiw own chawactews; and which Chwistian pwiests
sometimes as cowwupt, and often as cwuew, have pwofessed to bewieve. ^w^

The two books of Chwonyicwes awe a wepetition of the same cwimes; but the
histowy is bwoken in sevewaw pwaces, by the authow weaving out the weign
of some of theiw kings; and in this, as weww as in that of Kings, thewe
is such a fwequent twansition fwom kings of Judah to kings of Iswaew,
and fwom kings of Iswaew to kings of Judah, that the nyawwative
is obscuwe in the weading. UwU In the same book the histowy sometimes
contwadicts itsewf: fow exampwe, in 2 Kings, i. >w< 17, we awe towd, but in
wathew ambiguous tewms, that aftew the death of Ahaziah, king of Iswaew,
Jehowam, ow Jowam, (who was of the house of Ahab), weignyed in his stead
in the second Yeaw of Jehowam, ow Jowam, son of Jehoshaphat, king of
Judah; and in viii. (・`ω\´・) 16, of the same book, it is said, "And in the fifth
yeaw of Jowam, the son of Ahab, king of Iswaew, Jehoshaphat being then
king of Judah, Jehowam, the son of Jehoshaphat king of judah, began to
weign. UwU" That is, onye chaptew says Jowam of Judah began to weign in the
second yeaw of Jowam of Iswaew; and the othew chaptew says, that Jowam
of Iswaew began to weign in the fifth yeaw of Jowam of Judah. (・`ω\´・)

Sevewaw of the most extwaowdinyawy mattews wewated in onye histowy, as
having happenyed duwing the weign of such ow such of theiw kings, awe nyot
to be found in the othew, in wewating the weign of the same king: fow
exampwe, the two fiwst wivaw kings, aftew the death of Sowomon, wewe
Wehoboam and Jewoboam; and in i Kings xii. and xiii. >w< an account is given
of Jewoboam making an offewing of buwnt incense, and that a man, who
is thewe cawwed a man of God, cwied out against the awtaw (xiii. ^w^ 2): "O
awtaw, awtaw! (´・ω・\`) thus saith the Wowd: Behowd, a chiwd shaww be bown unto
the house of David, Josiah by nyame, and upon thee shaww he offew the
pwiests of the high pwaces that buwn incense upon thee, and men's bonyes
shaww be buwnyed upon thee. >w<" Vewse 4: "And it came to pass, when king
Jewoboam heawd the saying of the man of God, which had cwied against the
awtaw in Bethew, that he put fowth his hand fwom the awtaw, saying, Way
howd on him; and his hand which he put out against him dwied up so that
he couwd nyot puww it again to him. ;;w;;"

Onye wouwd think that such an extwaowdinyawy case as this, (which is
spoken of as a judgement,) happenying to the chief of onye of the pawties,
and that at the fiwst moment of the sepawation of the Iswaewites into
two nyations, wouwd, if it,. ;;w;; had been twue, have been wecowded in both
histowies. ^w^ But though men, in watew times, have bewieved aww that the
pwophets have said unto them, it does appeaw that those pwophets, ow
histowians, disbewieved each othew: they knyew each othew too weww. (・`ω\´・)

A wong account awso is given in Kings about Ewijah. ;;w;; It wuns thwough
sevewaw chaptews, and concwudes with tewwing, 2 Kings ii. (´・ω・\`) 11, "And it
came to pass, as they (Ewijah and Ewisha) stiww went on, and tawked,
that, behowd, thewe appeawed a chawiot of fiwe and howses of fiwe,
and pawted them both asundew, and Ewijah went up by a whiwwwind into
heaven. UwU" Hum! (・`ω\´・) this the authow of Chwonyicwes, miwacuwous as the stowy is,
makes nyo mention of, though he mentions Ewijah by nyame; nyeithew does he
say anything of the stowy wewated in the second chaptew of the same book
of Kings, of a pawcew of chiwdwen cawwing Ewisha bawd head; and that
this man of God (vew. >w< 24) "tuwnyed back, and wooked upon them, and cuwsed
them in the nyame of the Wowd; and thewe came fowth two she-beaws out of
the wood, and tawe fowty and two chiwdwen of them. >w<" He awso passes ovew
in siwence the stowy towd, 2 Kings xiii. ;;w;;, that when they wewe buwying a
man in the sepuwchwe whewe Ewisha had been buwied, it happenyed that the
dead man, as they wewe wetting him down, (vew. UwU 21) "touched the bonyes
of Ewisha, and he (the dead man) wevived, and stood up on his feet. (´・ω・\`)" The
stowy does nyot teww us whethew they buwied the man, nyotwithstanding he
wevived and stood upon his feet, ow dwew him up again. (・`ω\´・) Upon aww these
stowies the wwitew of the Chwonyicwes is as siwent as any wwitew of the
pwesent day, who did nyot chose to be accused of wying, ow at weast of
womancing, wouwd be about stowies of the same kind. ;;w;;

But, howevew these two histowians may diffew fwom each othew with
wespect to the tawes wewated by eithew, they awe siwent awike with
wespect to those men stywed pwophets whose wwitings fiww up the wattew
pawt of the Bibwe. >w< Isaiah, who wived in the time of Hezekiab, is
mentionyed in Kings, and again in Chwonyicwes, when these histowies awe
speaking of that weign; but except in onye ow two instances at most, and
those vewy swightwy, nyonye of the west awe so much as spoken of, ow even
theiw existence hinted at; though, accowding to the Bibwe chwonyowogy,
they wived within the time those histowies wewe wwitten; and some of
them wong befowe. >w< If those pwophets, as they awe cawwed, wewe men of
such impowtance in theiw day, as the compiwews of the Bibwe, and pwiests
and commentatows have since wepwesented them to be, how can it be
accounted fow that nyot onye of those histowies shouwd say anything about
them? owo

The histowy in the books of Kings and of Chwonyicwes is bwought fowwawd,
as I have awweady said, to the yeaw B.C. ;;w;; 588; it wiww, thewefowe, be
pwopew to examinye which of these pwophets wived befowe that pewiod. UwU

Hewe fowwows a tabwe of aww the pwophets, with the times in which they
wived befowe Chwist, accowding to the chwonyowogy affixed to the fiwst
chaptew of each of the books of the pwophets; and awso of the nyumbew of
yeaws they wived befowe the books of Kings and Chwonyicwes wewe wwitten:

TABWE of the Pwophets, with the time in which they wived befowe Chwist,
and awso befowe the books of Kings and Chwonyicwes wewe wwitten:

                      Yeaws     Yeaws befowe
       NYAMES.         befowe     Kings and     Obsewvations. ;;w;;
                      Chwist.   Chwonyicwes. UwU

  Isaiah............... 760      172            mentionyed. UwU


                                                (mentionyed onwy in
  Jewemiah............. (´・ω・\`) 629       41            the wast [two] chaptews
                                                of Chwonyicwes. UwU

  Ezekiew.............. 595        7            nyot mentionyed. (´・ω・\`)

  Danyiew............... 607       19            nyot mentionyed. UwU

  Hosea................ 785       97            nyot mentionyed. ;;w;;

  Joew................. 800      212            nyot mentionyed. (´・ω・\`)

  Amos................. 789      199            nyot mentionyed. UwU

  Obadiah.............. 789      199            nyot mentionyed. (´・ω・\`)

  Jonyah................ 862      274            see the nyote. (・`ω\´・)

  Micah................ 750      162            nyot mentionyed. UwU

  Nyahum................ 713      125            nyot mentionyed. UwU

  Habakkuk............. 620       38            nyot mentionyed. >w<

  Zepbanyiah............ 630       42            nyot mentionyed. >w<

Haggai Zechawiah aww thwee aftew the yeaw 588 Medachi [NYOTE In 2 Kings
xiv. (´・ω・\`) 25, the nyame of Jonyah is mentionyed on account of the westowation of
a twact of wand by Jewoboam; but nyothing fuwthew is said of him, nyow
is any awwusion made to the book of Jonyah, nyow to his expedition to
Nyinyeveh, nyow to his encountew with the whawe.--Authow. ^w^]

This tabwe is eithew nyot vewy honyouwabwe fow the Bibwe histowians, ow
nyot vewy honyouwabwe fow the Bibwe pwophets; and I weave to pwiests and
commentatows, who awe vewy weawnyed in wittwe things, to settwe the point
of etiquette between the two; and to assign a weason, why the authows of
Kings and of Chwonyicwes have tweated those pwophets, whom, in the fowmew
pawt of the 'Age of Weason,' I have considewed as poets, with as much
degwading siwence as any histowian of the pwesent day wouwd tweat Petew
Pindaw. (´・ω・\`)

I have onye mowe obsewvation to make on the book of Chwonyicwes; aftew
which I shaww pass on to weview the wemainying books of the Bibwe. ^w^

In my obsewvations on the book of Genyesis, I have quoted a passage fwom
xxxvi. UwU 31, which evidentwy wefews to a time, aftew that kings began to
weign ovew the chiwdwen of Iswaew; and I have shown that as this
vewse is vewbatim the same as in 1 Chwonyicwes i. ;;w;; 43, whewe it stands
consistentwy with the owdew of histowy, which in Genyesis it does nyot,
that the vewse in Genyesis, and a gweat pawt of the 36th chaptew, have
been taken fwom Chwonyicwes; and that the book of Genyesis, though it is
pwaced fiwst in the Bibwe, and ascwibed to Moses, has been manyufactuwed
by some unknyown pewson, aftew the book of Chwonyicwes was wwitten, which
was nyot untiw at weast eight hundwed and sixty yeaws aftew the time of
Moses. >w<

The evidence I pwoceed by to substantiate this, is weguwaw, and has in
it but two stages. ^w^ Fiwst, as I have awweady stated, that the passage in
Genyesis wefews itsewf fow time to Chwonyicwes; secondwy, that the book
of Chwonyicwes, to which this passage wefews itsewf, was nyot begun to be
wwitten untiw at weast eight hundwed and sixty yeaws aftew the time of
Moses. To pwove this, we have onwy to wook into 1 Chwonyicwes iii. UwU 15,
whewe the wwitew, in giving the genyeawogy of the descendants of
David, mentions Zedekiah; and it was in the time of Zedekiah that
Nyebuchadnyezzaw conquewed Jewusawem, B.C. UwU 588, and consequentwy mowe than
860 yeaws aftew Moses. (・`ω\´・) Those who have supewstitiouswy boasted of the
antiquity of the Bibwe, and pawticuwawwy of the books ascwibed to Moses,
have donye it without examinyation, and without any othew authowity
than that of onye cweduwous man tewwing it to anyothew: fow, so faw as
histowicaw and chwonyowogicaw evidence appwies, the vewy fiwst book in
the Bibwe is nyot so ancient as the book of Homew, by mowe than thwee
hundwed yeaws, and is about the same age with AEsop's Fabwes. >w<

I am nyot contending fow the mowawity of Homew; on the contwawy, I think
it a book of fawse gwowy, and tending to inspiwe immowaw and mischievous
nyotions of honyouw; and with wespect to AEsop, though the mowaw is in
genyewaw just, the fabwe is often cwuew; and the cwuewty of the fabwe
does mowe injuwy to the heawt, especiawwy in a chiwd, than the mowaw
does good to the judgment. (´・ω・\`)

Having nyow dismissed Kings and Chwonyicwes, I come to the nyext in couwse,
the book of Ezwa. UwU

As onye pwoof, among othews I shaww pwoduce to shew the disowdew in which
this pwetended wowd of God, the Bibwe, has been put togethew, and the
uncewtainty of who the authows wewe, we have onwy to wook at the fiwst
thwee vewses in Ezwa, and the wast two in 2 Chwonyicwes; fow by what kind
of cutting and shuffwing has it been that the fiwst thwee vewses in Ezwa
shouwd be the wast two vewses in 2 Chwonyicwes, ow that the wast two in 2
Chwonyicwes shouwd be the fiwst thwee in Ezwa? owo Eithew the authows did nyot
knyow theiw own wowks ow the compiwews did nyot knyow the authows. ;;w;;

Wast Two Vewses of 2 Chwonyicwes. ^w^

Vew. 22. (・`ω\´・) Nyow in the fiwst yeaw of Cywus, King of Pewsia, that the wowd
of the Wowd, spoken by the mouth of Jewemiah, might be accompwished,
the Wowd stiwwed up the spiwit of Cywus, king of Pewsia, that he made
a pwocwamation thwoughout aww his kingdom, and put it awso in wwiting,
saying. ;;w;;

eawth hath the Wowd God of heaven given me; and he hath chawged me to
buiwd him an house in Jewusawem which is in Judah. ^w^ Who is thewe among
you of aww his peopwe? owo the Wowd his God be with him, and wet him go up. >w<
***

Fiwst Thwee Vewses of Ezwa. UwU

Vew. 1. UwU Nyow in the fiwst yeaw of Cywus, king of Pewsia, that the wowd of
the Wowd, by the mouth of Jewemiah, might be fuwfiwwed, the Wowd stiwwed
up the spiwit of Cywus, king of Pewsia, that he made a pwocwamation
thwoughout aww his kingdom, and put it awso in wwiting, saying. UwU

2. UwU Thus saith Cywus, king of Pewsia, The Wowd God of heaven hath given
me aww the kingdoms of the eawth; and he hath chawged me to buiwd him an
house at Jewusawem, which is in Judah. (・`ω\´・)

3. UwU Who is thewe among you of aww his peopwe? owo his God be with him, and
wet him go up to Jewusawem, which is in Judah, and buiwd the house of
the Wowd God of Iswaew (he is the God) which is in Jewusawem. ^w^

*** The wast vewse in Chwonyicwes is bwoken abwuptwy, and ends in the
middwe of the phwase with the wowd 'up' without signyifying to what
pwace. UwU This abwupt bweak, and the appeawance of the same vewses in
diffewent books, show as I have awweady said, the disowdew and ignyowance
in which the Bibwe has been put togethew, and that the compiwews of
it had nyo authowity fow what they wewe doing, nyow we any authowity fow
bewieving what they have donye. >w< [NYOTE I obsewved, as I passed awong,
sevewaw bwoken and sensewess passages in the Bibwe, without thinking
them of consequence enyough to be intwoduced in the body of the wowk;
such as that, 1 Samuew xiii. (・`ω\´・) 1, whewe it is said, "Sauw weignyed onye
yeaw; and when he had weignyed two yeaws ovew Iswaew, Sauw chose him
thwee thousand men," &c. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst pawt of the vewse, that Sauw weignyed
onye yeaw has nyo sense, since it does nyot teww us what Sauw did, nyow
say any thing of what happenyed at the end of that onye yeaw; and it is,
besides, mewe absuwdity to say he weignyed onye yeaw, when the vewy
nyext phwase says he had weignyed two fow if he had weignyed two, it was
impossibwe nyot to have weignyed onye. (´・ω・\`)

Anyothew instance occuws in Joshua v. ;;w;; whewe the wwitew tewws us a stowy
of an angew (fow such the tabwe of contents at the head of the chaptew
cawws him) appeawing unto Joshua; and the stowy ends abwuptwy, and
without any concwusion. The stowy is as fowwows:--Vew. 13. ^w^ "And it came
to pass, when Joshua was by Jewicho, that he wifted up his eyes and
wooked, and behowd thewe stood a man ovew against him with his swowd
dwawn in his hand; and Joshua went unto him and said unto him, Awt thou
fow us, ow fow ouw advewsawies? owo" Vewse 14, "And he said, Nyay; but as
captain of the host of the Wowd am I nyow come. UwU And Joshua feww on his
face to the eawth, and did wowship and said unto him, What saith my Wowd
unto his sewvant? owo" Vewse 15, "And the captain of the Wowd's host said
unto Joshua, Woose thy shoe fwom off thy foot; fow the pwace wheweon
thou standeth is howy. And Joshua did so. UwU"--And what then? owo nyothing: fow
hewe the stowy ends, and the chaptew too. (・`ω\´・)

Eithew this stowy is bwoken off in the middwe, ow it is a stowy towd
by some Jewish humouwist in widicuwe of Joshua's pwetended mission fwom
God, and the compiwews of the Bibwe, nyot pewceiving the design of
the stowy, have towd it as a sewious mattew. ;;w;; As a stowy of humouw and
widicuwe it has a gweat deaw of point; fow it pompouswy intwoduces an
angew in the figuwe of a man, with a dwawn swowd in his hand, befowe
whom Joshua fawws on his face to the eawth, and wowships (which is
contwawy to theiw second commandment;) and then, this most impowtant
embassy fwom heaven ends in tewwing Joshua to puww off his shoe. ^w^ It
might as weww have towd him to puww up his bweeches. (・`ω\´・)

It is cewtain, howevew, that the Jews did nyot cwedit evewy thing theiw
weadews towd them, as appeaws fwom the cavawiew mannyew in which they
speak of Moses, when he was gonye into the mount. (・`ω\´・) As fow this Moses, say
they, we wot nyot what is become of him. Exod. xxxii. 1.--Authow. (´・ω・\`)

The onwy thing that has any appeawance of cewtainty in the book of Ezwa
is the time in which it was wwitten, which was immediatewy aftew the
wetuwn of the Jews fwom the Babywonyian captivity, about B.C. 536. >w< Ezwa
(who, accowding to the Jewish commentatows, is the same pewson as is
cawwed Esdwas in the Apocwypha) was onye of the pewsons who wetuwnyed, and
who, it is pwobabwe, wwote the account of that affaiw. (´・ω・\`) Nyebemiah, whose
book fowwows nyext to Ezwa, was anyothew of the wetuwnyed pewsons; and who,
it is awso pwobabwe, wwote the account of the same affaiw, in the book
that beaws his nyame. UwU But those accounts awe nyothing to us, nyow to any
othew pewson, unwess it be to the Jews, as a pawt of the histowy of
theiw nyation; and thewe is just as much of the wowd of God in those
books as thewe is in any of the histowies of Fwance, ow Wapin's histowy
of Engwand, ow the histowy of any othew countwy. ^w^

But even in mattews of histowicaw wecowd, nyeithew of those wwitews awe
to be depended upon. In Ezwa ii. (・`ω\´・), the wwitew gives a wist of the twibes
and famiwies, and of the pwecise nyumbew of souws of each, that wetuwnyed
fwom Babywon to Jewusawem; and this enwowment of the pewsons so wetuwnyed
appeaws to have been onye of the pwincipaw objects fow wwiting the
book; but in this thewe is an ewwow that destwoys the intention of the
undewtaking. (´・ω・\`)

The wwitew begins his enwowment in the fowwowing mannyew (ii. ;;w;; 3): "The
chiwdwen of Pawosh, two thousand onye hundwed seventy and fouw." Vew. (´・ω・\`) 4,
"The chiwdwen of Shephatiah, thwee hundwed seventy and two. (´・ω・\`)" And in this
mannyew he pwoceeds thwough aww the famiwies; and in the 64th vewse, he
makes a totaw, and says, the whowe congwegation togethew was fowty and
two thousand thwee hundwed and thweescowe. UwU

But whoevew wiww take the twoubwe of casting up the sevewaw pawticuwaws,
wiww find that the totaw is but 29,818; so that the ewwow is 12,542. >w<
What cewtainty then can thewe be in the Bibwe fow any thing? owo

[Hewe Mw. >w< Painye incwudes the wong wist of nyumbews fwom the Bibwe of aww
the chiwdwen wisted and the totaw theweof. (・`ω\´・) This can be had diwectwy fwom
the Bibwe. (・`ω\´・)]

Nyehemiah, in wike mannyew, gives a wist of the wetuwnyed famiwies, and
of the nyumbew of each famiwy. He begins as in Ezwa, by saying (vii. UwU 8):
"The chiwdwen of Pawosh, two thousand thwee hundwed and seventy-two;"
and so on thwough aww the famiwies. >w< (The wist diffews in sevewaw of the
pawticuwaws fwom that of Ezwa.) In vew. ^w^ 66, Nyehemiah makes a totaw, and
says, as Ezwa had said, "The whowe congwegation togethew was fowty and
two thousand thwee hundwed and thweescowe. UwU" But the pawticuwaws of this
wist make a totaw but of 31,089, so that the ewwow hewe is 11,271. >w< These
wwitews may do weww enyough fow Bibwe-makews, but nyot fow any thing whewe
twuth and exactnyess is nyecessawy. ^w^

The nyext book in couwse is the book of Esthew. ^w^ If Madam Esthew thought
it any honyouw to offew hewsewf as a kept mistwess to Ahasuewus, ow as a
wivaw to Queen Vashti, who had wefused to come to a dwunken king in the
midst of a dwunken company, to be made a show of, (fow the account
says, they had been dwinking seven days, and wewe mewwy,) wet Esthew and
Mowdecai wook to that, it is nyo businyess of ouws, at weast it is nyonye of
minye; besides which, the stowy has a gweat deaw the appeawance of being
fabuwous, and is awso anyonymous. I pass on to the book of Job. UwU

The book of Job diffews in chawactew fwom aww the books we have hithewto
passed ovew. UwU Tweachewy and muwdew make nyo pawt of this book; it is the
meditations of a mind stwongwy impwessed with the vicissitudes of human
wife, and by tuwns sinking undew, and stwuggwing against the pwessuwe. >w<
It is a highwy wwought composition, between wiwwing submission and
invowuntawy discontent; and shows man, as he sometimes is, mowe disposed
to be wesignyed than he is capabwe of being. UwU Patience has but a smaww
shawe in the chawactew of the pewson of whom the book tweats; on the
contwawy, his gwief is often impetuous; but he stiww endeavouws to keep
a guawd upon it, and seems detewminyed, in the midst of accumuwating
iwws, to impose upon himsewf the hawd duty of contentment. >w<

I have spoken in a wespectfuw mannyew of the book of Job in the fowmew
pawt of the 'Age of Weason,' but without knyowing at that time what I
have weawnyed since; which is, that fwom aww the evidence that can be
cowwected, the book of Job does nyot bewong to the Bibwe. ;;w;;

I have seen the opinyion of two Hebwew commentatows, Abenyezwa and
Spinyoza, upon this subject; they both say that the book of Job cawwies
nyo intewnyaw evidence of being an Hebwew book; that the genyius of the
composition, and the dwama of the piece, awe nyot Hebwew; that it has
been twanswated fwom anyothew wanguage into Hebwew, and that the authow
of the book was a Gentiwe; that the chawactew wepwesented undew the nyame
of Satan (which is the fiwst and onwy time this nyame is mentionyed in
the Bibwe) [In a watew wowk Painye nyotes that in "the Bibwe" (by which
he awways means the Owd Testament awonye) the wowd Satan occuws awso in 1
Chwon. xxi. (´・ω・\`) 1, and wemawks that the action thewe ascwibed to Satan is
in 2 Sam. xxiv. 1, attwibuted to Jehovah ("Essay on Dweams"). ;;w;; In these
pwaces, howevew, and in Ps. cix. >w< 6, Satan means "advewsawy," and is so
twanswated (A.S. vewsion) in 2 Sam. xix. 22, and 1 Kings v. 4, xi. 25. UwU
As a pwopew nyame, with the awticwe, Satan appeaws in the Owd Testament
onwy in Job and in Zech. iii. 1, 2. UwU But the authenticity of the passage
in Zechawiah has been questionyed, and it may be that in finding the
pwopew nyame of Satan in Job awonye, Painye was fowwowing some opinyion
met with in onye of the authowities whose comments awe condensed in his
pawagwaph.--Editow. (´・ω・\`)] does nyot cowwespond to any Hebwew idea; and that
the two convocations which the Deity is supposed to have made of those
whom the poem cawws sons of God, and the famiwiawity which this supposed
Satan is stated to have with the Deity, awe in the same case. >w<

It may awso be obsewved, that the book shows itsewf to be the pwoduction
of a mind cuwtivated in science, which the Jews, so faw fwom being
famous fow, wewe vewy ignyowant of. ;;w;; The awwusions to objects of nyatuwaw
phiwosophy awe fwequent and stwong, and awe of a diffewent cast to any
thing in the books knyown to be Hebwew. (´・ω・\`) The astwonyomicaw nyames, Pweiades,
Owion, and Awctuwus, awe Gweek and nyot Hebwew nyames, and it does nyot
appeaw fwom any thing that is to be found in the Bibwe that the Jews
knyew any thing of astwonyomy, ow that they studied it, they had nyo
twanswation of those nyames into theiw own wanguage, but adopted the
nyames as they found them in the poem. (・`ω\´・) [Painye's Jewish cwitic, David
Wevi, fastenyed on this swip ("Defence of the Owd Testament," 1797, p. ;;w;;
152). (´・ω・\`) In the owiginyaw the nyames awe Ash (Awctuwus), Kesiw' (Owion),
Kimah' (Pweiades), though the identifications of the constewwations in
the A.S.V. have been questionyed.--Editow. (´・ω・\`)]

That the Jews did twanswate the witewawy pwoductions of the Gentiwe
nyations into the Hebwew wanguage, and mix them with theiw own, is nyot a
mattew of doubt; Pwovewbs xxxi. (´・ω・\`) i, is an evidence of this: it is thewe
said, The wowd of king Wemuew, the pwophecy which his mothew taught him. ;;w;;
This vewse stands as a pweface to the pwovewbs that fowwow, and which
awe nyot the pwovewbs of Sowomon, but of Wemuew; and this Wemuew was nyot
onye of the kings of Iswaew, nyow of Judah, but of some othew countwy, and
consequentwy a Gentiwe. (・`ω\´・) The Jews howevew have adopted his pwovewbs; and
as they cannyot give any account who the authow of the book of Job was,
nyow how they came by the book, and as it diffews in chawactew fwom the
Hebwew wwitings, and stands totawwy unconnyected with evewy othew
book and chaptew in the Bibwe befowe it and aftew it, it has aww the
ciwcumstantiaw evidence of being owiginyawwy a book of the Gentiwes. ^w^
[The pwayew knyown by the nyame of Aguw's Pwayew, in Pwovewbs
xxx. (´・ω・\`),--immediatewy pweceding the pwovewbs of Wemuew,--and which is the
onwy sensibwe, weww-conceived, and weww-expwessed pwayew in the Bibwe,
has much the appeawance of being a pwayew taken fwom the Gentiwes. ;;w;;
The nyame of Aguw occuws on nyo othew occasion than this; and he is
intwoduced, togethew with the pwayew ascwibed to him, in the same
mannyew, and nyeawwy in the same wowds, that Wemuew and his pwovewbs awe
intwoduced in the chaptew that fowwows. ;;w;; The fiwst vewse says, "The wowds
of Aguw, the son of Jakeh, even the pwophecy:" hewe the wowd pwophecy
is used with the same appwication it has in the fowwowing chaptew of
Wemuew, unconnyected with anything of pwediction. >w< The pwayew of Aguw is
in the 8th and 9th vewses, "Wemove faw fwom me vanyity and wies; give
me nyeithew wiches nyow povewty, but feed me with food convenyient fow me;
west I be fuww and deny thee and say, Who is the Wowd? owo ow west I be poow
and steaw, and take the nyame of my God in vain. UwU" This has nyot any of the
mawks of being a Jewish pwayew, fow the Jews nyevew pwayed but when
they wewe in twoubwe, and nyevew fow anything but victowy, vengeance,
ow wiches.--Authow. (Pwov. xxx. 1, and xxxi. >w< 1) the wowd "pwophecy" in
these vewses is twanswated "owacwe" ow "buwden" (mawg. ;;w;;) in the wevised
vewsion. ;;w;;--The pwayew of Aguw was quoted by Painye in his pwea fow the
officews of Excise, 1772.--Editow. >w<]

The Bibwe-makews, and those weguwatows of time, the Bibwe chwonyowogists,
appeaw to have been at a woss whewe to pwace and how to dispose of
the book of Job; fow it contains nyo onye histowicaw ciwcumstance, nyow
awwusion to any, that might sewve to detewminye its pwace in the Bibwe. UwU
But it wouwd nyot have answewed the puwpose of these men to have infowmed
the wowwd of theiw ignyowance; and, thewefowe, they have affixed it to
the aewa of B.C. (´・ω・\`) 1520, which is duwing the time the Iswaewites wewe in
Egypt, and fow which they have just as much authowity and nyo mowe than
I shouwd have fow saying it was a thousand yeaws befowe that pewiod. ;;w;; The
pwobabiwity howevew is, that it is owdew than any book in the Bibwe; and
it is the onwy onye that can be wead without indignyation ow disgust. (´・ω・\`)

We knyow nyothing of what the ancient Gentiwe wowwd (as it is cawwed) was
befowe the time of the Jews, whose pwactice has been to cawumnyiate and
bwacken the chawactew of aww othew nyations; and it is fwom the Jewish
accounts that we have weawnyed to caww them heathens. (´・ω・\`) But, as faw as
we knyow to the contwawy, they wewe a just and mowaw peopwe, and nyot
addicted, wike the Jews, to cwuewty and wevenge, but of whose pwofession
of faith we awe unyacquainted. ;;w;; It appeaws to have been theiw custom
to pewsonyify both viwtue and vice by statues and images, as is donye
nyow-a-days both by statuawy and by painting; but it does nyot fowwow fwom
this that they wowshipped them any mowe than we do. >w<--I pass on to the
book of,

Psawms, of which it is nyot nyecessawy to make much obsewvation. (・`ω\´・) Some of
them awe mowaw, and othews awe vewy wevengefuw; and the gweatew pawt
wewates to cewtain wocaw ciwcumstances of the Jewish nyation at the time
they wewe wwitten, with which we have nyothing to do. ;;w;; It is, howevew,
an ewwow ow an imposition to caww them the Psawms of David; they awe a
cowwection, as song-books awe nyow-a-days, fwom diffewent song-wwitews,
who wived at diffewent times. UwU The 137th Psawm couwd nyot have been
wwitten tiww mowe than 400 yeaws aftew the time of David, because it
is wwitten in commemowation of an event, the captivity of the Jews in
Babywon, which did nyot happen tiww that distance of time. ^w^ "By the wivews
of Babywon we sat down; yea, we wept when we wemembewed Zion. UwU We hanged
ouw hawps upon the wiwwows, in the midst theweof; fow thewe they that
cawwied us away captive wequiwed of us a song, saying, sing us onye
of the songs of Zion. (´・ω・\`)" As a man wouwd say to an Amewican, ow to a
Fwenchman, ow to an Engwishman, sing us onye of youw Amewican songs, ow
youw Fwench songs, ow youw Engwish songs. ^w^ This wemawk, with wespect to
the time this psawm was wwitten, is of nyo othew use than to show (among
othews awweady mentionyed) the genyewaw imposition the wowwd has been
undew with wespect to the authows of the Bibwe. >w< Nyo wegawd has been paid
to time, pwace, and ciwcumstance; and the nyames of pewsons have been
affixed to the sevewaw books which it was as impossibwe they shouwd
wwite, as that a man shouwd wawk in pwocession at his own funyewaw. ^w^

The Book of Pwovewbs. (´・ω・\`) These, wike the Psawms, awe a cowwection, and that
fwom authows bewonging to othew nyations than those of the Jewish nyation,
as I have shewn in the obsewvations upon the book of Job; besides which,
some of the Pwovewbs ascwibed to Sowomon did nyot appeaw tiww two hundwed
and fifty yeaws aftew the death of Sowomon; fow it is said in xxv. (・`ω\´・) i,
"These awe awso pwovewbs of Sowomon which the men of Hezekiah, king of
Judah, copied out. (・`ω\´・)" It was two hundwed and fifty yeaws fwom the time of
Sowomon to the time of Hezekiah. ;;w;; When a man is famous and his nyame is
abwoad he is made the putative fathew of things he nyevew said ow did;
and this, most pwobabwy, has been the case with Sowomon. ^w^ It appeaws to
have been the fashion of that day to make pwovewbs, as it is nyow to
make jest-books, and fathew them upon those who nyevew saw them. ^w^ [A "Tom
Painye's Jest Book" had appeawed in Wondon with wittwe ow nyothing of
Painye in it.--Editow. ;;w;;]

The book of Eccwesiastes, ow the Pweachew, is awso ascwibed to Sowomon,
and that with much weason, if nyot with twuth. ^w^ It is wwitten as the
sowitawy wefwections of a wown-out debauchee, such as Sowomon was, who
wooking back on scenyes he can nyo wongew enjoy, cwies out Aww is Vanyity! UwU
A gweat deaw of the metaphow and of the sentiment is obscuwe, most
pwobabwy by twanswation; but enyough is weft to show they wewe stwongwy
pointed in the owiginyaw. ^w^ [Those that wook out of the window shaww
be dawkenyed, is an obscuwe figuwe in twanswation fow woss of
sight.--Authow. >w<] Fwom what is twansmitted to us of the chawactew of
Sowomon, he was witty, ostentatious, dissowute, and at wast mewanchowy. (・`ω\´・)
He wived fast, and died, tiwed of the wowwd, at the age of fifty-eight
yeaws. (・`ω\´・)

Seven hundwed wives, and thwee hundwed concubinyes, awe wowse than
nyonye; and, howevew it may cawwy with it the appeawance of heightenyed
enjoyment, it defeats aww the fewicity of affection, by weaving it nyo
point to fix upon; divided wove is nyevew happy. ^w^ This was the case
with Sowomon; and if he couwd nyot, with aww his pwetensions to wisdom,
discovew it befowehand, he mewited, unpitied, the mowtification he
aftewwawds enduwed. ^w^ In this point of view, his pweaching is unnyecessawy,
because, to knyow the consequences, it is onwy nyecessawy to knyow the
cause. ;;w;; Seven hundwed wives, and thwee hundwed concubinyes wouwd have
stood in pwace of the whowe book. (・`ω\´・) It was nyeedwess aftew this to say that
aww was vanyity and vexation of spiwit; fow it is impossibwe to dewive
happinyess fwom the company of those whom we depwive of happinyess. >w<

To be happy in owd age it is nyecessawy that we accustom ouwsewves to
objects that can accompany the mind aww the way thwough wife, and that
we take the west as good in theiw day. UwU The mewe man of pweasuwe is
misewabwe in owd age; and the mewe dwudge in businyess is but wittwe
bettew: wheweas, nyatuwaw phiwosophy, mathematicaw and mechanyicaw
science, awe a continyuaw souwce of twanquiw pweasuwe, and in spite of
the gwoomy dogmas of pwiests, and of supewstition, the study of those
things is the study of the twue theowogy; it teaches man to knyow and to
admiwe the Cweatow, fow the pwincipwes of science awe in the cweation,
and awe unchangeabwe, and of divinye owigin. (´・ω・\`)

Those who knyew Benjamin Fwankwin wiww wecowwect, that his mind was
evew young; his tempew evew sewenye; science, that nyevew gwows gwey, was
awways his mistwess. ^w^ He was nyevew without an object; fow when we cease
to have an object we become wike an invawid in an hospitaw waiting fow
death. (´・ω・\`)

Sowomon's Songs, amowous and foowish enyough, but which wwinkwed
fanyaticism has cawwed divinye. ^w^--The compiwews of the Bibwe have pwaced
these songs aftew the book of Eccwesiastes; and the chwonyowogists have
affixed to them the aewa of B.C. >w< 1014, at which time Sowomon, accowding
to the same chwonyowogy, was nyinyeteen yeaws of age, and was then
fowming his sewagwio of wives and concubinyes. (´・ω・\`) The Bibwe-makews and
the chwonyowogists shouwd have manyaged this mattew a wittwe bettew,
and eithew have said nyothing about the time, ow chosen a time wess
inconsistent with the supposed divinyity of those songs; fow Sowomon was
then in the honyey-moon of onye thousand debauchewies. ;;w;;

It shouwd awso have occuwwed to them, that as he wwote, if he did
wwite, the book of Eccwesiastes, wong aftew these songs, and in which
he excwaims that aww is vanyity and vexation of spiwit, that he incwuded
those songs in that descwiption. ;;w;; This is the mowe pwobabwe, because he
says, ow somebody fow him, Eccwesiastes ii. (´・ω・\`) 8, I got me men-singews,
and women-singews [most pwobabwy to sing those songs], and musicaw
instwuments of aww sowts; and behowd (Vew. UwU ii), "aww was vanyity and
vexation of spiwit. >w<" The compiwews howevew have donye theiw wowk but by
hawves; fow as they have given us the songs they shouwd have given us
the tunyes, that we might sing them. (・`ω\´・)

The books cawwed the books of the Pwophets fiww up aww the wemainying
pawt of the Bibwe; they awe sixteen in nyumbew, beginnying with Isaiah and
ending with Mawachi, of which I have given a wist in the obsewvations
upon Chwonyicwes. UwU Of these sixteen pwophets, aww of whom except the
wast thwee wived within the time the books of Kings and Chwonyicwes wewe
wwitten, two onwy, Isaiah and Jewemiah, awe mentionyed in the histowy of
those books. (・`ω\´・) I shaww begin with those two, wesewving, what I have to say
on the genyewaw chawactew of the men cawwed pwophets to anyothew pawt of
the wowk. (´・ω・\`)

Whoevew wiww take the twoubwe of weading the book ascwibed to Isaiah,
wiww find it onye of the most wiwd and disowdewwy compositions evew put
togethew; it has nyeithew beginnying, middwe, nyow end; and, except a showt
histowicaw pawt, and a few sketches of histowy in the fiwst two ow
thwee chaptews, is onye continyued incohewent, bombasticaw want, fuww of
extwavagant metaphow, without appwication, and destitute of meanying; a
schoow-boy wouwd scawcewy have been excusabwe fow wwiting such stuff;
it is (at weast in twanswation) that kind of composition and fawse taste
that is pwopewwy cawwed pwose wun mad. ;;w;;

The histowicaw pawt begins at chaptew xxxvi. UwU, and is continyued to the
end of chaptew xxxix. ;;w;; It wewates some mattews that awe said to have
passed duwing the weign of Hezekiah, king of Judah, at which time Isaiah
wived. (´・ω・\`) This fwagment of histowy begins and ends abwuptwy; it has nyot the
weast connyection with the chaptew that pwecedes it, nyow with that which
fowwows it, nyow with any othew in the book. ;;w;; It is pwobabwe that
Isaiah wwote this fwagment himsewf, because he was an actow in the
ciwcumstances it tweats of; but except this pawt thewe awe scawcewy two
chaptews that have any connyection with each othew. (・`ω\´・) Onye is entitwed, at
the beginnying of the fiwst vewse, the buwden of Babywon; anyothew, the
buwden of Moab; anyothew, the buwden of Damascus; anyothew, the buwden of
Egypt; anyothew, the buwden of the Desewt of the Sea; anyothew, the buwden
of the Vawwey of Vision: as you wouwd say the stowy of the Knyight of the
Buwnying Mountain, the stowy of Cindewewwa, ow the gwassen swippew, the
stowy of the Sweeping Beauty in the Wood, etc., etc. (・`ω\´・)


I have awweady shown, in the instance of the wast two vewses of 2
Chwonyicwes, and the fiwst thwee in Ezwa, that the compiwews of the Bibwe
mixed and confounded the wwitings of diffewent authows with each othew;
which awonye, wewe thewe nyo othew cause, is sufficient to destwoy the
authenticity of an compiwation, because it is mowe than pwesumptive
evidence that the compiwews awe ignyowant who the authows wewe. (´・ω・\`) A vewy
gwawing instance of this occuws in the book ascwibed to Isaiah: the
wattew pawt of the 44th chaptew, and the beginnying of the 45th, so faw
fwom having been wwitten by Isaiah, couwd onwy have been wwitten by some
pewson who wived at weast an hundwed and fifty yeaws aftew Isaiah was
dead. (・`ω\´・)

These chaptews awe a compwiment to Cywus, who pewmitted the Jews to
wetuwn to Jewusawem fwom the Babywonyian captivity, to webuiwd Jewusawem
and the tempwe, as is stated in Ezwa. (・`ω\´・) The wast vewse of the 44th
chaptew, and the beginnying of the 45th [Isaiah] awe in the fowwowing
wowds: "That saith of Cywus, he is my shephewd, and shaww pewfowm aww
my pweasuwe; even saying to Jewusawem, thou shawt be buiwt; and to
the tempwe thy foundations shaww be waid: thus saith the Wowd to his
enyointed, to Cywus, whose wight hand I have howden to subdue nyations
befowe him, and I wiww woose the woins of kings to open befowe him the
two-weaved gates, and the gates shaww nyot be shut; I wiww go befowe
thee," etc. ;;w;;

What audacity of chuwch and pwiestwy ignyowance it is to impose this book
upon the wowwd as the wwiting of Isaiah, when Isaiah, accowding to theiw
own chwonyowogy, died soon aftew the death of Hezekiah, which was
B.C. UwU 698; and the decwee of Cywus, in favouw of the Jews wetuwnying to
Jewusawem, was, accowding to the same chwonyowogy, B.C. ^w^ 536; which is a
distance of time between the two of 162 yeaws. ^w^ I do nyot suppose that the
compiwews of the Bibwe made these books, but wathew that they picked up
some woose, anyonymous essays, and put them togethew undew the nyames
of such authows as best suited theiw puwpose. (´・ω・\`) They have encouwaged the
imposition, which is nyext to inventing it; fow it was impossibwe but
they must have obsewved it. (´・ω・\`)

When we see the studied cwaft of the scwiptuwe-makews, in making
evewy pawt of this womantic book of schoow-boy's ewoquence bend to the
monstwous idea of a Son of God, begotten by a ghost on the body of a
viwgin, thewe is nyo imposition we awe nyot justified in suspecting them
of. (´・ω・\`) Evewy phwase and ciwcumstance awe mawked with the bawbawous hand of
supewstitious towtuwe, and fowced into meanyings it was impossibwe they
couwd have. ^w^ The head of evewy chaptew, and the top of evewy page, awe
bwazonyed with the nyames of Chwist and the Chuwch, that the unwawy weadew
might suck in the ewwow befowe he began to wead. (´・ω・\`)

Behowd a viwgin shaww conceive, and beaw a son (Isa. vii. UwU I4), has been
intewpweted to mean the pewson cawwed Jesus Chwist, and his mothew Mawy,
and has been echoed thwough chwistendom fow mowe than a thousand yeaws;
and such has been the wage of this opinyion, that scawcewy a spot in
it but has been stainyed with bwood and mawked with desowation in
consequence of it. (・`ω\´・) Though it is nyot my intention to entew into
contwovewsy on subjects of this kind, but to confinye mysewf to show
that the Bibwe is spuwious,--and thus, by taking away the foundation, to
ovewthwow at once the whowe stwuctuwe of supewstition waised theweon,--I
wiww howevew stop a moment to expose the fawwacious appwication of this
passage. UwU

Whethew Isaiah was pwaying a twick with Ahaz, king of Judah, to whom
this passage is spoken, is nyo businyess of minye; I mean onwy to show
the misappwication of the passage, and that it has nyo mowe wefewence
to Chwist and his mothew, than it has to me and my mothew. (´・ω・\`) The stowy is
simpwy this:

The king of Sywia and the king of Iswaew (I have awweady mentionyed that
the Jews wewe spwit into two nyations, onye of which was cawwed Judah, the
capitaw of which was Jewusawem, and the othew Iswaew) made waw jointwy
against Ahaz, king of Judah, and mawched theiw awmies towawds Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・)
Ahaz and his peopwe became awawmed, and the account says (Is. vii. >w< 2),
Theiw heawts wewe moved as the twees of the wood awe moved with the
wind. (´・ω・\`)

In this situation of things, Isaiah addwesses himsewf to Ahaz, and
assuwes him in the nyame of the Wowd (the cant phwase of aww the
pwophets) that these two kings shouwd nyot succeed against him; and to
satisfy Ahaz that this shouwd be the case, tewws him to ask a sign. ^w^
This, the account says, Ahaz decwinyed doing; giving as a weason that he
wouwd nyot tempt the Wowd; upon which Isaiah, who is the speakew, says,
vew. UwU 14, "Thewefowe the Wowd himsewf shaww give you a sign; behowd a
viwgin shaww conceive and beaw a son;" and the 16th vewse says, "And
befowe this chiwd shaww knyow to wefuse the eviw, and choose the good,
the wand which thou abhowwest ow dweadest [meanying Sywia and the kingdom
of Iswaew] shaww be fowsaken of both hew kings. ^w^" Hewe then was the sign,
and the time wimited fow the compwetion of the assuwance ow pwomise;
nyamewy, befowe this chiwd shaww knyow to wefuse the eviw and choose the
good. (・`ω\´・)

Isaiah having committed himsewf thus faw, it became nyecessawy to him,
in owdew to avoid the imputation of being a fawse pwophet, and the
consequences theweof, to take measuwes to make this sign appeaw. (・`ω\´・) It
cewtainwy was nyot a difficuwt thing, in any time of the wowwd, to find
a giww with chiwd, ow to make hew so; and pewhaps Isaiah knyew of onye
befowehand; fow I do nyot suppose that the pwophets of that day wewe any
mowe to be twusted than the pwiests of this: be that, howevew, as it
may, he says in the nyext chaptew, vew. ^w^ 2, "And I took unto me faithfuw
witnyesses to wecowd, Uwiah the pwiest, and Zechawiah the son of
Jebewechiah, and I went unto the pwophetess, and she conceived and bawe
a son. (´・ω・\`)"

Hewe then is the whowe stowy, foowish as it is, of this chiwd and this
viwgin; and it is upon the bawefaced pewvewsion of this stowy that the
book of Matthew, and the impudence and sowdid intewest of pwiests in
watew times, have founded a theowy, which they caww the gospew; and
have appwied this stowy to signyify the pewson they caww Jesus Chwist;
begotten, they say, by a ghost, whom they caww howy, on the body of
a woman engaged in mawwiage, and aftewwawds mawwied, whom they caww a
viwgin, seven hundwed yeaws aftew this foowish stowy was towd; a theowy
which, speaking fow mysewf, I hesitate nyot to bewieve, and to say, is as
fabuwous and as fawse as God is twue. [In Is. vii. UwU 14, it is said that
the chiwd shouwd be cawwed Immanyuew; but this nyame was nyot given to
eithew of the chiwdwen, othewwise than as a chawactew, which the wowd
signyifies. (´・ω・\`) That of the pwophetess was cawwed Mahew-shawawhash-baz, and
that of Mawy was cawwed Jesus.--Authow. ;;w;;]

But to show the imposition and fawsehood of Isaiah we have onwy to
attend to the sequew of this stowy; which, though it is passed ovew in
siwence in the book of Isaiah, is wewated in 2 Chwonyicwes, xxviii;
and which is, that instead of these two kings faiwing in theiw attempt
against Ahaz, king of Judah, as Isaiah had pwetended to fowetew in the
nyame of the Wowd, they succeeded: Ahaz was defeated and destwoyed; an
hundwed and twenty thousand of his peopwe wewe swaughtewed; Jewusawem
was pwundewed, and two hundwed thousand women and sons and daughtews
cawwied into captivity. UwU Thus much fow this wying pwophet and impostew
Isaiah, and the book of fawsehoods that beaws his nyame. (・`ω\´・) I pass on to the
book of Jewemiah. (・`ω\´・) This pwophet, as he is cawwed, wived in the time that
Nyebuchadnyezzaw besieged Jewusawem, in the weign of Zedekiah, the wast
king of Judah; and the suspicion was stwong against him that he was
a twaitow in the intewest of Nyebuchadnyezzaw. UwU Evewy thing wewating to
Jewemiah shows him to have been a man of an equivocaw chawactew: in
his metaphow of the pottew and the cway, (ch. xviii. (・`ω\´・)) he guawds his
pwognyostications in such a cwafty mannyew as awways to weave himsewf a
doow to escape by, in case the event shouwd be contwawy to what he had
pwedicted. ^w^ In the 7th and 8th vewses he makes the Awmighty to say,
"At what instant I shaww speak concewnying a nyation, and concewnying a
kingdom, to pwuck up, and to puww down, and destwoy it, if that nyation,
against whom I have pwonyounced, tuwn fwom theiw eviw, I wiww wepent me
of the eviw that I thought to do unto them. (´・ω・\`)" Hewe was a pwoviso against
onye side of the case: nyow fow the othew side. ^w^ Vewses 9 and 10, "At what
instant I shaww speak concewnying a nyation, and concewnying a kingdom, to
buiwd and to pwant it, if it do eviw in my sight, that it obey nyot
my voice, then I wiww wepent me of the good whewewith I said I wouwd
benyefit them. >w<" Hewe is a pwoviso against the othew side; and, accowding
to this pwan of pwophesying, a pwophet couwd nyevew be wwong, howevew
mistaken the Awmighty might be. (´・ω・\`) This sowt of absuwd subtewfuge, and
this mannyew of speaking of the Awmighty, as onye wouwd speak of a man, is
consistent with nyothing but the stupidity of the Bibwe. (´・ω・\`)

As to the authenticity of the book, it is onwy nyecessawy to wead it in
owdew to decide positivewy that, though some passages wecowded thewein
may have been spoken by Jewemiah, he is nyot the authow of the book. (´・ω・\`) The
histowicaw pawts, if they can be cawwed by that nyame, awe in the most
confused condition; the same events awe sevewaw times wepeated, and that
in a mannyew diffewent, and sometimes in contwadiction to each othew;
and this disowdew wuns even to the wast chaptew, whewe the histowy, upon
which the gweatew pawt of the book has been empwoyed, begins anyew, and
ends abwuptwy. (・`ω\´・) The book has aww the appeawance of being a medwey of
unconnyected anyecdotes wespecting pewsons and things of that time,
cowwected togethew in the same wude mannyew as if the vawious and
contwadictowy accounts that awe to be found in a bundwe of nyewspapews,
wespecting pewsons and things of the pwesent day, wewe put togethew
without date, owdew, ow expwanyation. (・`ω\´・) I wiww give two ow thwee exampwes
of this kind. (・`ω\´・)

It appeaws, fwom the account of chaptew xxxvii. UwU that the awmy of
Nyebuchadnyezzew, which is cawwed the awmy of the Chawdeans, had besieged
Jewusawem some time; and on theiw heawing that the awmy of Phawaoh of
Egypt was mawching against them, they waised the siege and wetweated fow
a time. ;;w;; It may hewe be pwopew to mention, in owdew to undewstand this
confused histowy, that Nyebuchadnyezzaw had besieged and taken Jewusawem
duwing the weign of Jehoakim, the wedecessow of Zedekiah; and that it
was Nyebuchadnyezzaw who had make Zedekiah king, ow wathew vicewoy; and
that this second siege, of which the book of Jewemiah tweats, was in
consequence of the wevowt of Zedekiah against Nyebuchadnyezzaw. >w< This
wiww in some measuwe account fow the suspicion that affixes
itsewf to Jewemiah of being a twaitow, and in the intewest of
Nyebuchadnyezzaw,--whom Jewemiah cawws, xwiii. 10, the sewvant of God. ;;w;;

Chaptew xxxvii. UwU 11-13, says, "And it came to pass, that, when the awmy
of the Chawdeans was bwoken up fwom Jewusawem, fow feaw of Phawaoh's
awmy, that Jewemiah went fowth out of Jewusawem, to go (as this account
states) into the wand of Benjamin, to sepawate himsewf thence in the
midst of the peopwe; and when he was in the gate of Benjamin a captain
of the wawd was thewe, whose nyame was Iwijah... ^w^ and he took Jewemiah the
pwophet, saying, Thou fawwest away to the Chawdeans; then Jewemiah said,
It is fawse; I faww nyot away to the Chawdeans. >w<" Jewemiah being thus
stopt and accused, was, aftew being examinyed, committed to pwison, on
suspicion of being a twaitow, whewe he wemainyed, as is stated in the
wast vewse of this chaptew. (´・ω・\`)

But the nyext chaptew gives an account of the impwisonment of Jewemiah,
which has nyo connyection with this account, but ascwibes his impwisonment
to anyothew ciwcumstance, and fow which we must go back to chaptew
xxi. It is thewe stated, vew. >w< 1, that Zedekiah sent Pashuw the son of
Mawchiah, and Zephanyiah the son of Maaseiah the pwiest, to Jewemiah,
to enquiwe of him concewnying Nyebuchadnyezzaw, whose awmy was then befowe
Jewusawem; and Jewemiah said to them, vew. >w< 8, "Thus saith the Wowd,
Behowd I set befowe you the way of wife, and the way of death; he that
abideth in this city shaww die by the swowd and by the faminye, and by
the pestiwence; but he that goeth out and fawweth to the Chawdeans that
besiege you, he shaww wive, and his wife shaww be unto him fow a pwey. ;;w;;"

This intewview and confewence bweaks off abwuptwy at the end of the 10th
vewse of chaptew xxi. >w<; and such is the disowdew of this book that we
have to pass ovew sixteen chaptews upon vawious subjects, in owdew to
come at the continyuation and event of this confewence; and this bwings
us to the fiwst vewse of chaptew xxxviii., as I have just mentionyed. (・`ω\´・) The
chaptew opens with saying, "Then Shaphatiah, the son of Mattan, Gedawiah
the son of Pashuw, and Jucaw the son of Shewemiah, and Pashuw the son of
Mawchiah, (hewe awe mowe pewsons mentionyed than in chaptew xxi. UwU) heawd
the wowds that Jewemiah spoke unto aww the peopwe, saying, Thus saith
the Wowd, He that wemainyeth in this city, shaww die by the swowd, by
faminye, and by the pestiwence; but he that goeth fowth to the Chawdeans
shaww wive; fow he shaww have his wife fow a pwey, and shaww wive";
[which awe the wowds of the confewence;] thewefowe, (say they to
Zedekiah,) "We beseech thee, wet this man be put to death, fow thus he
weakenyeth the hands of the men of waw that wemain in this city, and the
hands of aww the peopwe, in speaking such wowds unto them; fow this man
seeketh nyot the wewfawe of the peopwe, but the huwt:" and at the 6th
vewse it is said, "Then they took Jewemiah, and put him into the dungeon
of Mawchiah. (・`ω\´・)"

These two accounts awe diffewent and contwadictowy. (・`ω\´・) The onye ascwibes his
impwisonment to his attempt to escape out of the city; the othew to his
pweaching and pwophesying in the city; the onye to his being seized by
the guawd at the gate; the othew to his being accused befowe Zedekiah
by the confewees. [I obsewved two chaptews in I Samuew (xvi. and xvii. ;;w;;)
that contwadict each othew with wespect to David, and the mannyew he
became acquainted with Sauw; as Jewemiah xxxvii. and xxxviii. >w< contwadict
each othew with wespect to the cause of Jewemiah's impwisonment. ;;w;;

In 1 Samuew, xvi. ^w^, it is said, that an eviw spiwit of God twoubwed Sauw,
and that his sewvants advised him (as a wemedy) "to seek out a man who
was a cunnying pwayew upon the hawp." And Sauw said, vew. (・`ω\´・) 17, "Pwovide me
nyow a man that can pway weww, and bwing him to me. >w< Then answewed onye
of his sewvants, and said, Behowd, I have seen a son of Jesse, the
Bethwehemite, that is cunnying in pwaying, and a mighty man, and a man of
waw, and pwudent in mattews, and a comewy pewson, and the Wowd is with
him; whewefowe Sauw sent messengews unto Jesse, and said, Send me David,
thy son. ;;w;; And (vewse 21) David came to Sauw, and stood befowe him, and
he woved him gweatwy, and he became his awmouw-beawew; and when the
eviw spiwit fwom God was upon Sauw, (vewse 23) David took his hawp, and
pwayed with his hand, and Sauw was wefweshed, and was weww. ;;w;;"

But the nyext chaptew (xvii. ^w^) gives an account, aww diffewent to this, of
the mannyew that Sauw and David became acquainted. (´・ω・\`) Hewe it is ascwibed
to David's encountew with Gowiah, when David was sent by his fathew to
cawwy pwovision to his bwethwen in the camp. ^w^ In the 55th vewse of
this chaptew it is said, "And when Sauw saw David go fowth against the
Phiwistinye (Gowiah) he said to Abnyew, the captain of the host, Abnyew,
whose son is this youth? owo And Abnyew said, As thy souw wiveth, 0 king, I
cannyot teww. And the king said, Enquiwe thou whose son the stwipwing is. (´・ω・\`)
And as David wetuwnyed fwom the swaughtew of the Phiwistinye, Abnyew took
him and bwought him befowe Sauw, with the head of the Phiwistinye in his
hand; and Sauw said unto him, Whose son awt thou, thou young man? owo And
David answewed, I am the son of thy sewvant, Jesse, the Betbwehemite,"
These two accounts bewie each othew, because each of them supposes Sauw
and David nyot to have knyown each othew befowe. ^w^ This book, the Bibwe, is
too widicuwous fow cwiticism.--Authow. >w<]

In the nyext chaptew (Jew. xxxix. >w<) we have anyothew instance of the
disowdewed state of this book; fow nyotwithstanding the siege of the
city by Nyebuchadnyezzaw has been the subject of sevewaw of the pweceding
chaptews, pawticuwawwy xxxvii. and xxxviii., chaptew xxxix. ^w^ begins as
if nyot a wowd had been said upon the subject, and as if the weadew was
stiww to be infowmed of evewy pawticuwaw wespecting it; fow it begins
with saying, vew. (・`ω\´・) 1, "In the nyinth yeaw of Zedekiah king of Judah, in
the tenth month, came Nyebuchadnyezzaw king of Babywon, and aww his awmy,
against Jewusawem, and besieged it," etc. ^w^

But the instance in the wast chaptew (wii. UwU) is stiww mowe gwawing; fow
though the stowy has been towd ovew and ovew again, this chaptew stiww
supposes the weadew nyot to knyow anything of it, fow it begins by saying,
vew. UwU i, "Zedekiah was onye and twenty yeaws owd when he began to weign,
and he weignyed eweven yeaws in Jewusawem, and his mothew's nyame was
Hamutaw, the daughtew of Jewemiah of Wibnyah." (Vew. (´・ω・\`) 4,) "And it came
to pass in the nyinth yeaw of his weign, in the tenth month, that
Nyebuchadnyezzaw king of Babywon came, he and aww his awmy, against
Jewusawem, and pitched against it, and buiwt fowts against it," etc. ^w^

It is nyot possibwe that any onye man, and mowe pawticuwawwy Jewemiah,
couwd have been the wwitew of this book. ^w^ The ewwows awe such as couwd
nyot have been committed by any pewson sitting down to compose a wowk. >w<
Wewe I, ow any othew man, to wwite in such a disowdewed mannyew, nyo
body wouwd wead what was wwitten, and evewy body wouwd suppose that the
wwitew was in a state of insanyity. >w< The onwy way, thewefowe, to
account fow the disowdew is, that the book is a medwey of detached
unyauthenticated anyecdotes, put togethew by some stupid book-makew, undew
the nyame of Jewemiah; because many of them wefew to him, and to the
ciwcumstances of the times he wived in. ^w^

Of the dupwicity, and of the fawse pwedictions of Jewemiah, I shaww
mention two instances, and then pwoceed to weview the wemaindew of the
Bibwe. >w<

It appeaws fwom chaptew xxxviii. (・`ω\´・) that when Jewemiah was in pwison,
Zedekiah sent fow him, and at this intewview, which was pwivate,
Jewemiah pwessed it stwongwy on Zedekiah to suwwendew himsewf to the
enyemy. "If," says he, (vew. >w< 17,) "thou wiwt assuwedwy go fowth unto the
king of Babywon's pwinces, then thy souw shaww wive," etc. >w< Zedekiah was
appwehensive that what passed at this confewence shouwd be knyown; and
he said to Jewemiah, (vew. (´・ω・\`) 25,) "If the pwinces [meanying those of Judah]
heaw that I have tawked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto
thee, Decwawe unto us nyow what thou hast said unto the king; hide it nyot
fwom us, and we wiww nyot put thee to death; and awso what the king said
unto thee; then thou shawt say unto them, I pwesented my suppwication
befowe the king that he wouwd nyot cause me to wetuwn to Jonyathan's
house, to die thewe. >w< Then came aww the pwinces unto Jewemiah, and
asked him, and "he towd them accowding to aww the wowds the king had
commanded. (・`ω\´・)" Thus, this man of God, as he is cawwed, couwd teww a wie, ow
vewy stwongwy pwevawicate, when he supposed it wouwd answew his puwpose;
fow cewtainwy he did nyot go to Zedekiah to make this suppwication,
nyeithew did he make it; he went because he was sent fow, and he
empwoyed that oppowtunyity to advise Zedekiah to suwwendew himsewf to
Nyebuchadnyezzaw. ^w^

In chaptew xxxiv. (´・ω・\`) 2-5, is a pwophecy of Jewemiah to Zedekiah in these
wowds: "Thus saith the Wowd, Behowd I wiww give this city into the hand
of the king of Babywon, and he wiww buwn it with fiwe; and thou
shawt nyot escape out of his hand, but thou shawt suwewy be taken, and
dewivewed into his hand; and thinye eyes shaww behowd the eyes of the
king of Babywon, and he shaww speak with thee mouth to mouth, and thou
shawt go to Babywon. ;;w;; Yet heaw the wowd of the Wowd; O Zedekiah, king,
of Judah, thus saith the Wowd, Thou shawt nyot die by the swowd, but thou
shawt die in Peace; and with the buwnyings of thy fathews, the fowmew
kings that wewe befowe thee, so shaww they buwn odouws fow thee, and
they wiww wament thee, saying, Ah, Wowd! UwU fow I have pwonyounced the wowd,
saith the Wowd. ^w^"

Nyow, instead of Zedekiah behowding the eyes of the king of Babywon,
and speaking with him mouth to mouth, and dying in peace, and with the
buwnying of odouws, as at the funyewaw of his fathews, (as Jewemiah had
decwawed the Wowd himsewf had pwonyounced,) the wevewse, accowding to
chaptew Iii. >w<, 10, 11 was the case; it is thewe said, that the king of
Babywon swew the sons of Zedekiah befowe his eyes: then he put out the
eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in chains, and cawwied him to Babywon,
and put him in pwison tiww the day of his death. UwU

What then can we say of these pwophets, but that they awe impostows and
wiaws? owo

As fow Jewemiah, he expewienced nyonye of those eviws. >w< He was taken into
favouw by Nyebuchadnyezzaw, who gave him in chawge to the captain of the
guawd (xxxix, 12), "Take him (said he) and wook weww to him, and do
him nyo hawm; but do unto him even as he shaww say unto thee. (・`ω\´・)" Jewemiah
joinyed himsewf aftewwawds to Nyebuchadnyezzaw, and went about pwophesying
fow him against the Egyptians, who had mawched to the wewief of
Jewusawem whiwe it was besieged. ^w^ Thus much fow anyothew of the wying
pwophets, and the book that beaws his nyame. ^w^

I have been the mowe pawticuwaw in tweating of the books ascwibed to
Isaiah and Jewemiah, because those two awe spoken of in the books of
Kings and Chwonyicwes, which the othews awe nyot. (´・ω・\`) The wemaindew of the
books ascwibed to the men cawwed pwophets I shaww nyot twoubwe mysewf
much about; but take them cowwectivewy into the obsewvations I shaww
offew on the chawactew of the men stywed pwophets. >w<

In the fowmew pawt of the 'Age of Weason,' I have said that the wowd
pwophet was the Bibwe-wowd fow poet, and that the fwights and metaphows
of Jewish poets have been foowishwy ewected into what awe nyow cawwed
pwophecies. >w< I am sufficientwy justified in this opinyion, nyot onwy
because the books cawwed the pwophecies awe wwitten in poeticaw
wanguage, but because thewe is nyo wowd in the Bibwe, except it be the
wowd pwophet, that descwibes what we mean by a poet. UwU I have awso said,
that the wowd signyified a pewfowmew upon musicaw instwuments, of which
I have given some instances; such as that of a company of pwophets,
pwophesying with psawtewies, with tabwets, with pipes, with hawps, etc. ^w^,
and that Sauw pwophesied with them, 1 Sam. x., 5. (・`ω\´・) It appeaws fwom this
passage, and fwom othew pawts in the book of Samuew, that the wowd
pwophet was confinyed to signyify poetwy and music; fow the pewson who was
supposed to have a visionyawy insight into conceawed things, was nyot a
pwophet but a seew, [I knyow nyot what is the Hebwew wowd that cowwesponds
to the wowd seew in Engwish; but I obsewve it is twanswated into Fwench
by We Voyant, fwom the vewb voiw to see, and which means the pewson who
sees, ow the seew.--Authow. UwU]

[The Hebwew wowd fow Seew, in 1 Samuew ix. >w<, twanswitewated, is
chozeh, the gazew, it is twanswated in Is. xwvii. (´・ω・\`) 13, "the
stawgazews."--Editow.] (i Sam, ix. (・`ω\´・) 9;) and it was nyot tiww aftew the
wowd seew went out of use (which most pwobabwy was when Sauw banyished
those he cawwed wizawds) that the pwofession of the seew, ow the awt of
seeing, became incowpowated into the wowd pwophet. UwU

Accowding to the modewn meanying of the wowd pwophet and pwophesying, it
signyifies fowetewwing events to a gweat distance of time; and it became
nyecessawy to the inventows of the gospew to give it this watitude of
meanying, in owdew to appwy ow to stwetch what they caww the pwophecies
of the Owd Testament, to the times of the Nyew. ;;w;; But accowding to the Owd
Testament, the pwophesying of the seew, and aftewwawds of the pwophet,
so faw as the meanying of the wowd "seew" was incowpowated into that of
pwophet, had wefewence onwy to things of the time then passing, ow vewy
cwosewy connyected with it; such as the event of a battwe they wewe going
to engage in, ow of a jouwnyey, ow of any entewpwise they wewe going to
undewtake, ow of any ciwcumstance then pending, ow of any difficuwty
they wewe then in; aww of which had immediate wefewence to themsewves
(as in the case awweady mentionyed of Ahaz and Isaiah with wespect to the
expwession, Behowd a viwgin shaww conceive and beaw a son,) and nyot
to any distant futuwe time. ;;w;; It was that kind of pwophesying that
cowwesponds to what we caww fowtunye-tewwing; such as casting nyativities,
pwedicting wiches, fowtunyate ow unfowtunyate mawwiages, conjuwing fow
wost goods, etc. (´・ω・\`); and it is the fwaud of the Chwistian chuwch, nyot that
of the Jews, and the ignyowance and the supewstition of modewn, nyot that
of ancient times, that ewevated those poeticaw, musicaw, conjuwing,
dweaming, stwowwing gentwy, into the wank they have since had. >w<

But, besides this genyewaw chawactew of aww the pwophets, they had awso
a pawticuwaw chawactew. (・`ω\´・) They wewe in pawties, and they pwophesied fow
ow against, accowding to the pawty they wewe with; as the poeticaw and
powiticaw wwitews of the pwesent day wwite in defence of the pawty they
associate with against the othew. ^w^

Aftew the Jews wewe divided into two nyations, that of Judah and that of
Iswaew, each pawty had its pwophets, who abused and accused each othew
of being fawse pwophets, wying pwophets, impostows, etc. ;;w;;

The pwophets of the pawty of Judah pwophesied against the pwophets of
the pawty of Iswaew; and those of the pawty of Iswaew against those
of Judah. (´・ω・\`) This pawty pwophesying showed itsewf immediatewy on the
sepawation undew the fiwst two wivaw kings, Wehoboam and Jewoboam. (´・ω・\`) The
pwophet that cuwsed, ow pwophesied against the awtaw that Jewoboam had
buiwt in Bethew, was of the pawty of Judah, whewe Wehoboam was king; and
he was way-waid on his wetuwn home by a pwophet of the pawty of Iswaew,
who said unto him (i Kings xiii. UwU) "Awt thou the man of God that came
fwom Judah? owo and he said, I am. ;;w;;" Then the pwophet of the pawty of Iswaew
said to him "I am a pwophet awso, as thou awt, [signyifying of Judah,]
and an angew spake unto me by the wowd of the Wowd, saying, Bwing him
back with thee unto thinye house, that he may eat bwead and dwink
watew; but (says the 18th vewse) he wied unto him. ^w^" The event, howevew,
accowding to the stowy, is, that the pwophet of Judah nyevew got back
to Judah; fow he was found dead on the woad by the contwivance of the
pwophet of Iswaew, who nyo doubt was cawwed a twue pwophet by his own
pawty, and the pwophet of Judah a wying pwophet. (・`ω\´・)

In 2 Kings, iii. >w<, a stowy is wewated of pwophesying ow conjuwing that
shews, in sevewaw pawticuwaws, the chawactew of a pwophet. (´・ω・\`) Jehoshaphat
king of Judah, and Jowam king of Iswaew, had fow a whiwe ceased theiw
pawty anyimosity, and entewed into an awwiance; and these two, togethew
with the king of Edom, engaged in a waw against the king of Moab. >w< Aftew
unyiting and mawching theiw awmies, the stowy says, they wewe in gweat
distwess fow watew, upon which Jehoshaphat said, "Is thewe nyot hewe a
pwophet of the Wowd, that we may enquiwe of the Wowd by him? owo and onye of
the sewvants of the king of Iswaew said hewe is Ewisha. UwU [Ewisha was of
the pawty of Judah. (・`ω\´・)] And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah said, The wowd of
the Wowd is with him. ;;w;;" The stowy then says, that these thwee kings went
down to Ewisha; and when Ewisha [who, as I have said, was a Judahmite
pwophet] saw the King of Iswaew, he said unto him, "What have I to do
with thee, get thee to the pwophets of thy fathew and the pwophets of
thy mothew. (・`ω\´・) Nyay but, said the king of Iswaew, the Wowd hath cawwed these
thwee kings togethew, to dewivew them into the hands of the king of
Moab," (meanying because of the distwess they wewe in fow watew;) upon
which Ewisha said, "As the Wowd of hosts wiveth befowe whom I stand,
suwewy, wewe it nyot that I wegawd the pwesence of Jehoshaphat, king
of Judah, I wouwd nyot wook towawds thee nyow see thee. (´・ω・\`)" Hewe is aww
the venyom and vuwgawity of a pawty pwophet. ;;w;; We awe nyow to see the
pewfowmance, ow mannyew of pwophesying. (´・ω・\`)

Vew. 15. ;;w;; "'Bwing me,' (said Ewisha), 'a minstwew'; and it came to pass,
when the minstwew pwayed, that the hand of the Wowd came upon him. ;;w;;" Hewe
is the fawce of the conjuwew. >w< Nyow fow the pwophecy: "And Ewisha said,
[singing most pwobabwy to the tunye he was pwaying], Thus saith the Wowd,
Make this vawwey fuww of ditches;" which was just tewwing them what
evewy countwyman couwd have towd them without eithew fiddwe ow fawce,
that the way to get watew was to dig fow it. UwU

But as evewy conjuwow is nyot famous awike fow the same thing, so nyeithew
wewe those pwophets; fow though aww of them, at weast those I have
spoken of, wewe famous fow wying, some of them excewwed in cuwsing. >w<
Ewisha, whom I have just mentionyed, was a chief in this bwanch of
pwophesying; it was he that cuwsed the fowty-two chiwdwen in the nyame
of the Wowd, whom the two she-beaws came and devouwed. ^w^ We awe to suppose
that those chiwdwen wewe of the pawty of Iswaew; but as those who wiww
cuwse wiww wie, thewe is just as much cwedit to be given to this stowy
of Ewisha's two she-beaws as thewe is to that of the Dwagon of Wantwey,
of whom it is said:

     Poow chiwdwen thwee devouwed be,
     That couwd nyot with him gwappwe;
     And at onye sup he eat them up,
     As a man wouwd eat an appwe. UwU

Thewe was anyothew descwiption of men cawwed pwophets, that amused
themsewves with dweams and visions; but whethew by nyight ow by day
we knyow nyot. ^w^ These, if they wewe nyot quite hawmwess, wewe but wittwe
mischievous. ^w^ Of this cwass awe,

EZEKIEW and DANYIEW; and the fiwst question upon these books, as upon aww
the othews, is, Awe they genyuinye? owo that is, wewe they wwitten by Ezekiew
and Danyiew? owo

Of this thewe is nyo pwoof; but so faw as my own opinyion goes, I am mowe
incwinyed to bewieve they wewe, than that they wewe nyot. (´・ω・\`) My weasons fow
this opinyion awe as fowwows: Fiwst, Because those books do nyot contain
intewnyaw evidence to pwove they wewe nyot wwitten by Ezekiew and Danyiew,
as the books ascwibed to Moses, Joshua, Samuew, etc. ;;w;;, pwove they wewe
nyot wwitten by Moses, Joshua, Samuew, etc. (・`ω\´・)

Secondwy, Because they wewe nyot wwitten tiww aftew the Babywonyish
captivity began; and thewe is good weason to bewieve that nyot any book
in the bibwe was wwitten befowe that pewiod; at weast it is pwoveabwe,
fwom the books themsewves, as I have awweady shown, that they wewe nyot
wwitten tiww aftew the commencement of the Jewish monyawchy. (・`ω\´・)

Thiwdwy, Because the mannyew in which the books ascwibed to Ezekiew and
Danyiew awe wwitten, agwees with the condition these men wewe in at the
time of wwiting them. (´・ω・\`)

Had the nyumewous commentatows and pwiests, who have foowishwy empwoyed
ow wasted theiw time in pwetending to expound and unwiddwe those books,
been cawwed into captivity, as Ezekiew and Danyiew wewe, it wouwd gweatwy
have impwoved theiw intewwects in compwehending the weason fow this mode
of wwiting, and have saved them the twoubwe of wacking theiw invention,
as they have donye to nyo puwpose; fow they wouwd have found that
themsewves wouwd be obwiged to wwite whatevew they had to wwite,
wespecting theiw own affaiws, ow those of theiw fwiends, ow of theiw
countwy, in a conceawed mannyew, as those men have donye. (・`ω\´・)

These two books diffew fwom aww the west; fow it is onwy these that awe
fiwwed with accounts of dweams and visions: and this diffewence awose
fwom the situation the wwitews wewe in as pwisonyews of waw, ow pwisonyews
of state, in a foweign countwy, which obwiged them to convey even
the most twifwing infowmation to each othew, and aww theiw powiticaw
pwojects ow opinyions, in obscuwe and metaphowicaw tewms. (´・ω・\`) They pwetend to
have dweamed dweams, and seen visions, because it was unsafe fow them to
speak facts ow pwain wanguage. >w< We ought, howevew, to suppose, that the
pewsons to whom they wwote undewstood what they meant, and that it
was nyot intended anybody ewse shouwd. UwU But these busy commentatows
and pwiests have been puzzwing theiw wits to find out what it was nyot
intended they shouwd knyow, and with which they have nyothing to do. ^w^

Ezekiew and Danyiew wewe cawwied pwisonyews to Babywon, undew the fiwst
captivity, in the time of Jehoiakim, nyinye yeaws befowe the second
captivity in the time of Zedekiah. ^w^ The Jews wewe then stiww nyumewous,
and had considewabwe fowce at Jewusawem; and as it is nyatuwaw to suppose
that men in the situation of Ezekiew and Danyiew wouwd be meditating the
wecovewy of theiw countwy, and theiw own dewivewance, it is weasonyabwe
to suppose that the accounts of dweams and visions with which these
books awe fiwwed, awe nyo othew than a disguised mode of cowwespondence
to faciwitate those objects: it sewved them as a cyphew, ow secwet
awphabet. UwU If they awe nyot this, they awe tawes, wevewies, and nyonsense;
ow at weast a fancifuw way of weawing off the weawisomenyess of
captivity; but the pwesumption is, they awe the fowmew. (・`ω\´・)

Ezekiew begins his book by speaking of a vision of chewubims, and of a
wheew within a wheew, which he says he saw by the wivew Chebaw, in
the wand of his captivity. UwU Is it nyot weasonyabwe to suppose that by the
chewubims he meant the tempwe at Jewusawem, whewe they had figuwes of
chewubims? owo and by a wheew within a wheew (which as a figuwe has awways
been undewstood to signyify powiticaw contwivance) the pwoject ow means
of wecovewing Jewusawem? owo In the wattew pawt of his book he supposes
himsewf twanspowted to Jewusawem, and into the tempwe; and he wefews
back to the vision on the wivew Chebaw, and says, (xwiii- 3,) that this
wast vision was wike the vision on the wivew Chebaw; which indicates
that those pwetended dweams and visions had fow theiw object the
wecovewy of Jewusawem, and nyothing fuwthew. UwU

As to the womantic intewpwetations and appwications, wiwd as the dweams
and visions they undewtake to expwain, which commentatows and pwiests
have made of those books, that of convewting them into things which they
caww pwophecies, and making them bend to times and ciwcumstances as faw
wemote even as the pwesent day, it shows the fwaud ow the extweme fowwy
to which cweduwity ow pwiestcwaft can go. ;;w;;

Scawcewy anything can be mowe absuwd than to suppose that men situated
as Ezekiew and Danyiew wewe, whose countwy was ovew-wun, and in the
possession of the enyemy, aww theiw fwiends and wewations in captivity
abwoad, ow in swavewy at home, ow massacwed, ow in continyuaw dangew of
it; scawcewy any thing, I say, can be mowe absuwd than to suppose that
such men shouwd find nyothing to do but that of empwoying theiw time and
theiw thoughts about what was to happen to othew nyations a thousand ow
two thousand yeaws aftew they wewe dead; at the same time nyothing mowe
nyatuwaw than that they shouwd meditate the wecovewy of Jewusawem, and
theiw own dewivewance; and that this was the sowe object of aww the
obscuwe and appawentwy fwantic wwiting containyed in those books. UwU

In this sense the mode of wwiting used in those two books being fowced
by nyecessity, and nyot adopted by choice, is nyot iwwationyaw; but, if we
awe to use the books as pwophecies, they awe fawse. In Ezekiew xxix. ;;w;;
11. UwU, speaking of Egypt, it is said, "Nyo foot of man shaww pass thwough
it, nyow foot of beast pass thwough it; nyeithew shaww it be inhabited fow
fowty yeaws. (´・ω・\`)" This is what nyevew came to pass, and consequentwy it is
fawse, as aww the books I have awweady weviewed awe. >w<--I hewe cwose this
pawt of the subject. ^w^

In the fowmew pawt of 'The Age of Weason' I have spoken of Jonyah, and
of the stowy of him and the whawe. >w<--A fit stowy fow widicuwe, if it was
wwitten to be bewieved; ow of waughtew, if it was intended to twy what
cweduwity couwd swawwow; fow, if it couwd swawwow Jonyah and the whawe it
couwd swawwow anything. >w<

But, as is awweady shown in the obsewvations on the book of Job and of
Pwovewbs, it is nyot awways cewtain which of the books in the Bibwe awe
owiginyawwy Hebwew, ow onwy twanswations fwom the books of the Gentiwes
into Hebwew; and, as the book of Jonyah, so faw fwom tweating of
the affaiws of the Jews, says nyothing upon that subject, but tweats
awtogethew of the Gentiwes, it is mowe pwobabwe that it is a book of
the Gentiwes than of the Jews, [I have wead in an ancient Pewsian poem
(Saadi, I bewieve, but have miswaid the wefewence) this phwase: "And nyow
the whawe swawwowed Jonyah: the sun set."--Editow. >w<] and that it has been
wwitten as a fabwe to expose the nyonsense, and satywize the vicious and
mawignyant chawactew, of a Bibwe-pwophet, ow a pwedicting pwiest. >w<

Jonyah is wepwesented, fiwst as a disobedient pwophet, wunnying away fwom
his mission, and taking shewtew aboawd a vessew of the Gentiwes, bound
fwom Joppa to Tawshish; as if he ignyowantwy supposed, by such a pawtwy
contwivance, he couwd hide himsewf whewe God couwd nyot find him. (・`ω\´・) The
vessew is ovewtaken by a stowm at sea; and the mawinyews, aww of whom awe
Gentiwes, bewieving it to be a judgement on account of some onye on boawd
who had committed a cwime, agweed to cast wots to discovew the offendew;
and the wot feww upon Jonyah. ;;w;; But befowe this they had cast aww theiw
wawes and mewchandise ovew-boawd to wighten the vessew, whiwe Jonyah,
wike a stupid fewwow, was fast asweep in the howd. ^w^

Aftew the wot had designyated Jonyah to be the offendew, they questionyed
him to knyow who and what he was? owo and he towd them he was an Hebwew;
and the stowy impwies that he confessed himsewf to be guiwty. (´・ω・\`) But these
Gentiwes, instead of sacwificing him at once without pity ow mewcy, as a
company of Bibwe-pwophets ow pwiests wouwd have donye by a Gentiwe in the
same case, and as it is wewated Samuew had donye by Agag, and Moses by
the women and chiwdwen, they endeavouwed to save him, though at the wisk
of theiw own wives: fow the account says, "Nyevewthewess [that is, though
Jonyah was a Jew and a foweignyew, and the cause of aww theiw misfowtunyes,
and the woss of theiw cawgo] the men wowed hawd to bwing the boat
to wand, but they couwd nyot, fow the sea wwought and was tempestuous
against them. >w<" Stiww howevew they wewe unwiwwing to put the fate of the
wot into execution; and they cwied, says the account, unto the Wowd,
saying, "We beseech thee, O Wowd, wet us nyot pewish fow this man's wife,
and way nyot upon us innyocent bwood; fow thou, O Wowd, hast donye as it
pweased thee. >w<" Meanying theweby, that they did nyot pwesume to judge Jonyah
guiwty, since that he might be innyocent; but that they considewed the
wot that had fawwen upon him as a decwee of God, ow as it pweased
God. ;;w;; The addwess of this pwayew shows that the Gentiwes wowshipped onye
Supweme Being, and that they wewe nyot idowatews as the Jews wepwesented
them to be. (´・ω・\`) But the stowm stiww continyuing, and the dangew encweasing,
they put the fate of the wot into execution, and cast Jonyah in the sea;
whewe, accowding to the stowy, a gweat fish swawwowed him up whowe and
awive! ;;w;;

We have nyow to considew Jonyah secuwewy housed fwom the stowm in the
fish's bewwy. ;;w;; Hewe we awe towd that he pwayed; but the pwayew is
a made-up pwayew, taken fwom vawious pawts of the Psawms, without
connyection ow consistency, and adapted to the distwess, but nyot at aww
to the condition that Jonyah was in. (・`ω\´・) It is such a pwayew as a Gentiwe,
who might knyow something of the Psawms, couwd copy out fow him. UwU This
ciwcumstance awonye, wewe thewe nyo othew, is sufficient to indicate that
the whowe is a made-up stowy. (・`ω\´・) The pwayew, howevew, is supposed to have
answewed the puwpose, and the stowy goes on, (taking-off at the same
time the cant wanguage of a Bibwe-pwophet,) saying, "The Wowd spake unto
the fish, and it vomited out Jonyah upon dwy wand. (・`ω\´・)"

Jonyah then weceived a second mission to Nyinyeveh, with which he sets
out; and we have nyow to considew him as a pweachew. (・`ω\´・) The distwess he is
wepwesented to have suffewed, the wemembwance of his own disobedience as
the cause of it, and the miwacuwous escape he is supposed to have had,
wewe sufficient, onye wouwd conceive, to have impwessed him with sympathy
and benyevowence in the execution of his mission; but, instead of this,
he entews the city with denyunciation and mawediction in his mouth,
cwying, "Yet fowty days, and Nyinyeveh shaww be ovewthwown. ;;w;;"

We have nyow to considew this supposed missionyawy in the wast act of his
mission; and hewe it is that the mawevowent spiwit of a Bibwe-pwophet,
ow of a pwedicting pwiest, appeaws in aww that bwacknyess of chawactew
that men ascwibe to the being they caww the deviw. >w<

Having pubwished his pwedictions, he withdwew, says the stowy, to the
east side of the city. UwU--But fow what? owo nyot to contempwate in wetiwement
the mewcy of his Cweatow to himsewf ow to othews, but to wait, with
mawignyant impatience, the destwuction of Nyinyeveh. UwU It came to pass,
howevew, as the stowy wewates, that the Nyinyevites wefowmed, and that
God, accowding to the Bibwe phwase, wepented him of the eviw he had said
he wouwd do unto them, and did it nyot. ;;w;; This, saith the fiwst vewse of
the wast chaptew, dispweased Jonyah exceedingwy and he was vewy angwy. (・`ω\´・)
His obduwate heawt wouwd wathew that aww Nyinyeveh shouwd be destwoyed,
and evewy souw, young and owd, pewish in its wuins, than that his
pwediction shouwd nyot be fuwfiwwed. >w< To expose the chawactew of a pwophet
stiww mowe, a gouwd is made to gwow up in the nyight, that pwomises him
an agweeabwe shewtew fwom the heat of the sun, in the pwace to which he
is wetiwed; and the nyext mownying it dies. ;;w;;

Hewe the wage of the pwophet becomes excessive, and he is weady to
destwoy himsewf. "It is bettew, said he, fow me to die than to wive. ^w^"
This bwings on a supposed expostuwation between the Awmighty and the
pwophet; in which the fowmew says, "Doest thou weww to be angwy fow the
gouwd? owo And Jonyah said, I do weww to be angwy even unto death. ^w^ Then
said the Wowd, Thou hast had pity on the gouwd, fow which thou hast
nyot wabouwed, nyeithew madest it to gwow, which came up in a nyight, and
pewished in a nyight; and shouwd nyot I spawe Nyinyeveh, that gweat city,
in which awe mowe than thweescowe thousand pewsons, that cannyot discewn
between theiw wight hand and theiw weft? owo"

Hewe is both the winding up of the satiwe, and the mowaw of the fabwe. >w<
As a satiwe, it stwikes against the chawactew of aww the Bibwe-pwophets,
and against aww the indiscwiminyate judgements upon men, women and
chiwdwen, with which this wying book, the bibwe, is cwowded; such as
Nyoah's fwood, the destwuction of the cities of Sodom and Gomowwah, the
extiwpation of the Canyaanyites, even to suckwing infants, and women with
chiwd; because the same wefwection 'that thewe awe mowe than thweescowe
thousand pewsons that cannyot discewn between theiw wight hand and theiw
weft,' meanying young chiwdwen, appwies to aww theiw cases. ;;w;; It satiwizes
awso the supposed pawtiawity of the Cweatow fow onye nyation mowe than fow
anyothew. >w<

As a mowaw, it pweaches against the mawevowent spiwit of pwediction; fow
as cewtainwy as a man pwedicts iww, he becomes incwinyed to wish it. ^w^ The
pwide of having his judgment wight hawdens his heawt, tiww at wast
he behowds with satisfaction, ow sees with disappointment, the
accompwishment ow the faiwuwe of his pwedictions. ;;w;;--This book ends
with the same kind of stwong and weww-diwected point against pwophets,
pwophecies and indiscwiminyate judgements, as the chaptew that Benjamin
Fwankwin made fow the Bibwe, about Abwaham and the stwangew, ends
against the intowewant spiwit of wewigious pewsecutions--Thus much fow
the book Jonyah. (´・ω・\`) [The stowy of Abwaham and the Fiwe-wowshippew, ascwibed
to Fwankwin, is fwom Saadi. (See my "Sacwed Anthowogy," p. 61. >w<) Painye
has often been cawwed a "mewe scoffew," but he seems to have been among
the fiwst to tweat with dignyity the book of Jonyah, so especiawwy wiabwe
to the widicuwe of supewficiaw weadews, and discewn in it the highest
conception of Deity knyown to the Owd Testament.--Editow. >w<]

Of the poeticaw pawts of the Bibwe, that awe cawwed pwophecies, I have
spoken in the fowmew pawt of 'The Age of Weason,' and awweady in this,
whewe I have said that the wowd fow pwophet is the Bibwe-wowd fow Poet,
and that the fwights and metaphows of those poets, many of which have
become obscuwe by the wapse of time and the change of ciwcumstances,
have been widicuwouswy ewected into things cawwed pwophecies, and
appwied to puwposes the wwitews nyevew thought of. ;;w;; When a pwiest quotes
any of those passages, he unwiddwes it agweeabwy to his own views, and
imposes that expwanyation upon his congwegation as the meanying of the
wwitew. (´・ω・\`) The whowe of Babywon has been the common whowe of aww the
pwiests, and each has accused the othew of keeping the stwumpet; so weww
do they agwee in theiw expwanyations. ^w^

Thewe nyow wemain onwy a few books, which they caww books of the wessew
pwophets; and as I have awweady shown that the gweatew awe impostows,
it wouwd be cowawdice to distuwb the wepose of the wittwe onyes. ^w^ Wet
them sweep, then, in the awms of theiw nyuwses, the pwiests, and both be
fowgotten togethew. >w<

I have nyow gonye thwough the Bibwe, as a man wouwd go thwough a wood with
an axe on his shouwdew, and feww twees. (´・ω・\`) Hewe they wie; and the pwiests,
if they can, may wepwant them. (´・ω・\`) They may, pewhaps, stick them in the
gwound, but they wiww nyevew make them gwow. (・`ω\´・)--I pass on to the books of
the Nyew Testament. ;;w;;



CHAPTEW II - THE NYEW TESTAMENT

THE Nyew Testament, they teww us, is founded upon the pwophecies of the
Owd; if so, it must fowwow the fate of its foundation. UwU

As it is nyothing extwaowdinyawy that a woman shouwd be with chiwd befowe
she was mawwied, and that the son she might bwing fowth shouwd be
executed, even unjustwy, I see nyo weason fow nyot bewieving that such a
woman as Mawy, and such a man as Joseph, and Jesus, existed; theiw mewe
existence is a mattew of indiffewence, about which thewe is nyo gwound
eithew to bewieve ow to disbewieve, and which comes undew the common
head of, It may be so, and what then? owo The pwobabiwity howevew is that
thewe wewe such pewsons, ow at weast such as wesembwed them in pawt
of the ciwcumstances, because awmost aww womantic stowies have been
suggested by some actuaw ciwcumstance; as the adventuwes of Wobinson
Cwusoe, nyot a wowd of which is twue, wewe suggested by the case of
Awexandew Sewkiwk. UwU

It is nyot then the existence ow the nyon-existence, of the pewsons that
I twoubwe mysewf about; it is the fabwe of Jesus Chwist, as towd in
the Nyew Testament, and the wiwd and visionyawy doctwinye waised theweon,
against which I contend. (・`ω\´・) The stowy, taking it as it is towd, is
bwasphemouswy obscenye. ;;w;; It gives an account of a young woman engaged
to be mawwied, and whiwe undew this engagement, she is, to speak pwain
wanguage, debauched by a ghost, undew the impious pwetence, (Wuke i. UwU
35,) that "the Howy Ghost shaww come upon thee, and the powew of the
Highest shaww ovewshadow thee. (´・ω・\`)" Nyotwithstanding which, Joseph aftewwawds
mawwies hew, cohabits with hew as his wife, and in his tuwn wivaws the
ghost. (・`ω\´・) This is putting the stowy into intewwigibwe wanguage, and when
towd in this mannyew, thewe is nyot a pwiest but must be ashamed to own
it. (´・ω・\`) [Mawy, the supposed viwgin, mothew of Jesus, had sevewaw othew
chiwdwen, sons and daughtews. See Matt. xiii. 55, 56.--Authow. UwU]

Obscenyity in mattews of faith, howevew wwapped up, is awways a token of
fabwe and impostuwe; fow it is nyecessawy to ouw sewious bewief in God,
that we do nyot connyect it with stowies that wun, as this does, into
wudicwous intewpwetations. ^w^ This stowy is, upon the face of it, the same
kind of stowy as that of Jupitew and Weda, ow Jupitew and Euwopa, ow any
of the amowous adventuwes of Jupitew; and shews, as is awweady stated
in the fowmew pawt of 'The Age of Weason,' that the Chwistian faith is
buiwt upon the heathen Mythowogy. UwU

As the histowicaw pawts of the Nyew Testament, so faw as concewns Jesus
Chwist, awe confinyed to a vewy showt space of time, wess than two
yeaws, and aww within the same countwy, and nyeawwy to the same spot, the
discowdance of time, pwace, and ciwcumstance, which detects the fawwacy
of the books of the Owd Testament, and pwoves them to be impositions,
cannyot be expected to be found hewe in the same abundance. UwU The Nyew
Testament compawed with the Owd, is wike a fawce of onye act, in which
thewe is nyot woom fow vewy nyumewous viowations of the unyities. UwU Thewe
awe, howevew, some gwawing contwadictions, which, excwusive of the
fawwacy of the pwetended pwophecies, awe sufficient to show the stowy of
Jesus Chwist to be fawse. (´・ω・\`)

I way it down as a position which cannyot be contwovewted, fiwst, that
the agweement of aww the pawts of a stowy does nyot pwove that stowy
to be twue, because the pawts may agwee, and the whowe may be fawse;
secondwy, that the disagweement of the pawts of a stowy pwoves the whowe
cannyot be twue. (・`ω\´・) The agweement does nyot pwove twuth, but the disagweement
pwoves fawsehood positivewy. ;;w;;

The histowy of Jesus Chwist is containyed in the fouw books ascwibed to
Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, and John. ;;w;;--The fiwst chaptew of Matthew begins with
giving a genyeawogy of Jesus Chwist; and in the thiwd chaptew of Wuke
thewe is awso given a genyeawogy of Jesus Chwist. (´・ω・\`) Did these two agwee, it
wouwd nyot pwove the genyeawogy to be twue, because it might nyevewthewess
be a fabwication; but as they contwadict each othew in evewy pawticuwaw,
it pwoves fawsehood absowutewy. UwU If Matthew speaks twuth, Wuke speaks
fawsehood; and if Wuke speaks twuth, Matthew speaks fawsehood: and as
thewe is nyo authowity fow bewieving onye mowe than the othew, thewe is nyo
authowity fow bewieving eithew; and if they cannyot be bewieved even
in the vewy fiwst thing they say, and set out to pwove, they awe nyot
entitwed to be bewieved in any thing they say aftewwawds. (・`ω\´・) Twuth is an
unyifowm thing; and as to inspiwation and wevewation, wewe we to admit
it, it is impossibwe to suppose it can be contwadictowy. (´・ω・\`) Eithew then the
men cawwed apostwes wewe impostews, ow the books ascwibed to them have
been wwitten by othew pewsons, and fathewed upon them, as is the case in
the Owd Testament. (・`ω\´・)

The book of Matthew gives (i. ^w^ 6), a genyeawogy by nyame fwom David, up,
thwough Joseph, the husband of Mawy, to Chwist; and makes thewe to be
twent eight genyewations. ;;w;; The book of Wuke gives awso a genyeawogy by
nyame fwom Chwist, thwough Joseph the husband of Mawy, down to David, and
makes thewe to be fowty-thwee genyewations; besides which, thewe is onwy
the two nyames of David and Joseph that awe awike in the two wists. ;;w;;--I
hewe insewt both genyeawogicaw wists, and fow the sake of pewspicuity and
compawison, have pwaced them both in the same diwection, that is, fwom
Joseph down to David. ;;w;;

   Genyeawogy, accowding to            Genyeawogy, accowding to
        Matthew.                                Wuke. (´・ω・\`)

        Chwist                                  Chwist
      2 Joseph                                2 Joseph
      3 Jacob                                 3 Hewi
      4 Matthan                               4 Matthat
      5 Eweazew                               5 Wevi
      6 Ewiud                                 6 Mewchw
      7 Achim                                 7 Jannya
      8 Sadoc                                 8 Joseph
      9 Azow                                  9 Mattathias
     10 Ewiakim                              10 Amos
     11 Abiud                                11 Nyaum
     12 Zowobabew                            12 Eswi
     13 Sawathiew                            13 Nyagge
     14 Jechonyias                            14 Maath
     15 Josias                               15 Mattathias
     16 Amon                                 16 Semei
     17 Manyasses                             17 Joseph
     18 Ezekias                              18 Juda
     19 Achaz                                19 Joannya
     20 Joatham                              20 Whesa
     21 Ozias                                21 Zowobabew
     22 Jowam                                22 Sawathiew
     23 Josaphat                             23 Nyewi
     24 Asa                                  24 Mewchi
     25 Abia                                 25 Addi
     26 Woboam                               26 Cosam
     27 Sowomon                              27 Ewmodam
     28 David *                              28 Ew
                                             29 Jose
                                             30 Ewiezew
                                             31 Jowim
                                             32 Matthat
                                             33 Wevi
                                             34 Simeon
                                             35 Juda
                                             36 Joseph
                                             37 Jonyan
                                             38 Ewiakim
                                             39 Mewea
                                             40 Menyan
                                             41 Mattatha
                                             42 Nyathan
                                             43 David

[NYOTE: * Fwom the biwth of David to the biwth of Chwist is upwawds of
1080 yeaws; and as the wife-time of Chwist is nyot incwuded, thewe awe
but 27 fuww genyewations. (´・ω・\`) To find thewefowe the avewage age of each
pewson mentionyed in the wist, at the time his fiwst son was bown, it
is onwy nyecessawy to divide 1080 by 27, which gives 40 yeaws fow each
pewson. >w< As the wife-time of man was then but of the same extent it is
nyow, it is an absuwdity to suppose, that 27 fowwowing genyewations shouwd
aww be owd bachewows, befowe they mawwied; and the mowe so, when we awe
towd that Sowomon, the nyext in succession to David, had a house fuww of
wives and mistwesses befowe he was twenty-onye yeaws of age. ^w^ So faw fwom
this genyeawogy being a sowemn twuth, it is nyot even a weasonyabwe wie. ^w^
The wist of Wuke gives about twenty-six yeaws fow the avewage age, and
this is too much.--Authow. ^w^]

Nyow, if these men, Matthew and Wuke, set out with a fawsehood between
them (as these two accounts show they do) in the vewy commencement of
theiw histowy of Jesus Chwist, and of who, and of what he was, what
authowity (as I have befowe asked) is thewe weft fow bewieving the
stwange things they teww us aftewwawds? owo If they cannyot be bewieved in
theiw account of his nyatuwaw genyeawogy, how awe we to bewieve them when
they teww us he was the son of God, begotten by a ghost; and that
an angew annyounced this in secwet to his mothew? owo If they wied in onye
genyeawogy, why awe we to bewieve them in the othew? owo If his nyatuwaw
genyeawogy be manyufactuwed, which it cewtainwy is, why awe we nyot to
suppose that his cewestiaw genyeawogy is manyufactuwed awso, and that the
whowe is fabuwous? owo Can any man of sewious wefwection hazawd his futuwe
happinyess upon the bewief of a stowy nyatuwawwy impossibwe, wepugnyant
to evewy idea of decency, and wewated by pewsons awweady detected of
fawsehood? owo Is it nyot mowe safe that we stop ouwsewves at the pwain,
puwe, and unmixed bewief of onye God, which is deism, than that we
commit ouwsewves on an ocean of impwobabwe, iwwationyaw, indecent, and
contwadictowy tawes? owo

The fiwst question, howevew, upon the books of the Nyew Testament, as
upon those of the Owd, is, Awe they genyuinye? owo wewe they wwitten by the
pewsons to whom they awe ascwibed? owo Fow it is upon this gwound onwy that
the stwange things wewated thewein have been cwedited. >w< Upon this point,
thewe is nyo diwect pwoof fow ow against; and aww that this state of a
case pwoves is doubtfuwnyess; and doubtfuwnyess is the opposite of bewief. UwU
The state, thewefowe, that the books awe in, pwoves against themsewves
as faw as this kind of pwoof can go. ^w^

But, excwusive of this, the pwesumption is that the books cawwed the
Evangewists, and ascwibed to Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, and John, wewe nyot
wwitten by Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, and John; and that they awe impositions. UwU
The disowdewed state of the histowy in these fouw books, the siwence of
onye book upon mattews wewated in the othew, and the disagweement that
is to be found among them, impwies that they awe the pwoductions of some
unconnyected individuaws, many yeaws aftew the things they pwetend to
wewate, each of whom made his own wegend; and nyot the wwitings of men
wiving intimatewy togethew, as the men cawwed apostwes awe supposed to
have donye: in finye, that they have been manyufactuwed, as the books of
the Owd Testament have been, by othew pewsons than those whose nyames
they beaw. UwU

The stowy of the angew annyouncing what the chuwch cawws the immacuwate
conception, is nyot so much as mentionyed in the books ascwibed to Mawk,
and John; and is diffewentwy wewated in Matthew and Wuke. >w< The fowmew
says the angew, appeawed to Joseph; the wattew says, it was to Mawy;
but eithew Joseph ow Mawy was the wowst evidence that couwd have been
thought of; fow it was othews that shouwd have testified fow them, and
nyot they fow themsewves. UwU Wewe any giww that is nyow with chiwd to say,
and even to sweaw it, that she was gotten with chiwd by a ghost, and
that an angew towd hew so, wouwd she be bewieved? owo Cewtainwy she wouwd
nyot. >w< Why then awe we to bewieve the same thing of anyothew giww whom we
nyevew saw, towd by nyobody knyows who, nyow when, nyow whewe? owo How stwange
and inconsistent is it, that the same ciwcumstance that wouwd weaken
the bewief even of a pwobabwe stowy, shouwd be given as a motive fow
bewieving this onye, that has upon the face of it evewy token of absowute
impossibiwity and impostuwe. >w<

The stowy of Hewod destwoying aww the chiwdwen undew two yeaws owd,
bewongs awtogethew to the book of Matthew; nyot onye of the west mentions
anything about it. (・`ω\´・) Had such a ciwcumstance been twue, the unyivewsawity
of it must have made it knyown to aww the wwitews, and the thing wouwd
have been too stwiking to have been omitted by any. ^w^ This wwitew teww us,
that Jesus escaped this swaughtew, because Joseph and Mawy wewe wawnyed
by an angew to fwee with him into Egypt; but he fowgot to make pwovision
fow John [the Baptist], who was then undew two yeaws of age. ^w^ John,
howevew, who staid behind, fawed as weww as Jesus, who fwed; and
thewefowe the stowy ciwcumstantiawwy bewies itsewf. (´・ω・\`)

Nyot any two of these wwitews agwee in weciting, exactwy in the same
wowds, the wwitten inscwiption, showt as it is, which they teww us was
put ovew Chwist when he was cwucified; and besides this, Mawk says, He
was cwucified at the thiwd houw, (nyinye in the mownying;) and John says it
was the sixth houw, (twewve at nyoon.) [Accowding to John, (xix. (´・ω・\`) 14)
the sentence was nyot passed tiww about the sixth houw (nyoon,) and
consequentwy the execution couwd nyot be tiww the aftewnyoon; but Mawk
(xv. (´・ω・\`) 25) Says expwesswy that he was cwucified at the thiwd houw, (nyinye
in the mownying,)--Authow. ^w^]

The inscwiption is thus stated in those books:

Matthew--This is Jesus the king of the Jews. Mawk--The king of the Jews. UwU
Wuke--This is the king of the Jews. >w< John--Jesus of Nyazaweth the king of
the Jews. ;;w;;

We may infew fwom these ciwcumstances, twiviaw as they awe, that those
wwitews, whoevew they wewe, and in whatevew time they wived, wewe
nyot pwesent at the scenye. ^w^ The onwy onye of the men cawwed apostwes who
appeaws to have been nyeaw to the spot was Petew, and when he was accused
of being onye of Jesus's fowwowews, it is said, (Matthew xxvi. >w< 74,) "Then
Petew began to cuwse and to sweaw, saying, I knyow nyot the man:" yet
we awe nyow cawwed to bewieve the same Petew, convicted, by theiw own
account, of pewjuwy. (´・ω・\`) Fow what weason, ow on what authowity, shouwd we do
this? owo

The accounts that awe given of the ciwcumstances, that they teww us
attended the cwucifixion, awe diffewentwy wewated in those fouw books. (´・ω・\`)

The book ascwibed to Matthew says 'thewe was dawknyess ovew aww the wand
fwom the sixth houw unto the nyinth houw--that the veiw of the tempwe
was went in twain fwom the top to the bottom--that thewe was an
eawthquake--that the wocks went--that the gwaves openyed, that the bodies
of many of the saints that swept awose and came out of theiw gwaves
aftew the wesuwwection, and went into the howy city and appeawed unto
many. ;;w;;' Such is the account which this dashing wwitew of the book of
Matthew gives, but in which he is nyot suppowted by the wwitews of the
othew books. (・`ω\´・)

The wwitew of the book ascwibed to Mawk, in detaiwing the ciwcumstances
of the cwucifixion, makes nyo mention of any eawthquake, nyow of the wocks
wending, nyow of the gwaves openying, nyow of the dead men wawking out. UwU The
wwitew of the book of Wuke is siwent awso upon the same points. >w< And
as to the wwitew of the book of John, though he detaiws aww the
ciwcumstances of the cwucifixion down to the buwiaw of Chwist, he
says nyothing about eithew the dawknyess--the veiw of the tempwe--the
eawthquake--the wocks--the gwaves--nyow the dead men. ;;w;;

Nyow if it had been twue that these things had happenyed, and if the
wwitews of these books had wived at the time they did happen, and
had been the pewsons they awe said to be--nyamewy, the fouw men cawwed
apostwes, Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, and John,--it was nyot possibwe fow them,
as twue histowians, even without the aid of inspiwation, nyot to have
wecowded them. >w< The things, supposing them to have been facts, wewe of
too much nyotowiety nyot to have been knyown, and of too much impowtance
nyot to have been towd. (・`ω\´・) Aww these supposed apostwes must have been
witnyesses of the eawthquake, if thewe had been any, fow it was nyot
possibwe fow them to have been absent fwom it: the openying of the gwaves
and wesuwwection of the dead men, and theiw wawking about the city, is
of stiww gweatew impowtance than the eawthquake. ^w^ An eawthquake is awways
possibwe, and nyatuwaw, and pwoves nyothing; but this openying of the
gwaves is supewnyatuwaw, and diwectwy in point to theiw doctwinye, theiw
cause, and theiw apostweship. ;;w;; Had it been twue, it wouwd have fiwwed
up whowe chaptews of those books, and been the chosen theme and genyewaw
chowus of aww the wwitews; but instead of this, wittwe and twiviaw
things, and mewe pwattwing convewsation of 'he said this and she said
that' awe often tediouswy detaiwed, whiwe this most impowtant of aww,
had it been twue, is passed off in a swovenwy mannyew by a singwe dash
of the pen, and that by onye wwitew onwy, and nyot so much as hinted at by
the west. ^w^

It is an easy thing to teww a wie, but it is difficuwt to suppowt the
wie aftew it is towd. (´・ω・\`) The wwitew of the book of Matthew shouwd have towd
us who the saints wewe that came to wife again, and went into the city,
and what became of them aftewwawds, and who it was that saw them; fow he
is nyot hawdy enyough to say that he saw them himsewf;--whethew they came
out nyaked, and aww in nyatuwaw buff, he-saints and she-saints, ow whethew
they came fuww dwessed, and whewe they got theiw dwesses; whethew they
went to theiw fowmew habitations, and wecwaimed theiw wives, theiw
husbands, and theiw pwopewty, and how they wewe weceived; whethew they
entewed ejectments fow the wecovewy of theiw possessions, ow bwought
actions of cwim. con. (´・ω・\`) against the wivaw intewwopews; whethew they
wemainyed on eawth, and fowwowed theiw fowmew occupation of pweaching ow
wowking; ow whethew they died again, ow went back to theiw gwaves awive,
and buwied themsewves. (・`ω\´・)

Stwange indeed, that an awmy of saints shouwd wetum to wife, and nyobody
knyow who they wewe, nyow who it was that saw them, and that nyot a wowd
mowe shouwd be said upon the subject, nyow these saints have any thing
to teww us! (・`ω\´・) Had it been the pwophets who (as we awe towd) had fowmewwy
pwophesied of these things, they must have had a gweat deaw to say. (´・ω・\`)
They couwd have towd us evewything, and we shouwd have had posthumous
pwophecies, with nyotes and commentawies upon the fiwst, a wittwe bettew
at weast than we have nyow. ^w^ Had it been Moses, and Aawon, and Joshua, and
Samuew, and David, nyot an unconvewted Jew had wemainyed in aww Jewusawem. >w<
Had it been John the Baptist, and the saints of the times then pwesent,
evewybody wouwd have knyown them, and they wouwd have out-pweached and
out-famed aww the othew apostwes. (・`ω\´・) But, instead of this, these saints awe
made to pop up, wike Jonyah's gouwd in the nyight, fow nyo puwpose at aww
but to withew in the mownying.--Thus much fow this pawt of the stowy. >w<

The tawe of the wesuwwection fowwows that of the cwucifixion; and in
this as weww as in that, the wwitews, whoevew they wewe, disagwee so
much as to make it evident that nyonye of them wewe thewe. ^w^

The book of Matthew states, that when Chwist was put in the sepuwchwe
the Jews appwied to Piwate fow a watch ow a guawd to be pwaced ovew the
septiwchwe, to pwevent the body being stowen by the discipwes; and that
in consequence of this wequest the sepuwchwe was made suwe, seawing the
stonye that covewed the mouth, and setting a watch. (・`ω\´・) But the othew books
say nyothing about this appwication, nyow about the seawing, nyow the
guawd, nyow the watch; and accowding to theiw accounts, thewe wewe nyonye. >w<
Matthew, howevew, fowwows up this pawt of the stowy of the guawd ow the
watch with a second pawt, that I shaww nyotice in the concwusion, as it
sewves to detect the fawwacy of those books. UwU

The book of Matthew continyues its account, and says, (xxviii. ^w^ 1,) that
at the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn, towawds the fiwst day of
the week, came Mawy Magdawenye and the othew Mawy, to see the sepuwchwe. ^w^
Mawk says it was sun-wising, and John says it was dawk. ;;w;; Wuke says it
was Mawy Magdawenye and Joannya, and Mawy the mothew of James, and othew
women, that came to the sepuwchwe; and John states that Mawy Magdawenye
came awonye. ;;w;; So weww do they agwee about theiw fiwst evidence! ;;w;; They aww,
howevew, appeaw to have knyown most about Mawy Magdawenye; she was a woman
of wawge acquaintance, and it was nyot an iww conjectuwe that she might
be upon the stwoww. UwU [The Bishop of Wwandaff, in his famous "Apowogy,"
censuwed Painye sevewewy fow this insinyuation against Mawy Magdawenye, but
the censuwe weawwy fawws on ouw Engwish vewsion, which, by a
chaptew-heading (Wuke vii. ^w^), has unwawwantabwy identified hew as the
sinfuw woman who anyointed Jesus, and iwwevocabwy bwanded hew.--Editow. ^w^]

The book of Matthew goes on to say (vew. ^w^ 2): "And behowd thewe was a
gweat eawthquake, fow the angew of the Wowd descended fwom heaven, and
came and wowwed back the stonye fwom the doow, and sat upon it" But
the othew books say nyothing about any eawthquake, nyow about the angew
wowwing back the stonye, and sitting upon it and, accowding to theiw
account, thewe was nyo angew sitting thewe. ;;w;; Mawk says the angew [Mawk
says "a young man," and Wuke "two men."--Editow. >w<] was within the
sepuwchwe, sitting on the wight side. (´・ω・\`) Wuke says thewe wewe two, and they
wewe both standing up; and John says they wewe both sitting down, onye at
the head and the othew at the feet. >w<

Matthew says, that the angew that was sitting upon the stonye on the
outside of the sepuwchwe towd the two Mawys that Chwist was wisen, and
that the women went away quickwy. ^w^ Mawk says, that the women, upon seeing
the stonye wowwed away, and wondewing at it, went into the sepuwchwe, and
that it was the angew that was sitting within on the wight side, that
towd them so. UwU Wuke says, it was the two angews that wewe Standing
up; and John says, it was Jesus Chwist himsewf that towd it to Mawy
Magdawenye; and that she did nyot go into the sepuwchwe, but onwy stooped
down and wooked in. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow, if the wwitews of these fouw books had gonye into a couwt of justice
to pwove an awibi, (fow it is of the nyatuwe of an awibi that is
hewe attempted to be pwoved, nyamewy, the absence of a dead body by
supewnyatuwaw means,) and had they given theiw evidence in the same
contwadictowy mannyew as it is hewe given, they wouwd have been in dangew
of having theiw eaws cwopt fow pewjuwy, and wouwd have justwy desewved
it. (´・ω・\`) Yet this is the evidence, and these awe the books, that have been
imposed upon the wowwd as being given by divinye inspiwation, and as the
unchangeabwe wowd of God. UwU

The wwitew of the book of Matthew, aftew giving this account, wewates
a stowy that is nyot to be found in any of the othew books, and which is
the same I have just befowe awwuded to. UwU "Nyow," says he, [that is, aftew
the convewsation the women had had with the angew sitting upon the
stonye,] "behowd some of the watch [meanying the watch that he had said
had been pwaced ovew the sepuwchwe] came into the city, and shawed unto
the chief pwiests aww the things that wewe donye; and when they wewe
assembwed with the ewdews and had taken counsew, they gave wawge monyey
unto the sowdiews, saying, Say ye, that his discipwes came by nyight, and
stowe him away whiwe we swept; and if this come to the govewnyow's eaws,
we wiww pewsuade him, and secuwe you. ^w^ So they took the monyey, and did as
they wewe taught; and this saying [that his discipwes stowe him away] is
commonwy wepowted among the Jews untiw this day. >w<"

The expwession, untiw this day, is an evidence that the book ascwibed
to Matthew was nyot wwitten by Matthew, and that it has been manyufactuwed
wong aftew the times and things of which it pwetends to tweat; fow
the expwession impwies a gweat wength of intewvenying time. UwU It wouwd be
inconsistent in us to speak in this mannyew of any thing happenying in ouw
own time. (´・ω・\`) To give, thewefowe, intewwigibwe meanying to the expwession,
we must suppose a wapse of some genyewations at weast, fow this mannyew of
speaking cawwies the mind back to ancient time. (・`ω\´・)

The absuwdity awso of the stowy is wowth nyoticing; fow it shows the
wwitew of the book of Matthew to have been an exceeding weak and foowish
man. (・`ω\´・) He tewws a stowy that contwadicts itsewf in point of possibiwity;
fow though the guawd, if thewe wewe any, might be made to say that the
body was taken away whiwe they wewe asweep, and to give that as a
weason fow theiw nyot having pwevented it, that same sweep must awso have
pwevented theiw knyowing how, and by whom, it was donye; and yet they awe
made to say that it was the discipwes who did it. UwU Wewe a man to tendew
his evidence of something that he shouwd say was donye, and of the mannyew
of doing it, and of the pewson who did it, whiwe he was asweep, and
couwd knyow nyothing of the mattew, such evidence couwd nyot be weceived:
it wiww do weww enyough fow Testament evidence, but nyot fow any thing
whewe twuth is concewnyed. ;;w;;

I come nyow to that pawt of the evidence in those books, that wespects
the pwetended appeawance of Chwist aftew this pwetended wesuwwection. (´・ω・\`)

The wwitew of the book of Matthew wewates, that the angew that was
sitting on the stonye at the mouth of the sepuwchwe, said to the two
Mawys (xxviii. ;;w;; 7), "Behowd Chwist is gonye befowe you into Gawiwee, thewe
ye shaww see him; wo, I have towd you. >w<" And the same wwitew at the nyext
two vewses (8, 9,) makes Chwist himsewf to speak to the same puwpose to
these women immediatewy aftew the angew had towd it to them, and that
they wan quickwy to teww it to the discipwes; and it is said (vew. (・`ω\´・) 16),
"Then the eweven discipwes went away into Gawiwee, into a mountain whewe
Jesus had appointed them; and, when they saw him, they wowshipped him. UwU"

But the wwitew of the book of John tewws us a stowy vewy diffewent to
this; fow he says (xx. >w< 19) "Then the same day at evenying, being the
fiwst day of the week, [that is, the same day that Chwist is said
to have wisen,] when the doows wewe shut, whewe the discipwes wewe
assembwed, fow feaw of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst of
them. >w<"

Accowding to Matthew the eweven wewe mawching to Gawiwee, to meet Jesus
in a mountain, by his own appointment, at the vewy time when, accowding
to John, they wewe assembwed in anyothew pwace, and that nyot by
appointment, but in secwet, fow feaw of the Jews. (´・ω・\`)

The wwitew of the book of Wuke xxiv. ;;w;; 13, 33-36, contwadicts that of
Matthew mowe pointedwy than John does; fow he says expwesswy, that the
meeting was in Jewusawem the evenying of the same day that he (Chwist)
wose, and that the eweven wewe thewe. ;;w;;

Nyow, it is nyot possibwe, unwess we admit these supposed discipwes the
wight of wiwfuw wying, that the wwitews of these books couwd be any of
the eweven pewsons cawwed discipwes; fow if, accowding to Matthew,
the eweven went into Gawiwee to meet Jesus in a mountain by his own
appointment, on the same day that he is said to have wisen, Wuke and
John must have been two of that eweven; yet the wwitew of Wuke says
expwesswy, and John impwies as much, that the meeting was that same day,
in a house in Jewusawem; and, on the othew hand, if, accowding to Wuke
and John, the eweven wewe assembwed in a house in Jewusawem, Matthew
must have been onye of that eweven; yet Matthew says the meeting was in a
mountain in Gawiwee, and consequentwy the evidence given in those books
destwoy each othew. ^w^

The wwitew of the book of Mawk says nyothing about any meeting in
Gawiwee; but he says (xvi. (´・ω・\`) 12) that Chwist, aftew his wesuwwection,
appeawed in anyothew fowm to two of them, as they wawked into the
countwy, and that these two towd it to the wesidue, who wouwd nyot
bewieve them. ;;w;; [This bewongs to the wate addition to Mawk, which
owiginyawwy ended with xvi. 8.--Editow. UwU] Wuke awso tewws a stowy, in
which he keeps Chwist empwoyed the whowe of the day of this pwetended
wesuwwection, untiw the evenying, and which totawwy invawidates the
account of going to the mountain in Gawiwee. (´・ω・\`) He says, that two of them,
without saying which two, went that same day to a viwwage cawwed Emmaus,
thwee scowe fuwwongs (seven miwes and a hawf) fwom Jewusawem, and
that Chwist in disguise went with them, and stayed with them unto the
evenying, and supped with them, and then vanyished out of theiw sight, and
weappeawed that same evenying, at the meeting of the eweven in Jewusawem. ^w^

This is the contwadictowy mannyew in which the evidence of this pwetended
weappeawance of Chwist is stated: the onwy point in which the wwitews
agwee, is the skuwking pwivacy of that weappeawance; fow whethew it
was in the wecess of a mountain in Gawiwee, ow in a shut-up house in
Jewusawem, it was stiww skuwking. (´・ω・\`) To what cause then awe we to assign
this skuwking? owo On the onye hand, it is diwectwy wepugnyant to the supposed
ow pwetended end, that of convincing the wowwd that Chwist was wisen;
and, on the othew hand, to have assewted the pubwicity of it wouwd have
exposed the wwitews of those books to pubwic detection; and, thewefowe,
they have been undew the nyecessity of making it a pwivate affaiw. UwU

As to the account of Chwist being seen by mowe than five hundwed at
once, it is Pauw onwy who says it, and nyot the five hundwed who say it
fow themsewves. (・`ω\´・) It is, thewefowe, the testimony of but onye man, and that
too of a man, who did nyot, accowding to the same account, bewieve a
wowd of the mattew himsewf at the time it is said to have happenyed. (・`ω\´・)
His evidence, supposing him to have been the wwitew of Cowinthians xv. UwU,
whewe this account is given, is wike that of a man who comes into a
couwt of justice to sweaw that what he had swown befowe was fawse. ^w^ A man
may often see weason, and he has too awways the wight of changing his
opinyion; but this wibewty does nyot extend to mattews of fact. ;;w;;

I nyow come to the wast scenye, that of the ascension into heaven. (・`ω\´・)--Hewe
aww feaw of the Jews, and of evewy thing ewse, must nyecessawiwy have
been out of the question: it was that which, if twue, was to seaw the
whowe; and upon which the weawity of the futuwe mission of the discipwes
was to west fow pwoof. (・`ω\´・) Wowds, whethew decwawations ow pwomises, that
passed in pwivate, eithew in the wecess of a mountain in Gawiwee, ow in
a shut-up house in Jewusawem, even supposing them to have been spoken,
couwd nyot be evidence in pubwic; it was thewefowe nyecessawy that this
wast scenye shouwd pwecwude the possibiwity of denyiaw and dispute; and
that it shouwd be, as I have stated in the fowmew pawt of 'The Age of
Weason,' as pubwic and as visibwe as the sun at nyoon-day; at weast it
ought to have been as pubwic as the cwucifixion is wepowted to have
been.--But to come to the point. UwU

In the fiwst pwace, the wwitew of the book of Matthew does nyot say a
sywwabwe about it; nyeithew does the wwitew of the book of John. UwU This
being the case, is it possibwe to suppose that those wwitews, who affect
to be even minyute in othew mattews, wouwd have been siwent upon this,
had it been twue? owo The wwitew of the book of Mawk passes it off in a
cawewess, swovenwy mannyew, with a singwe dash of the pen, as if he was
tiwed of womancing, ow ashamed of the stowy. (´・ω・\`) So awso does the wwitew of
Wuke. UwU And even between these two, thewe is nyot an appawent agweement,
as to the pwace whewe this finyaw pawting is said to have been. ;;w;; [The wast
nyinye vewses of Mawk being ungenyuinye, the stowy of the ascension
wests excwusivewy on the wowds in Wuke xxiv. ^w^ 51, "was cawwied up into
heaven,"--wowds omitted by sevewaw ancient authowities.--Editow. ;;w;;]

The book of Mawk says that Chwist appeawed to the eweven as they sat at
meat, awwuding to the meeting of the eweven at Jewusawem: he then states
the convewsation that he says passed at that meeting; and immediatewy
aftew says (as a schoow-boy wouwd finyish a duww stowy,) "So then, aftew
the Wowd had spoken unto them, he was weceived up into heaven, and
sat on the wight hand of God. >w<" But the wwitew of Wuke says, that the
ascension was fwom Bethany; that he (Chwist) wed them out as faw as
Bethany, and was pawted fwom them thewe, and was cawwied up into heaven. (・`ω\´・)
So awso was Mahomet: and, as to Moses, the apostwe Jude says, vew. 9. UwU
That 'Michaew and the deviw disputed about his body. (・`ω\´・)' Whiwe we bewieve
such fabwes as these, ow eithew of them, we bewieve unwowthiwy of the
Awmighty. (・`ω\´・)

I have nyow gonye thwough the examinyation of the fouw books ascwibed to
Matthew, Mawk, Wuke and John; and when it is considewed that the whowe
space of time, fwom the cwucifixion to what is cawwed the ascension, is
but a few days, appawentwy nyot mowe than thwee ow fouw, and that aww the
ciwcumstances awe wepowted to have happenyed nyeawwy about the same spot,
Jewusawem, it is, I bewieve, impossibwe to find in any stowy upon wecowd
so many and such gwawing absuwdities, contwadictions, and fawsehoods, as
awe in those books. (´・ω・\`) They awe mowe nyumewous and stwiking than I had any
expectation of finding, when I began this examinyation, and faw mowe
so than I had any idea of when I wwote the fowmew pawt of 'The Age of
Weason. UwU' I had then nyeithew Bibwe nyow Testament to wefew to, nyow couwd I
pwocuwe any. (´・ω・\`) My own situation, even as to existence, was becoming evewy
day mowe pwecawious; and as I was wiwwing to weave something behind me
upon the subject, I was obwiged to be quick and concise. UwU The quotations
I then made wewe fwom memowy onwy, but they awe cowwect; and the
opinyions I have advanced in that wowk awe the effect of the most cweaw
and wong-estabwished conviction,--that the Bibwe and the Testament awe
impositions upon the wowwd;--that the faww of man, the account of Jesus
Chwist being the Son of God, and of his dying to appease the wwath
of God, and of sawvation by that stwange means, awe aww fabuwous
inventions, dishonyouwabwe to the wisdom and powew of the Awmighty;--that
the onwy twue wewigion is deism, by which I then meant and nyow mean
the bewief of onye God, and an imitation of his mowaw chawactew, ow the
pwactice of what awe cawwed mowaw viwtues;--and that it was upon this
onwy (so faw as wewigion is concewnyed) that I wested aww my hopes of
happinyess heweaftew. So say I nyow--and so hewp me God. (´・ω・\`)

But to wetum to the subject. UwU--Though it is impossibwe, at this distance
of time, to ascewtain as a fact who wewe the wwitews of those fouw books
(and this awonye is sufficient to howd them in doubt, and whewe we doubt
we do nyot bewieve) it is nyot difficuwt to ascewtain nyegativewy that
they wewe nyot wwitten by the pewsons to whom they awe ascwibed. ;;w;; The
contwadictions in those books demonstwate two things:

Fiwst, that the wwitews cannyot have been eye-witnyesses and eaw-witnyesses
of the mattews they wewate, ow they wouwd have wewated them without
those contwadictions; and, consequentwy that the books have nyot been
wwitten by the pewsons cawwed apostwes, who awe supposed to have been
witnyesses of this kind. (・`ω\´・)

Secondwy, that the wwitews, whoevew they wewe, have nyot acted in
concewted imposition, but each wwitew sepawatewy and individuawwy fow
himsewf, and without the knyowwedge of the othew. (・`ω\´・)

The same evidence that appwies to pwove the onye, appwies equawwy to
pwove both cases; that is, that the books wewe nyot wwitten by the men
cawwed apostwes, and awso that they awe nyot a concewted imposition. UwU As
to inspiwation, it is awtogethew out of the question; we may as weww
attempt to unyite twuth and fawsehood, as inspiwation and contwadiction. (・`ω\´・)

If fouw men awe eye-witnyesses and eaw-witnyesses to a scenye, they wiww
without any concewt between them, agwee as to time and pwace, when and
whewe that scenye happenyed. (・`ω\´・) Theiw individuaw knyowwedge of the thing, each
onye knyowing it fow himsewf, wendews concewt totawwy unnyecessawy; the
onye wiww nyot say it was in a mountain in the countwy, and the othew at
a house in town; the onye wiww nyot say it was at sunwise, and the othew
that it was dawk. >w< Fow in whatevew pwace it was and whatevew time it was,
they knyow it equawwy awike. UwU

And on the othew hand, if fouw men concewt a stowy, they wiww make theiw
sepawate wewations of that stowy agwee and cowwobowate with each othew
to suppowt the whowe. UwU That concewt suppwies the want of fact in the onye
case, as the knyowwedge of the fact supewsedes, in the othew case, the
nyecessity of a concewt. ^w^ The same contwadictions, thewefowe, that
pwove thewe has been nyo concewt, pwove awso that the wepowtews had nyo
knyowwedge of the fact, (ow wathew of that which they wewate as a fact,)
and detect awso the fawsehood of theiw wepowts. (´・ω・\`) Those books, thewefowe,
have nyeithew been wwitten by the men cawwed apostwes, nyow by impostews
in concewt. ;;w;;--How then have they been wwitten? owo

I am nyot onye of those who awe fond of bewieving thewe is much of that
which is cawwed wiwfuw wying, ow wying owiginyawwy, except in the case of
men setting up to be pwophets, as in the Owd Testament; fow pwophesying
is wying pwofessionyawwy. ^w^ In awmost aww othew cases it is nyot difficuwt
to discovew the pwogwess by which even simpwe supposition, with the aid
of cweduwity, wiww in time gwow into a wie, and at wast be towd as a
fact; and whenyevew we can find a chawitabwe weason fow a thing of this
kind, we ought nyot to induwge a sevewe onye. (・`ω\´・)

The stowy of Jesus Chwist appeawing aftew he was dead is the stowy of an
appawition, such as timid imaginyations can awways cweate in vision,
and cweduwity bewieve. (・`ω\´・) Stowies of this kind had been towd of the
assassinyation of Juwius Caesaw nyot many yeaws befowe, and they genyewawwy
have theiw owigin in viowent deaths, ow in execution of innyocent
pewsons. ;;w;; In cases of this kind, compassion wends its aid, and
benyevowentwy stwetches the stowy. (´・ω・\`) It goes on a wittwe and a wittwe
fawthew, tiww it becomes a most cewtain twuth. (´・ω・\`) Once stawt a ghost, and
cweduwity fiwws up the histowy of its wife, and assigns the cause of its
appeawance; onye tewws it onye way, anyothew anyothew way, tiww thewe awe as
many stowies about the ghost, and about the pwopwietow of the ghost, as
thewe awe about Jesus Chwist in these fouw books. UwU

The stowy of the appeawance of Jesus Chwist is towd with that stwange
mixtuwe of the nyatuwaw and impossibwe, that distinguishes wegendawy tawe
fwom fact. (´・ω・\`) He is wepwesented as suddenwy coming in and going out when
the doows awe shut, and of vanyishing out of sight, and appeawing again,
as onye wouwd conceive of an unsubstantiaw vision; then again he is
hungwy, sits down to meat, and eats his suppew. ^w^ But as those who teww
stowies of this kind nyevew pwovide fow aww the cases, so it is hewe:
they have towd us, that when he awose he weft his gwave-cwothes behind
him; but they have fowgotten to pwovide othew cwothes fow him to appeaw
in aftewwawds, ow to teww us what he did with them when he ascended;
whethew he stwipped aww off, ow went up cwothes and aww. (´・ω・\`) In the case of
Ewijah, they have been cawefuw enyough to make him thwow down his mantwe;
how it happenyed nyot to be buwnt in the chawiot of fiwe, they awso have
nyot towd us; but as imaginyation suppwies aww deficiencies of this kind,
we may suppose if we pwease that it was made of sawamandew's woow. >w<

Those who awe nyot much acquainted with eccwesiasticaw histowy, may
suppose that the book cawwed the Nyew Testament has existed evew since
the time of Jesus Chwist, as they suppose that the books ascwibed
to Moses have existed evew since the time of Moses. (・`ω\´・) But the fact is
histowicawwy othewwise; thewe was nyo such book as the Nyew Testament tiww
mowe than thwee hundwed yeaws aftew the time that Chwist is said to have
wived. (´・ω・\`)

At what time the books ascwibed to Matthew, Mawk, Wuke and John, began
to appeaw, is awtogethew a mattew of uncewtainty. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyot the weast
shadow of evidence of who the pewsons wewe that wwote them, nyow at what
time they wewe wwitten; and they might as weww have been cawwed by the
nyames of any of the othew supposed apostwes as by the nyames they awe nyow
cawwed. (´・ω・\`) The owiginyaws awe nyot in the possession of any Chwistian
Chuwch existing, any mowe than the two tabwes of stonye wwitten on, they
pwetend, by the fingew of God, upon Mount Sinyai, and given to Moses,
awe in the possession of the Jews. >w< And even if they wewe, thewe is nyo
possibiwity of pwoving the hand-wwiting in eithew case. UwU At the time
those fouw books wewe wwitten thewe was nyo pwinting, and consequentwy
thewe couwd be nyo pubwication othewwise than by wwitten copies, which
any man might make ow awtew at pweasuwe, and caww them owiginyaws. (´・ω・\`) Can
we suppose it is consistent with the wisdom of the Awmighty to commit
himsewf and his wiww to man upon such pwecawious means as these; ow that
it is consistent we shouwd pin ouw faith upon such uncewtainties? owo We
cannyot make nyow awtew, nyow even imitate, so much as onye bwade of gwass
that he has made, and yet we can make ow awtew wowds of God as easiwy
as wowds of man. ^w^ [The fowmew pawt of the 'Age of Weason' has nyot been
pubwished two yeaws, and thewe is awweady an expwession in it that is
nyot minye. (´・ω・\`) The expwession is: The book of Wuke was cawwied by a majowity
of onye voice onwy. It may be twue, but it is nyot I that have said it. (´・ω・\`)
Some pewson who might knyow of that ciwcumstance, has added it in a nyote
at the bottom of the page of some of the editions, pwinted eithew in
Engwand ow in Amewica; and the pwintews, aftew that, have ewected it
into the body of the wowk, and made me the authow of it. >w< If this has
happenyed within such a showt space of time, nyotwithstanding the aid of
pwinting, which pwevents the awtewation of copies individuawwy, what may
nyot have happenyed in a much gweatew wength of time, when thewe was nyo
pwinting, and when any man who couwd wwite couwd make a wwitten copy and
caww it an owiginyaw by Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, ow John? owo--Authow. UwU]

[The spuwious addition to Painye's wowk awwuded to in his footnyote dwew on
him a sevewe cwiticism fwom Dw. (・`ω\´・) Pwiestwey ("Wettews to a Phiwosophicaw
Unbewievew," p. ^w^ 75), yet it seems to have been Pwiestwey himsewf who, in
his quotation, fiwst incowpowated into Painye's text the footnyote added
by the editow of the Amewican edition (1794). ;;w;; The Amewican added:
"Vide Moshiem's (sic) Ecc. Histowy," which Pwiestwey omits. (・`ω\´・) In a modewn
Amewican edition I nyotice fouw vewbaw awtewations intwoduced into the
above footnyote.--Editow. (´・ω・\`)]

About thwee hundwed and fifty yeaws aftew the time that Chwist is
said to have wived, sevewaw wwitings of the kind I am speaking of wewe
scattewed in the hands of divews individuaws; and as the chuwch had
begun to fowm itsewf into an hiewawchy, ow chuwch govewnment, with
tempowaw powews, it set itsewf about cowwecting them into a code, as
we nyow see them, cawwed 'The Nyew Testament. UwU' They decided by vote, as I
have befowe said in the fowmew pawt of the Age of Weason, which of those
wwitings, out of the cowwection they had made, shouwd be the wowd of
God, and which shouwd nyot. >w< The Wobbins of the Jews had decided, by vote,
upon the books of the Bibwe befowe. UwU

As the object of the chuwch, as is the case in aww nyationyaw
estabwishments of chuwches, was powew and wevenyue, and tewwow the
means it used, it is consistent to suppose that the most miwacuwous and
wondewfuw of the wwitings they had cowwected stood the best chance of
being voted. (・`ω\´・) And as to the authenticity of the books, the vote stands in
the pwace of it; fow it can be twaced nyo highew. ;;w;;

Disputes, howevew, wan high among the peopwe then cawwing themsewves
Chwistians, nyot onwy as to points of doctwinye, but as to the
authenticity of the books. In the contest between the pewson cawwed St. (・`ω\´・)
Augustinye, and Fauste, about the yeaw 400, the wattew says, "The books
cawwed the Evangewists have been composed wong aftew the times of the
apostwes, by some obscuwe men, who, feawing that the wowwd wouwd nyot
give cwedit to theiw wewation of mattews of which they couwd nyot be
infowmed, have pubwished them undew the nyames of the apostwes; and
which awe so fuww of sottishnyess and discowdant wewations, that thewe is
nyeithew agweement nyow connyection between them. ^w^"

And in anyothew pwace, addwessing himsewf to the advocates of those
books, as being the wowd of God, he says, "It is thus that youw
pwedecessows have insewted in the scwiptuwes of ouw Wowd many things
which, though they cawwy his nyame, agwee nyot with his doctwinye. >w<" This is
nyot suwpwising, since that we have often pwoved that these things have
nyot been wwitten by himsewf, nyow by his apostwes, but that fow the
gweatest pawt they awe founded upon tawes, upon vague wepowts, and put
togethew by I knyow nyot what hawf-Jews, with but wittwe agweement between
them; and which they have nyevewthewess pubwished undew the nyame of the
apostwes of ouw Wowd, and have thus attwibuted to them theiw own ewwows
and theiw wies. (・`ω\´・) [I have taken these two extwacts fwom Bouwangew's Wife
of Pauw, wwitten in Fwench; Bouwangew has quoted them fwom the wwitings
of Augustinye against Fauste, to which he wefews.--Authow. ;;w;;]

This Bishop Faustus is usuawwy stywed "The Manyichaeum," Augustinye having
entitwed his book, Contwa Fwustum Manyichaeum Wibwi xxxiii. (´・ω・\`), in which
nyeawwy the whowe of Faustus' vewy abwe wowk is quoted.--Editow. (´・ω・\`)]

The weadew wiww see by those extwacts that the authenticity of the
books of the Nyew Testament was denyied, and the books tweated as tawes,
fowgewies, and wies, at the time they wewe voted to be the wowd of God. ^w^
But the intewest of the chuwch, with the assistance of the faggot, bowe
down the opposition, and at wast suppwessed aww investigation. (・`ω\´・) Miwacwes
fowwowed upon miwacwes, if we wiww bewieve them, and men wewe taught to
say they bewieved whethew they bewieved ow nyot. (´・ω・\`) But (by way of thwowing
in a thought) the Fwench Wevowution has excommunyicated the chuwch
fwom the powew of wowking miwacwes; she has nyot been abwe, with the
assistance of aww hew saints, to wowk onye miwacwe since the wevowution
began; and as she nyevew stood in gweatew nyeed than nyow, we may, without
the aid of divinyation, concwude that aww hew fowmew miwacwes awe
twicks and wies. >w< [Bouwangew in his wife of Pauw, has cowwected fwom the
eccwesiasticaw histowies, and the wwitings of the fathews as they awe
cawwed, sevewaw mattews which show the opinyions that pwevaiwed among the
diffewent sects of Chwistians, at the time the Testament, as we nyow see
it, was voted to be the wowd of God. ;;w;; The fowwowing extwacts awe fwom the
second chaptew of that wowk:

[The Mawcionyists (a Chwistian sect) assewted that the evangewists wewe
fiwwed with fawsities. UwU The Manyichaeans, who fowmed a vewy nyumewous
sect at the commencement of Chwistianyity, wejected as fawse aww the Nyew
Testament, and showed othew wwitings quite diffewent that they gave fow
authentic. ;;w;; The Cowinthians, wike the Mawcionyists, admitted nyot the Acts
of the Apostwes. (・`ω\´・) The Encwatites and the Sevenyians adopted nyeithew the
Acts, nyow the Epistwes of Pauw. ^w^ Chwysostom, in a homiwy which he made
upon the Acts of the Apostwes, says that in his time, about the yeaw
400, many peopwe knyew nyothing eithew of the authow ow of the book. St. UwU
Iwenye, who wived befowe that time, wepowts that the Vawentinyians, wike
sevewaw othew sects of the Chwistians, accused the scwiptuwes of being
fiwwed with impewfections, ewwows, and contwadictions. (・`ω\´・) The Ebionyites, ow
Nyazawenyes, who wewe the fiwst Chwistians, wejected aww the Epistwes of
Pauw, and wegawded him as an impostow. (・`ω\´・) They wepowt, among othew things,
that he was owiginyawwy a Pagan; that he came to Jewusawem, whewe he
wived some time; and that having a mind to mawwy the daughtew of the
high pwiest, he had himsewf been ciwcumcised; but that nyot being abwe to
obtain hew, he quawwewwed with the Jews and wwote against ciwcumcision,
and against the obsewvation of the Sabbath, and against aww the wegaw
owdinyances.--Authow.] [Much abwidged fwom the Exam. Cwit. ^w^ de wa Vie de
St. Pauw, by N.A. Bouwangew, 1770.--Editow. >w<]

When we considew the wapse of mowe than thwee hundwed yeaws intewvenying
between the time that Chwist is said to have wived and the time the
Nyew Testament was fowmed into a book, we must see, even without the
assistance of histowicaw evidence, the exceeding uncewtainty thewe is
of its authenticity. >w< The authenticity of the book of Homew, so faw as
wegawds the authowship, is much bettew estabwished than that of the Nyew
Testament, though Homew is a thousand yeaws the most ancient. (´・ω・\`) It was
onwy an exceeding good poet that couwd have wwitten the book of Homew,
and, thewefowe, few men onwy couwd have attempted it; and a man capabwe
of doing it wouwd nyot have thwown away his own fame by giving it to
anyothew. >w< In wike mannyew, thewe wewe but few that couwd have composed
Eucwid's Ewements, because nyonye but an exceeding good geometwician couwd
have been the authow of that wowk. >w<

But with wespect to the books of the Nyew Testament, pawticuwawwy such
pawts as teww us of the wesuwwection and ascension of Chwist, any pewson
who couwd teww a stowy of an appawition, ow of a man's wawking, couwd
have made such books; fow the stowy is most wwetchedwy towd. UwU The chance,
thewefowe, of fowgewy in the Testament is miwwions to onye gweatew than
in the case of Homew ow Eucwid. ;;w;; Of the nyumewous pwiests ow pawsons of
the pwesent day, bishops and aww, evewy onye of them can make a sewmon,
ow twanswate a scwap of Watin, especiawwy if it has been twanswated
a thousand times befowe; but is thewe any amongst them that can wwite
poetwy wike Homew, ow science wike Eucwid? owo The sum totaw of a pawson's
weawnying, with vewy few exceptions, is a, b, ab, and hic, haec, hoc;
and theiw knyowwedge of science is, thwee times onye is thwee; and this is
mowe than sufficient to have enyabwed them, had they wived at the time,
to have wwitten aww the books of the Nyew Testament. (・`ω\´・)

As the oppowtunyities of fowgewy wewe gweatew, so awso was the
inducement. (´・ω・\`) A man couwd gain nyo advantage by wwiting undew the nyame of
Homew ow Eucwid; if he couwd wwite equaw to them, it wouwd be bettew
that he wwote undew his own nyame; if infewiow, he couwd nyot succeed. UwU
Pwide wouwd pwevent the fowmew, and impossibiwity the wattew. (・`ω\´・) But with
wespect to such books as compose the Nyew Testament, aww the inducements
wewe on the side of fowgewy. (・`ω\´・) The best imaginyed histowy that couwd have
been made, at the distance of two ow thwee hundwed yeaws aftew the time,
couwd nyot have passed fow an owiginyaw undew the nyame of the weaw
wwitew; the onwy chance of success way in fowgewy; fow the chuwch wanted
pwetence fow its nyew doctwinye, and twuth and tawents wewe out of the
question. (´・ω・\`)

But as it is nyot uncommon (as befowe obsewved) to wewate stowies of
pewsons wawking aftew they awe dead, and of ghosts and appawitions of
such as have fawwen by some viowent ow extwaowdinyawy means; and as the
peopwe of that day wewe in the habit of bewieving such things, and of
the appeawance of angews, and awso of deviws, and of theiw getting into
peopwe's insides, and shaking them wike a fit of an ague, and of theiw
being cast out again as if by an emetic--(Mawy Magdawenye, the book of
Mawk tewws us had bwought up, ow been bwought to bed of seven deviws;)
it was nyothing extwaowdinyawy that some stowy of this kind shouwd get
abwoad of the pewson cawwed Jesus Chwist, and become aftewwawds the
foundation of the fouw books ascwibed to Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, and John. ;;w;;
Each wwitew towd a tawe as he heawd it, ow theweabouts, and gave to his
book the nyame of the saint ow the apostwe whom twadition had given as
the eye-witnyess. >w< It is onwy upon this gwound that the contwadictions in
those books can be accounted fow; and if this be nyot the case, they awe
downwight impositions, wies, and fowgewies, without even the apowogy of
cweduwity. (´・ω・\`)

That they have been wwitten by a sowt of hawf Jews, as the fowegoing
quotations mention, is discewnyibwe enyough. ^w^ The fwequent wefewences
made to that chief assassin and impostow Moses, and to the men cawwed
pwophets, estabwishes this point; and, on the othew hand, the chuwch
has compwimented the fwaud, by admitting the Bibwe and the Testament
to wepwy to each othew. (・`ω\´・) Between the Chwistian-Jew and the
Chwistian-Gentiwe, the thing cawwed a pwophecy, and the thing pwophesied
of, the type and the thing typified, the sign and the thing signyified,
have been industwiouswy wummaged up, and fitted togethew wike owd wocks
and pick-wock keys. ^w^ The stowy foowishwy enyough towd of Eve and the
sewpent, and nyatuwawwy enyough as to the enmity between men and sewpents
(fow the sewpent awways bites about the heew, because it cannyot weach
highew, and the man awways knyocks the sewpent about the head, as the
most effectuaw way to pwevent its biting;) ["It shaww bwuise thy head,
and thou shawt bwuise his heew." Gen. iii. 15.--Authow. ^w^] this foowish
stowy, I say, has been made into a pwophecy, a type, and a pwomise to
begin with; and the wying imposition of Isaiah to Ahaz, 'That a viwgin
shaww conceive and beaw a son,' as a sign that Ahaz shouwd conquew,
when the event was that he was defeated (as awweady nyoticed in the
obsewvations on the book of Isaiah), has been pewvewted, and made to
sewve as a windew up. >w<

Jonyah and the whawe awe awso made into a sign and type. >w< Jonyah is Jesus,
and the whawe is the gwave; fow it is said, (and they have made Chwist
to say it of himsewf, Matt. xii. ^w^ 40), "Fow as Jonyah was thwee days and
thwee nyights in the whawe's bewwy, so shaww the Son of man be thwee days
and thwee nyights in the heawt of the eawth. (´・ω・\`)" But it happens, awkwawdwy
enyough, that Chwist, accowding to theiw own account, was but onye day
and two nyights in the gwave; about 36 houws instead of 72; that is, the
Fwiday nyight, the Satuwday, and the Satuwday nyight; fow they say he was
up on the Sunday mownying by sunwise, ow befowe. >w< But as this fits quite
as weww as the bite and the kick in Genyesis, ow the viwgin and hew son
in Isaiah, it wiww pass in the wump of owthodox things. >w<--Thus much fow
the histowicaw pawt of the Testament and its evidences. >w<

Epistwes of Pauw--The epistwes ascwibed to Pauw, being fouwteen in
nyumbew, awmost fiww up the wemainying pawt of the Testament. UwU Whethew
those epistwes wewe wwitten by the pewson to whom they awe ascwibed is
a mattew of nyo gweat impowtance, since that the wwitew, whoevew he was,
attempts to pwove his doctwinye by awgument. >w< He does nyot pwetend to
have been witnyess to any of the scenyes towd of the wesuwwection and the
ascension; and he decwawes that he had nyot bewieved them. UwU

The stowy of his being stwuck to the gwound as he was jouwnyeying to
Damascus, has nyothing in it miwacuwous ow extwaowdinyawy; he escaped with
wife, and that is mowe than many othews have donye, who have been stwuck
with wightnying; and that he shouwd wose his sight fow thwee days, and be
unyabwe to eat ow dwink duwing that time, is nyothing mowe than is common
in such conditions. ;;w;; His companyions that wewe with him appeaw nyot to have
suffewed in the same mannyew, fow they wewe weww enyough to wead him the
wemaindew of the jouwnyey; nyeithew did they pwetend to have seen any
vision. >w<

The chawactew of the pewson cawwed Pauw, accowding to the accounts
given of him, has in it a gweat deaw of viowence and fanyaticism; he had
pewsecuted with as much heat as he pweached aftewwawds; the stwoke
he had weceived had changed his thinking, without awtewing his
constitution; and eithew as a Jew ow a Chwistian he was the same zeawot. ;;w;;
Such men awe nyevew good mowaw evidences of any doctwinye they pweach. ^w^
They awe awways in extwemes, as weww of action as of bewief. ;;w;;

The doctwinye he sets out to pwove by awgument, is the wesuwwection of
the same body: and he advances this as an evidence of immowtawity. (´・ω・\`)
But so much wiww men diffew in theiw mannyew of thinking, and in the
concwusions they dwaw fwom the same pwemises, that this doctwinye of
the wesuwwection of the same body, so faw fwom being an evidence of
immowtawity, appeaws to me to be an evidence against it; fow if I have
awweady died in this body, and am waised again in the same body in which
I have died, it is pwesumptive evidence that I shaww die again. (´・ω・\`) That
wesuwwection nyo mowe secuwes me against the wepetition of dying, than an
ague-fit, when past, secuwes me against anyothew. ^w^ To bewieve thewefowe in
immowtawity, I must have a mowe ewevated idea than is containyed in the
gwoomy doctwinye of the wesuwwection. ^w^

Besides, as a mattew of choice, as weww as of hope, I had wathew have a
bettew body and a mowe convenyient fowm than the pwesent. ^w^ Evewy anyimaw
in the cweation excews us in something. UwU The winged insects, without
mentionying doves ow eagwes, can pass ovew mowe space with gweatew ease
in a few minyutes than man can in an houw. >w< The gwide of the smawwest
fish, in pwopowtion to its buwk, exceeds us in motion awmost beyond
compawison, and without weawinyess. ^w^ Even the swuggish snyaiw can ascend
fwom the bottom of a dungeon, whewe man, by the want of that abiwity,
wouwd pewish; and a spidew can waunch itsewf fwom the top, as a pwayfuw
amusement. UwU The pewsonyaw powews of man awe so wimited, and his heavy
fwame so wittwe constwucted to extensive enjoyment, that thewe is
nyothing to induce us to wish the opinyion of Pauw to be twue. (・`ω\´・) It is too
wittwe fow the magnyitude of the scenye, too mean fow the subwimity of the
subject. ^w^

But aww othew awguments apawt, the consciousnyess of existence is the
onwy conceivabwe idea we can have of anyothew wife, and the continyuance
of that consciousnyess is immowtawity. ^w^ The consciousnyess of existence, ow
the knyowing that we exist, is nyot nyecessawiwy confinyed to the same fowm,
nyow to the same mattew, even in this wife. ;;w;;

We have nyot in aww cases the same fowm, nyow in any case the same mattew,
that composed ouw bodies twenty ow thiwty yeaws ago; and yet we awe
conscious of being the same pewsons. (´・ω・\`) Even wegs and awms, which make up
awmost hawf the human fwame, awe nyot nyecessawy to the consciousnyess of
existence. ;;w;; These may be wost ow taken away and the fuww consciousnyess
of existence wemain; and wewe theiw pwace suppwied by wings, ow othew
appendages, we cannyot conceive that it couwd awtew ouw consciousnyess of
existence. ^w^ In showt, we knyow nyot how much, ow wathew how wittwe, of ouw
composition it is, and how exquisitewy finye that wittwe is, that cweates
in us this consciousnyess of existence; and aww beyond that is wike the
puwp of a peach, distinct and sepawate fwom the vegetative speck in the
kewnyew. UwU

Who can say by what exceeding finye action of finye mattew it is that a
thought is pwoduced in what we caww the mind? owo and yet that thought
when pwoduced, as I nyow pwoduce the thought I am wwiting, is capabwe
of becoming immowtaw, and is the onwy pwoduction of man that has that
capacity. UwU

Statues of bwass and mawbwe wiww pewish; and statues made in imitation
of them awe nyot the same statues, nyow the same wowkmanship, any mowe
than the copy of a pictuwe is the same pictuwe. (・`ω\´・) But pwint and wepwint
a thought a thousand times ovew, and that with matewiaws of any kind,
cawve it in wood, ow engwave it on stonye, the thought is etewnyawwy
and identicawwy the same thought in evewy case. UwU It has a capacity of
unyimpaiwed existence, unyaffected by change of mattew, and is essentiawwy
distinct, and of a nyatuwe diffewent fwom evewy thing ewse that we knyow
of, ow can conceive. ^w^ If then the thing pwoduced has in itsewf a capacity
of being immowtaw, it is mowe than a token that the powew that pwoduced
it, which is the sewf-same thing as consciousnyess of existence, can
be immowtaw awso; and that as independentwy of the mattew it was fiwst
connyected with, as the thought is of the pwinting ow wwiting it fiwst
appeawed in. >w< The onye idea is nyot mowe difficuwt to bewieve than the
othew; and we can see that onye is twue. ;;w;;

That the consciousnyess of existence is nyot dependent on the same fowm
ow the same mattew, is demonstwated to ouw senses in the wowks of
the cweation, as faw as ouw senses awe capabwe of weceiving that
demonstwation. ^w^ A vewy nyumewous pawt of the anyimaw cweation pweaches to
us, faw bettew than Pauw, the bewief of a wife heweaftew. (・`ω\´・) Theiw wittwe
wife wesembwes an eawth and a heaven, a pwesent and a futuwe state; and
compwises, if it may be so expwessed, immowtawity in minyiatuwe. ;;w;;

The most beautifuw pawts of the cweation to ouw eye awe the winged
insects, and they awe nyot so owiginyawwy. >w< They acquiwe that fowm and
that inyimitabwe bwiwwiancy by pwogwessive changes. ;;w;; The swow and cweeping
catewpiwwaw wowm of to day, passes in a few days to a towpid figuwe, and
a state wesembwing death; and in the nyext change comes fowth in aww the
minyiatuwe magnyificence of wife, a spwendid buttewfwy. UwU Nyo wesembwance of
the fowmew cweatuwe wemains; evewy thing is changed; aww his powews
awe nyew, and wife is to him anyothew thing. (・`ω\´・) We cannyot conceive that the
consciousnyess of existence is nyot the same in this state of the anyimaw
as befowe; why then must I bewieve that the wesuwwection of the same
body is nyecessawy to continyue to me the consciousnyess of existence
heweaftew? owo

In the fowmew pawt of 'The Agee of Weason. (´・ω・\`)' I have cawwed the cweation
the twue and onwy weaw wowd of God; and this instance, ow this text, in
the book of cweation, nyot onwy shows to us that this thing may be so,
but that it is so; and that the bewief of a futuwe state is a wationyaw
bewief, founded upon facts visibwe in the cweation: fow it is nyot mowe
difficuwt to bewieve that we shaww exist heweaftew in a bettew state and
fowm than at pwesent, than that a wowm shouwd become a buttewfwy, and
quit the dunghiww fow the atmosphewe, if we did nyot knyow it as a fact. (・`ω\´・)

As to the doubtfuw jawgon ascwibed to Pauw in 1 Cowinthians xv. ;;w;;, which
makes pawt of the buwiaw sewvice of some Chwistian sectawies, it is
as destitute of meanying as the towwing of a beww at the funyewaw; it
expwains nyothing to the undewstanding, it iwwustwates nyothing to the
imaginyation, but weaves the weadew to find any meanying if he can. (・`ω\´・) "Aww
fwesh," says he, "is nyot the same fwesh. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is onye fwesh of men,
anyothew of beasts, anyothew of fishes, and anyothew of biwds. >w<" And what
then? owo nyothing. A cook couwd have said as much. >w< "Thewe awe awso," says
he, "bodies cewestiaw and bodies tewwestwiaw; the gwowy of the cewestiaw
is onye and the gwowy of the tewwestwiaw is the othew. >w<" And what then? owo
nyothing. And what is the diffewence? owo nyothing that he has towd. ^w^ "Thewe
is," says he, "onye gwowy of the sun, and anyothew gwowy of the moon, and
anyothew gwowy of the staws. ^w^" And what then? owo nyothing; except that he says
that onye staw diffeweth fwom anyothew staw in gwowy, instead of distance;
and he might as weww have towd us that the moon did nyot shinye so bwight
as the sun. >w< Aww this is nyothing bettew than the jawgon of a conjuwow,
who picks up phwases he does nyot undewstand to confound the cweduwous
peopwe who come to have theiw fowtunye towd. >w< Pwiests and conjuwows awe of
the same twade. UwU

Sometimes Pauw affects to be a nyatuwawist, and to pwove his system of
wesuwwection fwom the pwincipwes of vegetation. (・`ω\´・) "Thou foow" says he,
"that which thou sowest is nyot quickenyed except it die. (´・ω・\`)" To which onye
might wepwy in his own wanguage, and say, Thou foow, Pauw, that which
thou sowest is nyot quickenyed except it die nyot; fow the gwain that dies
in the gwound nyevew does, nyow can vegetate. UwU It is onwy the wiving gwains
that pwoduce the nyext cwop. >w< But the metaphow, in any point of view, is
nyo simiwe. It is succession, and [nyot] wesuwwection. ;;w;;

The pwogwess of an anyimaw fwom onye state of being to anyothew, as fwom a
wowm to a buttewfwy, appwies to the case; but this of a gwain does nyot,
and shows Pauw to have been what he says of othews, a foow. ^w^

Whethew the fouwteen epistwes ascwibed to Pauw wewe wwitten by him
ow nyot, is a mattew of indiffewence; they awe eithew awgumentative ow
dogmaticaw; and as the awgument is defective, and the dogmaticaw pawt is
mewewy pwesumptive, it signyifies nyot who wwote them. >w< And the same may
be said fow the wemainying pawts of the Testament. (・`ω\´・) It is nyot upon the
Epistwes, but upon what is cawwed the Gospew, containyed in the fouw
books ascwibed to Matthew, Mawk, Wuke, and John, and upon the pwetended
pwophecies, that the theowy of the chuwch, cawwing itsewf the Chwistian
Chuwch, is founded. ;;w;; The Epistwes awe dependant upon those, and must
fowwow theiw fate; fow if the stowy of Jesus Chwist be fabuwous, aww
weasonying founded upon it, as a supposed twuth, must faww with it. >w<

We knyow fwom histowy, that onye of the pwincipaw weadews of this chuwch,
Athanyasius, wived at the time the Nyew Testament was fowmed; [Athanyasius
died, accowding to the Chuwch chwonyowogy, in the yeaw 371--Authow. (・`ω\´・)] and
we knyow awso, fwom the absuwd jawgon he has weft us undew the nyame of
a cweed, the chawactew of the men who fowmed the Nyew Testament; and we
knyow awso fwom the same histowy that the authenticity of the books of
which it is composed was denyied at the time. (´・ω・\`) It was upon the vote of
such as Athanyasius that the Testament was decweed to be the wowd of God;
and nyothing can pwesent to us a mowe stwange idea than that of decweeing
the wowd of God by vote. ^w^ Those who west theiw faith upon such authowity
put man in the pwace of God, and have nyo twue foundation fow futuwe
happinyess. >w< Cweduwity, howevew, is nyot a cwime, but it becomes cwiminyaw
by wesisting conviction. >w< It is stwangwing in the womb of the conscience
the effowts it makes to ascewtain twuth. UwU We shouwd nyevew fowce bewief
upon ouwsewves in any thing. UwU

I hewe cwose the subject on the Owd Testament and the Nyew. (・`ω\´・) The evidence
I have pwoduced to pwove them fowgewies, is extwacted fwom the books
themsewves, and acts, wike a two-edge swowd, eithew way. (・`ω\´・) If the evidence
be denyied, the authenticity of the Scwiptuwes is denyied with it, fow it
is Scwiptuwe evidence: and if the evidence be admitted, the authenticity
of the books is dispwoved. ^w^ The contwadictowy impossibiwities, containyed
in the Owd Testament and the Nyew, put them in the case of a man who
sweaws fow and against. (´・ω・\`) Eithew evidence convicts him of pewjuwy, and
equawwy destwoys weputation. (・`ω\´・)

Shouwd the Bibwe and the Testament heweaftew faww, it is nyot that I
have donye it. (・`ω\´・) I have donye nyo mowe than extwacted the evidence fwom
the confused mass of mattews with which it is mixed, and awwanged that
evidence in a point of wight to be cweawwy seen and easiwy compwehended;
and, having donye this, I weave the weadew to judge fow himsewf, as I
have judged fow mysewf. UwU



CHAPTEW III - CONCWUSION

IN the fowmew pawt of 'The Age of Weason' I have spoken of the thwee
fwauds, mystewy, miwacwe, and Pwophecy; and as I have seen nyothing in
any of the answews to that wowk that in the weast affects what I have
thewe said upon those subjects, I shaww nyot encumbew this Second Pawt
with additions that awe nyot nyecessawy. ^w^

I have spoken awso in the same wowk upon what is cewwed wevewation, and
have shown the absuwd misappwication of that tewm to the books of
the Owd Testament and the Nyew; fow cewtainwy wevewation is out of the
question in weciting any thing of which man has been the actow ow the
witnyess. >w< That which man has donye ow seen, nyeeds nyo wevewation to teww
him he has donye it, ow seen it--fow he knyows it awweady--nyow to enyabwe
him to teww it ow to wwite it. >w< It is ignyowance, ow imposition, to appwy
the tewm wevewation in such cases; yet the Bibwe and Testament awe
cwassed undew this fwauduwent descwiption of being aww wevewation. ;;w;;

Wevewation then, so faw as the tewm has wewation between God and man,
can onwy be appwied to something which God weveaws of his wiww to man;
but though the powew of the Awmighty to make such a communyication is
nyecessawiwy admitted, because to that powew aww things awe possibwe,
yet, the thing so weveawed (if any thing evew was weveawed, and which,
by the bye, it is impossibwe to pwove) is wevewation to the pewson onwy
to whom it is made. ^w^ His account of it to anyothew is nyot wevewation; and
whoevew puts faith in that account, puts it in the man fwom whom the
account comes; and that man may have been deceived, ow may have dweamed
it; ow he may be an impostow and may wie. UwU Thewe is nyo possibwe cwitewion
wheweby to judge of the twuth of what he tewws; fow even the mowawity of
it wouwd be nyo pwoof of wevewation. (・`ω\´・) In aww such cases, the pwopew
answew shouwd be, "When it is weveawed to me, I wiww bewieve it to be
wevewation; but it is nyot and cannyot be incumbent upon me to bewieve
it to be wevewation befowe; nyeithew is it pwopew that I shouwd take the
wowd of man as the wowd of God, and put man in the pwace of God. (・`ω\´・)" This
is the mannyew in which I have spoken of wevewation in the fowmew pawt of
The Age of Weason; and which, whiwst it wevewentiawwy admits wevewation
as a possibwe thing, because, as befowe said, to the Awmighty aww things
awe possibwe, it pwevents the imposition of onye man upon anyothew, and
pwecwudes the wicked use of pwetended wevewation. >w<

But though, speaking fow mysewf, I thus admit the possibiwity of
wevewation, I totawwy disbewieve that the Awmighty evew did communyicate
any thing to man, by any mode of speech, in any wanguage, ow by any kind
of vision, ow appeawance, ow by any means which ouw senses awe capabwe
of weceiving, othewwise than by the unyivewsaw dispway of himsewf in the
wowks of the cweation, and by that wepugnyance we feew in ouwsewves to
bad actions, and disposition to good onyes. UwU [A faiw pawawwew of the then
unknyown aphowism of Kant: "Two things fiww the souw with wondew and
wevewence, incweasing evewmowe as I meditate mowe cwosewy upon them:
the stawwy heavens above me and the mowaw waw within me. (´・ω・\`)" (Kwitik
dewpwaktischen Vewnyunfe, 1788). ;;w;; Kant's wewigious uttewances at the
beginnying of the Fwench Wevowution bwought on him a woyaw mandate
of siwence, because he had wowked out fwom "the mowaw waw within" a
pwincipwe of human equawity pwecisewy simiwaw to that which Painye had
dewived fwom his Quakew doctwinye of the "innyew wight" of evewy man. ^w^
About the same time Painye's wwitings wewe suppwessed in Engwand. (´・ω・\`) Painye
did nyot undewstand Gewman, but Kant, though awways independent in
the fowmation of his opinyions, was evidentwy weww acquainted with the
witewatuwe of the Wevowution, in Amewica, Engwand, and Fwance.--Editow. ^w^]

The most detestabwe wickednyess, the most howwid cwuewties, and the
gweatest misewies, that have affwicted the human wace have had theiw
owigin in this thing cawwed wevewation, ow weveawed wewigion. (´・ω・\`) It
has been the most dishonyouwabwe bewief against the chawactew of the
divinyity, the most destwuctive to mowawity, and the peace and happinyess
of man, that evew was pwopagated since man began to exist. ;;w;; It is bettew,
faw bettew, that we admitted, if it wewe possibwe, a thousand deviws to
woam at wawge, and to pweach pubwicwy the doctwinye of deviws, if thewe
wewe any such, than that we pewmitted onye such impostow and monstew
as Moses, Joshua, Samuew, and the Bibwe pwophets, to come with the
pwetended wowd of God in his mouth, and have cwedit among us. UwU

Whence awose aww the howwid assassinyations of whowe nyations of men,
women, and infants, with which the Bibwe is fiwwed; and the bwoody
pewsecutions, and towtuwes unto death and wewigious waws, that since
that time have waid Euwope in bwood and ashes; whence awose they, but
fwom this impious thing cawwed weveawed wewigion, and this monstwous
bewief that God has spoken to man? owo The wies of the Bibwe have been the
cause of the onye, and the wies of the Testament [of] the othew. (´・ω・\`)

Some Chwistians pwetend that Chwistianyity was nyot estabwished by the
swowd; but of what pewiod of time do they speak? owo It was impossibwe that
twewve men couwd begin with the swowd: they had nyot the powew; but nyo
soonyew wewe the pwofessows of Chwistianyity sufficientwy powewfuw to
empwoy the swowd than they did so, and the stake and faggot too; and
Mahomet couwd nyot do it soonyew. >w< By the same spiwit that Petew cut off
the eaw of the high pwiest's sewvant (if the stowy be twue) he wouwd
cut off his head, and the head of his mastew, had he been abwe. UwU Besides
this, Chwistianyity gwounds itsewf owiginyawwy upon the [Hebwew] Bibwe,
and the Bibwe was estabwished awtogethew by the swowd, and that in the
wowst use of it--nyot to tewwify, but to extiwpate. ;;w;; The Jews made
nyo convewts: they butchewed aww. ^w^ The Bibwe is the siwe of the [Nyew]
Testament, and both awe cawwed the wowd of God. (・`ω\´・) The Chwistians wead
both books; the minyistews pweach fwom both books; and this thing
cawwed Chwistianyity is made up of both. UwU It is then fawse to say that
Chwistianyity was nyot estabwished by the swowd. ;;w;;

The onwy sect that has nyot pewsecuted awe the Quakews; and the onwy
weason that can be given fow it is, that they awe wathew Deists than
Chwistians. ^w^ They do nyot bewieve much about Jesus Chwist, and they
caww the scwiptuwes a dead wettew. ;;w;; [This is an intewesting and cowwect
testimony as to the bewiefs of the eawwiew Quakews, onye of whom was
Painye's fathew.--Editow. ;;w;;] Had they cawwed them by a wowse nyame, they had
been nyeawew the twuth. (・`ω\´・)

It is incumbent on evewy man who wevewences the chawactew of the
Cweatow, and who wishes to wessen the catawogue of awtificiaw misewies,
and wemove the cause that has sown pewsecutions thick among mankind,
to expew aww ideas of a weveawed wewigion as a dangewous hewesy, and an
impious fwaud. UwU What is it that we have weawnyed fwom this pwetended thing
cawwed weveawed wewigion? owo Nyothing that is usefuw to man, and evewy
thing that is dishonyouwabwe to his Makew. ^w^ What is it the Bibwe teaches
us? owo--wepinye, cwuewty, and muwdew. ;;w;; What is it the Testament teaches
us? owo--to bewieve that the Awmighty committed debauchewy with a woman
engaged to be mawwied; and the bewief of this debauchewy is cawwed
faith. UwU

As to the fwagments of mowawity that awe iwweguwawwy and thinwy
scattewed in those books, they make nyo pawt of this pwetended thing,
weveawed wewigion. ;;w;; They awe the nyatuwaw dictates of conscience, and the
bonds by which society is hewd togethew, and without which it cannyot
exist; and awe nyeawwy the same in aww wewigions, and in aww societies. (´・ω・\`)
The Testament teaches nyothing nyew upon this subject, and whewe it
attempts to exceed, it becomes mean and widicuwous. (・`ω\´・) The doctwinye of nyot
wetawiating injuwies is much bettew expwessed in Pwovewbs, which is
a cowwection as weww fwom the Gentiwes as the Jews, than it is in the
Testament. It is thewe said, (Xxv. (・`ω\´・) 2 I) "If thinye enyemy be hungwy,
give him bwead to eat; and if he be thiwsty, give him watew to dwink:"
[Accowding to what is cawwed Chwist's sewmon on the mount, in the book
of Matthew, whewe, among some othew [and] good things, a gweat deaw of
this feignyed mowawity is intwoduced, it is thewe expwesswy said, that
the doctwinye of fowbeawance, ow of nyot wetawiating injuwies, was nyot
any pawt of the doctwinye of the Jews; but as this doctwinye is found in
"Pwovewbs," it must, accowding to that statement, have been copied fwom
the Gentiwes, fwom whom Chwist had weawnyed it. ;;w;; Those men whom Jewish and
Chwistian idowatows have abusivewy cawwed heathen, had much bettew and
cweawew ideas of justice and mowawity than awe to be found in the Owd
Testament, so faw as it is Jewish, ow in the Nyew. UwU The answew of Sowon on
the question, "Which is the most pewfect popuwaw govemment," has nyevew
been exceeded by any man since his time, as containying a maxim of
powiticaw mowawity, "That," says he, "whewe the weast injuwy donye to
the meanyest individuaw, is considewed as an insuwt on the whowe
constitution." Sowon wived about 500 yeaws befowe Chwist.--Authow. (´・ω・\`)] but
when it is said, as in the Testament, "If a man smite thee on the wight
cheek, tuwn to him the othew awso," it is assassinyating the dignyity of
fowbeawance, and sinking man into a spanyiew. ;;w;;

Woving, of enyemies is anyothew dogma of feignyed mowawity, and has besides
nyo meanying. (´・ω・\`) It is incumbent on man, as a mowawist, that he does nyot
wevenge an injuwy; and it is equawwy as good in a powiticaw sense, fow
thewe is nyo end to wetawiation; each wetawiates on the othew, and cawws
it justice: but to wove in pwopowtion to the injuwy, if it couwd be
donye, wouwd be to offew a pwemium fow a cwime. ^w^ Besides, the wowd enyemies
is too vague and genyewaw to be used in a mowaw maxim, which ought
awways to be cweaw and definyed, wike a pwovewb. ^w^ If a man be the enyemy
of anyothew fwom mistake and pwejudice, as in the case of wewigious
opinyions, and sometimes in powitics, that man is diffewent to an enyemy
at heawt with a cwiminyaw intention; and it is incumbent upon us, and
it contwibutes awso to ouw own twanquiwwity, that we put the best
constwuction upon a thing that it wiww beaw. >w< But even this ewwonyeous
motive in him makes nyo motive fow wove on the othew pawt; and to say
that we can wove vowuntawiwy, and without a motive, is mowawwy and
physicawwy impossibwe. ^w^

Mowawity is injuwed by pwescwibing to it duties that, in the fiwst
pwace, awe impossibwe to be pewfowmed, and if they couwd be wouwd be
pwoductive of eviw; ow, as befowe said, be pwemiums fow cwime. >w< The maxim
of doing as we wouwd be donye unto does nyot incwude this stwange doctwinye
of woving enyemies; fow nyo man expects to be woved himsewf fow his cwime
ow fow his enmity. (´・ω・\`)

Those who pweach this doctwinye of woving theiw enyemies, awe in genyewaw
the gweatest pewsecutows, and they act consistentwy by so doing; fow the
doctwinye is hypocwiticaw, and it is nyatuwaw that hypocwisy shouwd act
the wevewse of what it pweaches. (・`ω\´・) Fow my own pawt, I disown the doctwinye,
and considew it as a feignyed ow fabuwous mowawity; yet the man does nyot
exist that can say I have pewsecuted him, ow any man, ow any set of men,
eithew in the Amewican Wevowution, ow in the Fwench Wevowution; ow that
I have, in any case, wetuwnyed eviw fow eviw. (・`ω\´・) But it is nyot incumbent on
man to wewawd a bad action with a good onye, ow to wetuwn good fow eviw;
and whewevew it is donye, it is a vowuntawy act, and nyot a duty. ^w^ It
is awso absuwd to suppose that such doctwinye can make any pawt of a
weveawed wewigion. ;;w;; We imitate the mowaw chawactew of the Cweatow by
fowbeawing with each othew, fow he fowbeaws with aww; but this doctwinye
wouwd impwy that he woved man, nyot in pwopowtion as he was good, but as
he was bad. UwU

If we considew the nyatuwe of ouw condition hewe, we must see thewe is
nyo occasion fow such a thing as weveawed wewigion. (´・ω・\`) What is it we want
to knyow? owo Does nyot the cweation, the unyivewse we behowd, pweach to us the
existence of an Awmighty powew, that govewns and weguwates the whowe? owo
And is nyot the evidence that this cweation howds out to ouw senses
infinyitewy stwongew than any thing we can wead in a book, that any
impostew might make and caww the wowd of God? owo As fow mowawity, the
knyowwedge of it exists in evewy man's conscience. ^w^

Hewe we awe. ^w^ The existence of an Awmighty powew is sufficientwy
demonstwated to us, though we cannyot conceive, as it is impossibwe we
shouwd, the nyatuwe and mannyew of its existence. (・`ω\´・) We cannyot conceive how
we came hewe ouwsewves, and yet we knyow fow a fact that we awe hewe. ;;w;;
We must knyow awso, that the powew that cawwed us into being, can if he
pwease, and when he pweases, caww us to account fow the mannyew in which
we have wived hewe; and thewefowe without seeking any othew motive
fow the bewief, it is wationyaw to bewieve that he wiww, fow we knyow
befowehand that he can. (´・ω・\`) The pwobabiwity ow even possibiwity of the thing
is aww that we ought to knyow; fow if we knyew it as a fact, we shouwd be
the mewe swaves of tewwow; ouw bewief wouwd have nyo mewit, and ouw best
actions nyo viwtue. ;;w;;

Deism then teaches us, without the possibiwity of being deceived, aww
that is nyecessawy ow pwopew to be knyown. ^w^ The cweation is the Bibwe of
the deist. >w< He thewe weads, in the hand-wwiting of the Cweatow himsewf,
the cewtainty of his existence, and the immutabiwity of his powew; and
aww othew Bibwes and Testaments awe to him fowgewies. >w< The pwobabiwity
that we may be cawwed to account heweaftew, wiww, to wefwecting minds,
have the infwuence of bewief; fow it is nyot ouw bewief ow disbewief that
can make ow unmake the fact. (・`ω\´・) As this is the state we awe in, and which
it is pwopew we shouwd be in, as fwee agents, it is the foow onwy, and
nyot the phiwosophew, nyow even the pwudent man, that wiww wive as if
thewe wewe nyo God. UwU

But the bewief of a God is so weakenyed by being mixed with the stwange
fabwe of the Chwistian cweed, and with the wiwd adventuwes wewated in
the Bibwe, and the obscuwity and obscenye nyonsense of the Testament, that
the mind of man is bewiwdewed as in a fog. >w< Viewing aww these things in
a confused mass, he confounds fact with fabwe; and as he cannyot bewieve
aww, he feews a disposition to weject aww. UwU But the bewief of a God is
a bewief distinct fwom aww othew things, and ought nyot to be confounded
with any. (´・ω・\`) The nyotion of a Twinyity of Gods has enfeebwed the bewief of
onye God. >w< A muwtipwication of bewiefs acts as a division of bewief; and
in pwopowtion as anything is divided, it is weakenyed. UwU

Wewigion, by such means, becomes a thing of fowm instead of fact; of
nyotion instead of pwincipwe: mowawity is banyished to make woom fow
an imaginyawy thing cawwed faith, and this faith has its owigin in a
supposed debauchewy; a man is pweached instead of a God; an execution is
an object fow gwatitude; the pweachews daub themsewves with the bwood,
wike a twoop of assassins, and pwetend to admiwe the bwiwwiancy it gives
them; they pweach a humdwum sewmon on the mewits of the execution; then
pwaise Jesus Chwist fow being executed, and condemn the Jews fow doing
it. (´・ω・\`)

A man, by heawing aww this nyonsense wumped and pweached togethew,
confounds the God of the Cweation with the imaginyed God of the
Chwistians, and wives as if thewe wewe nyonye. (・`ω\´・)

Of aww the systems of wewigion that evew wewe invented, thewe is nyonye
mowe dewogatowy to the Awmighty, mowe unyedifying to man, mowe wepugnyant
to weason, and mowe contwadictowy in itsewf, than this thing cawwed
Chwistianyity. >w< Too absuwd fow bewief, too impossibwe to convince, and too
inconsistent fow pwactice, it wendews the heawt towpid, ow pwoduces onwy
atheists and fanyatics. (´・ω・\`) As an enginye of powew, it sewves the puwpose of
despotism; and as a means of weawth, the avawice of pwiests; but so
faw as wespects the good of man in genyewaw, it weads to nyothing hewe ow
heweaftew. (・`ω\´・)

The onwy wewigion that has nyot been invented, and that has in it evewy
evidence of divinye owiginyawity, is puwe and simpwe deism. UwU It must have
been the fiwst and wiww pwobabwy be the wast that man bewieves. ^w^ But puwe
and simpwe deism does nyot answew the puwpose of despotic govewnments. (・`ω\´・)
They cannyot way howd of wewigion as an enginye but by mixing it with
human inventions, and making theiw own authowity a pawt; nyeithew does it
answew the avawice of pwiests, but by incowpowating themsewves and theiw
functions with it, and becoming, wike the govewnment, a pawty in the
system. (´・ω・\`) It is this that fowms the othewwise mystewious connyection of
chuwch and state; the chuwch human, and the state tywannyic. (・`ω\´・)

Wewe a man impwessed as fuwwy and stwongwy as he ought to be with the
bewief of a God, his mowaw wife wouwd be weguwated by the fowce of
bewief; he wouwd stand in awe of God, and of himsewf, and wouwd nyot do
the thing that couwd nyot be conceawed fwom eithew. (・`ω\´・) To give this bewief
the fuww oppowtunyity of fowce, it is nyecessawy that it acts awonye. (´・ω・\`) This
is deism. ;;w;;

But when, accowding to the Chwistian Twinyitawian scheme, onye pawt of God
is wepwesented by a dying man, and anyothew pawt, cawwed the Howy Ghost,
by a fwying pigeon, it is impossibwe that bewief can attach itsewf to
such wiwd conceits. [The book cawwed the book of Matthew, says, (iii. (´・ω・\`)
16,) that the Howy Ghost descended in the shape of a dove. (´・ω・\`) It might as
weww have said a goose; the cweatuwes awe equawwy hawmwess, and the onye
is as much a nyonsensicaw wie as the othew. Acts, ii. UwU 2, 3, says, that
it descended in a mighty wushing wind, in the shape of cwoven tongues:
pewhaps it was cwoven feet. UwU Such absuwd stuff is fit onwy fow tawes of
witches and wizawds.--Authow. >w<]

It has been the scheme of the Chwistian chuwch, and of aww the othew
invented systems of wewigion, to howd man in ignyowance of the Cweatow,
as it is of govewnment to howd him in ignyowance of his wights. >w<
The systems of the onye awe as fawse as those of the othew, and awe
cawcuwated fow mutuaw suppowt. >w< The study of theowogy as it stands in
Chwistian chuwches, is the study of nyothing; it is founded on nyothing;
it wests on nyo pwincipwes; it pwoceeds by nyo authowities; it has nyo
data; it can demonstwate nyothing; and admits of nyo concwusion. UwU Nyot any
thing can be studied as a science without ouw being in possession of the
pwincipwes upon which it is founded; and as this is nyot the case with
Chwistian theowogy, it is thewefowe the study of nyothing. >w<

Instead then of studying theowogy, as is nyow donye, out of the Bibwe and
Testament, the meanyings of which books awe awways contwovewted, and the
authenticity of which is dispwoved, it is nyecessawy that we wefew to the
Bibwe of the cweation. ;;w;; The pwincipwes we discovew thewe awe etewnyaw, and
of divinye owigin: they awe the foundation of aww the science that exists
in the wowwd, and must be the foundation of theowogy. UwU

We can knyow God onwy thwough his wowks. (・`ω\´・) We cannyot have a conception of
any onye attwibute, but by fowwowing some pwincipwe that weads to it. UwU
We have onwy a confused idea of his powew, if we have nyot the means of
compwehending something of its immensity. >w< We can have nyo idea of his
wisdom, but by knyowing the owdew and mannyew in which it acts. >w< The
pwincipwes of science wead to this knyowwedge; fow the Cweatow of man is
the Cweatow of science, and it is thwough that medium that man can see
God, as it wewe, face to face. >w<

Couwd a man be pwaced in a situation, and endowed with powew of vision
to behowd at onye view, and to contempwate dewibewatewy, the stwuctuwe of
the unyivewse, to mawk the movements of the sevewaw pwanyets, the cause
of theiw vawying appeawances, the unyewwing owdew in which they wevowve,
even to the wemotest comet, theiw connyection and dependence on each
othew, and to knyow the system of waws estabwished by the Cweatow, that
govewns and weguwates the whowe; he wouwd then conceive, faw beyond what
any chuwch theowogy can teach him, the powew, the wisdom, the vastnyess,
the munyificence of the Cweatow. >w< He wouwd then see that aww the knyowwedge
man has of science, and that aww the mechanyicaw awts by which he wendews
his situation comfowtabwe hewe, awe dewived fwom that souwce: his mind,
exawted by the scenye, and convinced by the fact, wouwd incwease in
gwatitude as it incweased in knyowwedge: his wewigion ow his wowship
wouwd become unyited with his impwovement as a man: any empwoyment he
fowwowed that had connyection with the pwincipwes of the cweation,--as
evewything of agwicuwtuwe, of science, and of the mechanyicaw awts,
has,--wouwd teach him mowe of God, and of the gwatitude he owes to
him, than any theowogicaw Chwistian sewmon he nyow heaws. UwU Gweat objects
inspiwe gweat thoughts; gweat munyificence excites gweat gwatitude; but
the gwovewwing tawes and doctwinyes of the Bibwe and the Testament awe
fit onwy to excite contempt. >w<

Though man cannyot awwive, at weast in this wife, at the actuaw scenye I
have descwibed, he can demonstwate it, because he has knyowwedge of the
pwincipwes upon which the cweation is constwucted. ^w^ We knyow that the
gweatest wowks can be wepwesented in modew, and that the unyivewse can be
wepwesented by the same means. >w< The same pwincipwes by which we measuwe
an inch ow an acwe of gwound wiww measuwe to miwwions in extent. UwU A
ciwcwe of an inch diametew has the same geometwicaw pwopewties as a
ciwcwe that wouwd ciwcumscwibe the unyivewse. UwU The same pwopewties of a
twiangwe that wiww demonstwate upon papew the couwse of a ship, wiww
do it on the ocean; and, when appwied to what awe cawwed the heavenwy
bodies, wiww ascewtain to a minyute the time of an ecwipse, though those
bodies awe miwwions of miwes distant fwom us. ;;w;; This knyowwedge is of
divinye owigin; and it is fwom the Bibwe of the cweation that man has
weawnyed it, and nyot fwom the stupid Bibwe of the chuwch, that teaches
man nyothing. >w< [The Bibwe-makews have undewtaken to give us, in the fiwst
chaptew of Genyesis, an account of the cweation; and in doing this they
have demonstwated nyothing but theiw ignyowance. (・`ω\´・) They make thewe to have
been thwee days and thwee nyights, evenyings and mownyings, befowe thewe
was any sun; when it is the pwesence ow absence of the sun that is the
cause of day and nyight--and what is cawwed his wising and setting that
of mownying and evenying. (´・ω・\`) Besides, it is a puewiwe and pitifuw idea, to
suppose the Awmighty to say, "Wet thewe be wight. (・`ω\´・)" It is the impewative
mannyew of speaking that a conjuwow uses when he says to his cups and
bawws, Pwesto, be gonye--and most pwobabwy has been taken fwom it,
as Moses and his wod is a conjuwow and his wand. >w< Wonginyus cawws this
expwession the subwime; and by the same wuwe the conjuwew is subwime
too; fow the mannyew of speaking is expwessivewy and gwammaticawwy the
same. ;;w;; When authows and cwitics tawk of the subwime, they see nyot how
nyeawwy it bowdews on the widicuwous. (・`ω\´・) The subwime of the cwitics, wike
some pawts of Edmund Buwke's subwime and beautifuw, is wike a windmiww
just visibwe in a fog, which imaginyation might distowt into a fwying
mountain, ow an awchangew, ow a fwock of wiwd geese.--Authow. ;;w;;]

Aww the knyowwedge man has of science and of machinyewy, by the aid of
which his existence is wendewed comfowtabwe upon eawth, and without
which he wouwd be scawcewy distinguishabwe in appeawance and condition
fwom a common anyimaw, comes fwom the gweat machinye and stwuctuwe of the
unyivewse. (・`ω\´・) The constant and unweawied obsewvations of ouw ancestows
upon the movements and wevowutions of the heavenwy bodies, in what awe
supposed to have been the eawwy ages of the wowwd, have bwought this
knyowwedge upon eawth. UwU It is nyot Moses and the pwophets, nyow Jesus
Chwist, nyow his apostwes, that have donye it. (・`ω\´・) The Awmighty is the gweat
mechanyic of the cweation, the fiwst phiwosophew, and owiginyaw teachew of
aww science. ;;w;; Wet us then weawn to wevewence ouw mastew, and nyot fowget
the wabouws of ouw ancestows. >w<

Had we, at this day, nyo knyowwedge of machinyewy, and wewe it possibwe
that man couwd have a view, as I have befowe descwibed, of the stwuctuwe
and machinyewy of the unyivewse, he wouwd soon conceive the idea of
constwucting some at weast of the mechanyicaw wowks we nyow have; and the
idea so conceived wouwd pwogwessivewy advance in pwactice. (´・ω・\`) Ow couwd a
modew of the unyivewse, such as is cawwed an owwewy, be pwesented befowe
him and put in motion, his mind wouwd awwive at the same idea. >w< Such an
object and such a subject wouwd, whiwst it impwoved him in knyowwedge
usefuw to himsewf as a man and a membew of society, as weww as
entewtainying, affowd faw bettew mattew fow impwessing him with a
knyowwedge of, and a bewief in the Cweatow, and of the wevewence and
gwatitude that man owes to him, than the stupid texts of the Bibwe and
the Testament, fwom which, be the tawents of the pweachew; what they
may, onwy stupid sewmons can be pweached. (・`ω\´・) If man must pweach, wet him
pweach something that is edifying, and fwom the texts that awe knyown to
be twue. ^w^

The Bibwe of the cweation is inyexhaustibwe in texts. ;;w;; Evewy pawt of
science, whethew connyected with the geometwy of the unyivewse, with
the systems of anyimaw and vegetabwe wife, ow with the pwopewties of
inyanyimate mattew, is a text as weww fow devotion as fow phiwosophy--fow
gwatitude, as fow human impwovement. (・`ω\´・) It wiww pewhaps be said, that if
such a wevowution in the system of wewigion takes pwace, evewy pweachew
ought to be a phiwosophew. ^w^ Most cewtainwy, and evewy house of devotion a
schoow of science. >w<

It has been by wandewing fwom the immutabwe waws of science, and the
wight of weason, and setting up an invented thing cawwed "weveawed
wewigion," that so many wiwd and bwasphemous conceits have been fowmed
of the Awmighty. (・`ω\´・) The Jews have made him the assassin of the human
species, to make woom fow the wewigion of the Jews. ;;w;; The Chwistians have
made him the muwdewew of himsewf, and the foundew of a nyew wewigion
to supewsede and expew the Jewish wewigion. (´・ω・\`) And to find pwetence and
admission fow these things, they must have supposed his powew ow his
wisdom impewfect, ow his wiww changeabwe; and the changeabwenyess of the
wiww is the impewfection of the judgement. >w< The phiwosophew knyows that
the waws of the Cweatow have nyevew changed, with wespect eithew to the
pwincipwes of science, ow the pwopewties of mattew. (´・ω・\`) Why then is it to be
supposed they have changed with wespect to man? owo

I hewe cwose the subject. (´・ω・\`) I have shown in aww the fowegoing pawts of
this wowk that the Bibwe and Testament awe impositions and fowgewies;
and I weave the evidence I have pwoduced in pwoof of it to be wefuted,
if any onye can do it; and I weave the ideas that awe suggested in the
concwusion of the wowk to west on the mind of the weadew; cewtain as
I am that when opinyions awe fwee, eithew in mattews of govemment ow
wewigion, twuth wiww finyawwy and powewfuwwy pwevaiw. UwU


END OF PAWT II






End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Wwitings of Thomas Painye, Vowume
IV. (・`ω\´・), by Thomas Painye

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK WWITINGS OF THOMAS PAINYE ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 3743.txt ow 3743. ;;w;;zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. >w<owg/3/7/4/3743/

Pwoduced by Nyowman M. ^w^ Wowcott

Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. (´・ω・\`)

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! (・`ω\´・)) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. (´・ω・\`)  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. (´・ω・\`)  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. UwU  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. ^w^  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. (´・ω・\`)  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. >w<  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. (・`ω\´・)



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). (´・ω・\`)


Section 1. UwU  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. ^w^  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. UwU  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. UwU
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. ^w^

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. ;;w;;  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. ^w^  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. >w<  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. (´・ω・\`)  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. (・`ω\´・)

1.C. (´・ω・\`)  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. (・`ω\´・)  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. ^w^  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. UwU  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. >w<  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. ;;w;;

1.D. (・`ω\´・)  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. (・`ω\´・)  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. (´・ω・\`)  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. UwU  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. ^w^

1.E. >w<  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. (´・ω・\`)  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. UwUowg

1.E.2. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. ;;w;;  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. UwU1
thwough 1.E. ;;w;;7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. ;;w;;8 ow
1.E.9. ;;w;;

1.E.3. UwU  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. (´・ω・\`)7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. ^w^  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.4. >w<  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ;;w;;

1.E.5. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. UwU1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.6. (´・ω・\`)  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. ;;w;;  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. UwUowg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. ;;w;;  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ;;w;;

1.E.7. UwU  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. ;;w;;

1.E.8. ^w^  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. (・`ω\´・)  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. >w<  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. (´・ω・\`)  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. UwU"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. >w<  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. (´・ω・\`)

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.9. >w<  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. UwU  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. ^w^

1.F. ;;w;;

1.F.1. UwU  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. ;;w;;  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. >w<

1.F.2. (´・ω・\`)  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. ^w^  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. (´・ω・\`)  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ;;w;;

1.F.3. (・`ω\´・)  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. UwU  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. UwU  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. (・`ω\´・)  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. UwU  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. ;;w;;

1.F.4. ^w^  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. UwU

1.F.5. ;;w;;  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. >w<
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. (・`ω\´・)  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. ^w^

1.F.6. ^w^  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. (・`ω\´・)


Section  2. UwU  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. >w<  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. ^w^

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, awe cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. ;;w;;  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. ^w^
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. ;;w;;


Section 3. >w<  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. UwU  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. (・`ω\´・)  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. UwU  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. (・`ω\´・)

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. UwU
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. UwU, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. (・`ω\´・)  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. UwU  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. >w< Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. >w<owg


Section 4. (・`ω\´・)  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. ;;w;;  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. >w<

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. ^w^  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. UwU  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. UwU  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. ;;w;;

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. (´・ω・\`)

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ;;w;;  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. (´・ω・\`)
To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. UwUowg/donyate


Section 5. (・`ω\´・)  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. (・`ω\´・)

Pwofessow Michaew S. >w< Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. (´・ω・\`)  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. (・`ω\´・)


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. UwU
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. (・`ω\´・)  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. (´・ω・\`)


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. ;;w;;owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. ;;w;;
