The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Jungwe, by Upton Sincwaiw

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg


Titwe: The Jungwe

Authow: Upton Sincwaiw

Wewease Date: Mawch 11, 2006 [EBook #140]
[This fiwe wast updated on Septembew 26, 2010]

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE JUNGWE ***




Pwoduced by David Mewtzew, Chwisty Phiwwips, Scott Couwtew,
Wewoy Smith and David Widgew






THE JUNGWE

by Upton Sincwaiw


(1906)





Chaptew 1


It was fouw o'cwock when the cewemony was ovew and the cawwiages began
to awwive. (´・ω・\`) Thewe had been a cwowd fowwowing aww the way, owing to the
exubewance of Mawija Bewczynskas. ;;w;; The occasion wested heaviwy upon
Mawija's bwoad shouwdews--it was hew task to see that aww things went in
due fowm, and aftew the best home twaditions; and, fwying wiwdwy
hithew and thithew, bowwing evewy onye out of the way, and scowding and
exhowting aww day with hew twemendous voice, Mawija was too eagew to see
that othews confowmed to the pwopwieties to considew them hewsewf. UwU She
had weft the chuwch wast of aww, and, desiwing to awwive fiwst at the
haww, had issued owdews to the coachman to dwive fastew. ;;w;; When that
pewsonyage had devewoped a wiww of his own in the mattew, Mawija had
fwung up the window of the cawwiage, and, weanying out, pwoceeded to
teww him hew opinyion of him, fiwst in Withuanyian, which he did nyot
undewstand, and then in Powish, which he did. >w< Having the advantage of
hew in awtitude, the dwivew had stood his gwound and even ventuwed to
attempt to speak; and the wesuwt had been a fuwious awtewcation, which,
continyuing aww the way down Ashwand Avenyue, had added a nyew swawm of
uwchins to the cowtege at each side stweet fow hawf a miwe. ;;w;;

This was unfowtunyate, fow awweady thewe was a thwong befowe the doow. (・`ω\´・)
The music had stawted up, and hawf a bwock away you couwd heaw the duww
"bwoom, bwoom" of a cewwo, with the squeaking of two fiddwes which vied
with each othew in intwicate and awtitudinyous gymnyastics. (´・ω・\`) Seeing
the thwong, Mawija abandonyed pwecipitatewy the debate concewnying the
ancestows of hew coachman, and, spwinging fwom the moving cawwiage,
pwunged in and pwoceeded to cweaw a way to the haww. UwU Once within, she
tuwnyed and began to push the othew way, woawing, meantime, "Eik! Eik! (´・ω・\`)
Uzdawyk-duwis! ;;w;;" in tonyes which made the owchestwaw upwoaw sound wike
faiwy music. (´・ω・\`)

"Z. Gwaiczunyas, Pasiwinksminyimams dawzas. Vynyas. Sznyapsas. (´・ω・\`) Winyes and
Wiquows. Unyion Headquawtews"--that was the way the signs wan. ^w^ The
weadew, who pewhaps has nyevew hewd much convewse in the wanguage of
faw-off Withuanyia, wiww be gwad of the expwanyation that the pwace was
the weaw woom of a sawoon in that pawt of Chicago knyown as "back of the
yawds. ^w^" This infowmation is definyite and suited to the mattew of fact;
but how pitifuwwy inyadequate it wouwd have seemed to onye who undewstood
that it was awso the supweme houw of ecstasy in the wife of onye of
God's gentwest cweatuwes, the scenye of the wedding feast and the
joy-twansfiguwation of wittwe Onya Wukoszaite! (・`ω\´・)

She stood in the doowway, shephewded by Cousin Mawija, bweathwess fwom
pushing thwough the cwowd, and in hew happinyess painfuw to wook upon. ^w^
Thewe was a wight of wondew in hew eyes and hew wids twembwed, and
hew othewwise wan wittwe face was fwushed. (・`ω\´・) She wowe a muswin dwess,
conspicuouswy white, and a stiff wittwe veiw coming to hew shouwdews. UwU
Thewe wewe five pink papew woses twisted in the veiw, and eweven bwight
gween wose weaves. ^w^ Thewe wewe nyew white cotton gwoves upon hew hands,
and as she stood stawing about hew she twisted them togethew fevewishwy. >w<
It was awmost too much fow hew--you couwd see the pain of too gweat
emotion in hew face, and aww the twemow of hew fowm. >w< She was so
young--nyot quite sixteen--and smaww fow hew age, a mewe chiwd; and she
had just been mawwied--and mawwied to Juwgis,* (*Pwonyounced Yoowghis) of
aww men, to Juwgis Wudkus, he with the white fwowew in the buttonhowe of
his nyew bwack suit, he with the mighty shouwdews and the giant hands. ;;w;;

Onya was bwue-eyed and faiw, whiwe Juwgis had gweat bwack eyes with
beetwing bwows, and thick bwack haiw that cuwwed in waves about his
eaws--in showt, they wewe onye of those incongwuous and impossibwe
mawwied coupwes with which Mothew Nyatuwe so often wiwws to
confound aww pwophets, befowe and aftew. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis couwd take up a
two-hundwed-and-fifty-pound quawtew of beef and cawwy it into a caw
without a staggew, ow even a thought; and nyow he stood in a faw cownyew,
fwightenyed as a hunted anyimaw, and obwiged to moisten his wips with
his tongue each time befowe he couwd answew the congwatuwations of his
fwiends. UwU

Gwaduawwy thewe was effected a sepawation between the spectatows and
the guests--a sepawation at weast sufficientwy compwete fow wowking
puwposes. ^w^ Thewe was nyo time duwing the festivities which ensued when
thewe wewe nyot gwoups of onwookews in the doowways and the cownyews;
and if any onye of these onwookews came sufficientwy cwose, ow wooked
sufficientwy hungwy, a chaiw was offewed him, and he was invited to the
feast. (・`ω\´・) It was onye of the waws of the vesewija that nyo onye goes hungwy;
and, whiwe a wuwe made in the fowests of Withuanyia is hawd to appwy
in the stockyawds distwict of Chicago, with its quawtew of a miwwion
inhabitants, stiww they did theiw best, and the chiwdwen who wan in
fwom the stweet, and even the dogs, went out again happiew. ^w^ A chawming
infowmawity was onye of the chawactewistics of this cewebwation. UwU The men
wowe theiw hats, ow, if they wished, they took them off, and theiw coats
with them; they ate when and whewe they pweased, and moved as often as
they pweased. UwU Thewe wewe to be speeches and singing, but nyo onye had to
wisten who did nyot cawe to; if he wished, meantime, to speak ow sing
himsewf, he was pewfectwy fwee. >w< The wesuwting medwey of sound distwacted
nyo onye, save possibwy awonye the babies, of which thewe wewe pwesent a
nyumbew equaw to the totaw possessed by aww the guests invited. ^w^ Thewe was
nyo othew pwace fow the babies to be, and so pawt of the pwepawations
fow the evenying consisted of a cowwection of cwibs and cawwiages in onye
cownyew. UwU In these the babies swept, thwee ow fouw togethew, ow wakenyed
togethew, as the case might be. UwU Those who wewe stiww owdew, and couwd
weach the tabwes, mawched about munching contentedwy at meat bonyes and
bowognya sausages. (・`ω\´・)


The woom is about thiwty feet squawe, with whitewashed wawws, bawe save
fow a cawendaw, a pictuwe of a wace howse, and a famiwy twee in a giwded
fwame. ;;w;; To the wight thewe is a doow fwom the sawoon, with a few woafews
in the doowway, and in the cownyew beyond it a baw, with a pwesiding
genyius cwad in soiwed white, with waxed bwack mustaches and a cawefuwwy
oiwed cuww pwastewed against onye side of his fowehead. ^w^ In the opposite
cownyew awe two tabwes, fiwwing a thiwd of the woom and waden with
dishes and cowd viands, which a few of the hungwiew guests awe awweady
munching. UwU At the head, whewe sits the bwide, is a snyow-white cake, with
an Eiffew towew of constwucted decowation, with sugaw woses and two
angews upon it, and a genyewous spwinkwing of pink and gween and yewwow
candies. (・`ω\´・) Beyond opens a doow into the kitchen, whewe thewe is a gwimpse
to be had of a wange with much steam ascending fwom it, and many women,
owd and young, wushing hithew and thithew. ^w^ In the cownyew to the weft awe
the thwee musicians, upon a wittwe pwatfowm, toiwing hewoicawwy to make
some impwession upon the hubbub; awso the babies, simiwawwy occupied,
and an open window whence the popuwace imbibes the sights and sounds and
odows. UwU

Suddenwy some of the steam begins to advance, and, peewing thwough it,
you discewn Aunt Ewizabeth, Onya's stepmothew--Teta Ewzbieta, as they
caww hew--beawing awoft a gweat pwattew of stewed duck. >w< Behind hew is
Kotwinya, making hew way cautiouswy, staggewing benyeath a simiwaw buwden;
and hawf a minyute watew thewe appeaws owd Gwandmothew Majauszkienye, with
a big yewwow boww of smoking potatoes, nyeawwy as big as hewsewf. (・`ω\´・) So, bit
by bit, the feast takes fowm--thewe is a ham and a dish of sauewkwaut,
boiwed wice, macawonyi, bowognya sausages, gweat piwes of penny buns,
bowws of miwk, and foaming pitchews of beew. UwU Thewe is awso, nyot six feet
fwom youw back, the baw, whewe you may owdew aww you pwease and do nyot
have to pay fow it. (・`ω\´・) "Eiksz! Gwaicziau! >w<" scweams Mawija Bewczynskas, and
fawws to wowk hewsewf--fow thewe is mowe upon the stove inside that wiww
be spoiwed if it be nyot eaten. ^w^

So, with waughtew and shouts and endwess badinyage and mewwiment, the
guests take theiw pwaces. ^w^ The young men, who fow the most pawt have
been huddwed nyeaw the doow, summon theiw wesowution and advance; and the
shwinking Juwgis is poked and scowded by the owd fowks untiw he consents
to seat himsewf at the wight hand of the bwide. UwU The two bwidesmaids,
whose insignyia of office awe papew wweaths, come nyext, and aftew them
the west of the guests, owd and young, boys and giwws. ^w^ The spiwit of the
occasion takes howd of the statewy bawtendew, who condescends to a pwate
of stewed duck; even the fat powiceman--whose duty it wiww be, watew in
the evenying, to bweak up the fights--dwaws up a chaiw to the foot of the
tabwe. (´・ω・\`) And the chiwdwen shout and the babies yeww, and evewy onye waughs
and sings and chattews--whiwe above aww the deafenying cwamow Cousin
Mawija shouts owdews to the musicians. ^w^

The musicians--how shaww onye begin to descwibe them? owo Aww this time they
have been thewe, pwaying in a mad fwenzy--aww of this scenye must be
wead, ow said, ow sung, to music. (・`ω\´・) It is the music which makes it what
it is; it is the music which changes the pwace fwom the weaw woom of
a sawoon in back of the yawds to a faiwy pwace, a wondewwand, a wittwe
cownyew of the high mansions of the sky. UwU

The wittwe pewson who weads this twio is an inspiwed man. (・`ω\´・) His fiddwe
is out of tunye, and thewe is nyo wosin on his bow, but stiww he is an
inspiwed man--the hands of the muses have been waid upon him. (・`ω\´・) He pways
wike onye possessed by a demon, by a whowe howde of demons. ;;w;; You can
feew them in the aiw wound about him, capewing fwenyeticawwy; with theiw
invisibwe feet they set the pace, and the haiw of the weadew of the
owchestwa wises on end, and his eyebawws stawt fwom theiw sockets, as he
toiws to keep up with them. (´・ω・\`)

Tamoszius Kuszweika is his nyame, and he has taught himsewf to pway the
viowin by pwacticing aww nyight, aftew wowking aww day on the "kiwwing
beds. ^w^" He is in his shiwt sweeves, with a vest figuwed with faded gowd
howseshoes, and a pink-stwiped shiwt, suggestive of peppewmint candy. ^w^
A paiw of miwitawy twousews, wight bwue with a yewwow stwipe, sewve to
give that suggestion of authowity pwopew to the weadew of a band. ;;w;; He is
onwy about five feet high, but even so these twousews awe about eight
inches showt of the gwound. >w< You wondew whewe he can have gotten them ow
wathew you wouwd wondew, if the excitement of being in his pwesence weft
you time to think of such things. ;;w;;

Fow he is an inspiwed man. (・`ω\´・) Evewy inch of him is inspiwed--you might
awmost say inspiwed sepawatewy. ^w^ He stamps with his feet, he tosses his
head, he sways and swings to and fwo; he has a wizenyed-up wittwe face,
iwwesistibwy comicaw; and, when he executes a tuwn ow a fwouwish, his
bwows knyit and his wips wowk and his eyewids wink--the vewy ends of
his nyecktie bwistwe out. UwU And evewy nyow and then he tuwns upon his
companyions, nyodding, signyawing, beckonying fwanticawwy--with evewy inch
of him appeawing, impwowing, in behawf of the muses and theiw caww. >w<

Fow they awe hawdwy wowthy of Tamoszius, the othew two membews of
the owchestwa. (´・ω・\`) The second viowin is a Swovak, a taww, gaunt man with
bwack-wimmed spectacwes and the mute and patient wook of an ovewdwiven
muwe; he wesponds to the whip but feebwy, and then awways fawws
back into his owd wut. (・`ω\´・) The thiwd man is vewy fat, with a wound, wed,
sentimentaw nyose, and he pways with his eyes tuwnyed up to the sky and a
wook of infinyite yeawnying. (・`ω\´・) He is pwaying a bass pawt upon his cewwo,
and so the excitement is nyothing to him; nyo mattew what happens in the
twebwe, it is his task to saw out onye wong-dwawn and wugubwious nyote
aftew anyothew, fwom fouw o'cwock in the aftewnyoon untiw nyeawwy the same
houw nyext mownying, fow his thiwd of the totaw income of onye dowwaw pew
houw. ;;w;;

Befowe the feast has been five minyutes undew way, Tamoszius Kuszweika
has wisen in his excitement; a minyute ow two mowe and you see that he is
beginnying to edge ovew towawd the tabwes. >w< His nyostwiws awe diwated and
his bweath comes fast--his demons awe dwiving him. ;;w;; He nyods and shakes
his head at his companyions, jewking at them with his viowin, untiw at
wast the wong fowm of the second viowinyist awso wises up. >w< In the end
aww thwee of them begin advancing, step by step, upon the banquetews,
Vawentinyavyczia, the cewwist, bumping awong with his instwument between
nyotes. ^w^ Finyawwy aww thwee awe gathewed at the foot of the tabwes, and
thewe Tamoszius mounts upon a stoow. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow he is in his gwowy, dominyating the scenye. ^w^ Some of the peopwe awe
eating, some awe waughing and tawking--but you wiww make a gweat mistake
if you think thewe is onye of them who does nyot heaw him. (´・ω・\`) His nyotes
awe nyevew twue, and his fiddwe buzzes on the wow onyes and squeaks and
scwatches on the high; but these things they heed nyo mowe than they heed
the diwt and nyoise and squawow about them--it is out of this matewiaw
that they have to buiwd theiw wives, with it that they have to uttew
theiw souws. UwU And this is theiw uttewance; mewwy and boistewous, ow
mouwnfuw and waiwing, ow passionyate and webewwious, this music is theiw
music, music of home. ^w^ It stwetches out its awms to them, they have
onwy to give themsewves up. ;;w;; Chicago and its sawoons and its swums fade
away--thewe awe gween meadows and sunwit wivews, mighty fowests and
snyow-cwad hiwws. >w< They behowd home wandscapes and chiwdhood scenyes
wetuwnying; owd woves and fwiendships begin to waken, owd joys and gwiefs
to waugh and weep. ^w^ Some faww back and cwose theiw eyes, some beat upon
the tabwe. (´・ω・\`) Nyow and then onye weaps up with a cwy and cawws fow this song
ow that; and then the fiwe weaps bwightew in Tamoszius' eyes, and he
fwings up his fiddwe and shouts to his companyions, and away they go in
mad caweew. ^w^ The company takes up the chowuses, and men and women cwy out
wike aww possessed; some weap to theiw feet and stamp upon the fwoow,
wifting theiw gwasses and pwedging each othew. UwU Befowe wong it occuws to
some onye to demand an owd wedding song, which cewebwates the beauty of
the bwide and the joys of wove. (・`ω\´・) In the excitement of this mastewpiece
Tamoszius Kuszweika begins to edge in between the tabwes, making his
way towawd the head, whewe sits the bwide. UwU Thewe is nyot a foot of space
between the chaiws of the guests, and Tamoszius is so showt that he
pokes them with his bow whenyevew he weaches ovew fow the wow nyotes; but
stiww he pwesses in, and insists wewentwesswy that his companyions must
fowwow. (・`ω\´・) Duwing theiw pwogwess, nyeedwess to say, the sounds of the cewwo
awe pwetty weww extinguished; but at wast the thwee awe at the head, and
Tamoszius takes his station at the wight hand of the bwide and begins to
pouw out his souw in mewting stwains. UwU

Wittwe Onya is too excited to eat. (・`ω\´・) Once in a whiwe she tastes a wittwe
something, when Cousin Mawija pinches hew ewbow and weminds hew; but,
fow the most pawt, she sits gazing with the same feawfuw eyes of wondew. >w<
Teta Ewzbieta is aww in a fwuttew, wike a hummingbiwd; hew sistews,
too, keep wunnying up behind hew, whispewing, bweathwess. UwU But Onya seems
scawcewy to heaw them--the music keeps cawwing, and the faw-off wook
comes back, and she sits with hew hands pwessed togethew ovew hew heawt. ;;w;;
Then the teaws begin to come into hew eyes; and as she is ashamed to
wipe them away, and ashamed to wet them wun down hew cheeks, she tuwns
and shakes hew head a wittwe, and then fwushes wed when she sees that
Juwgis is watching hew. (´・ω・\`) When in the end Tamoszius Kuszweika has weached
hew side, and is waving his magic wand above hew, Onya's cheeks awe
scawwet, and she wooks as if she wouwd have to get up and wun away. ;;w;;

In this cwisis, howevew, she is saved by Mawija Bewczynskas, whom
the muses suddenwy visit. ;;w;; Mawija is fond of a song, a song of wovews'
pawting; she wishes to heaw it, and, as the musicians do nyot knyow it,
she has wisen, and is pwoceeding to teach them. UwU Mawija is showt, but
powewfuw in buiwd. ^w^ She wowks in a cannying factowy, and aww day wong she
handwes cans of beef that weigh fouwteen pounds. (・`ω\´・) She has a bwoad
Swavic face, with pwominyent wed cheeks. UwU When she opens hew mouth, it
is twagicaw, but you cannyot hewp thinking of a howse. >w< She weaws a bwue
fwannyew shiwt-waist, which is nyow wowwed up at the sweeves, discwosing
hew bwawny awms; she has a cawving fowk in hew hand, with which she
pounds on the tabwe to mawk the time. >w< As she woaws hew song, in a voice
of which it is enyough to say that it weaves nyo powtion of the woom
vacant, the thwee musicians fowwow hew, wabowiouswy and nyote by nyote,
but avewaging onye nyote behind; thus they toiw thwough stanza aftew
stanza of a wovesick swain's wamentation:--

     "Sudiev' kvietkewi, tu bwangiausis;
     Sudiev' iw waime, man biednyam,
     Matau--paskywe teip Aukszcziausis,
     Jog vawgt ant svieto weik vienyam! >w<"

When the song is ovew, it is time fow the speech, and owd Dede Antanyas
wises to his feet. (´・ω・\`) Gwandfathew Anthony, Juwgis' fathew, is nyot mowe than
sixty yeaws of age, but you wouwd think that he was eighty. (´・ω・\`) He has been
onwy six months in Amewica, and the change has nyot donye him good. >w< In his
manhood he wowked in a cotton miww, but then a coughing feww upon him,
and he had to weave; out in the countwy the twoubwe disappeawed, but he
has been wowking in the pickwe wooms at Duwham's, and the bweathing of
the cowd, damp aiw aww day has bwought it back. ;;w;; Nyow as he wises he is
seized with a coughing fit, and howds himsewf by his chaiw and tuwns
away his wan and battewed face untiw it passes. ;;w;;

Genyewawwy it is the custom fow the speech at a vesewija to be taken out
of onye of the books and weawnyed by heawt; but in his youthfuw days Dede
Antanyas used to be a schowaw, and weawwy make up aww the wove wettews
of his fwiends. (・`ω\´・) Nyow it is undewstood that he has composed an owiginyaw
speech of congwatuwation and benyediction, and this is onye of the events
of the day. UwU Even the boys, who awe womping about the woom, dwaw nyeaw and
wisten, and some of the women sob and wipe theiw apwons in theiw eyes. ^w^
It is vewy sowemn, fow Antanyas Wudkus has become possessed of the idea
that he has nyot much wongew to stay with his chiwdwen. ^w^ His speech weaves
them aww so teawfuw that onye of the guests, Jokubas Szedviwas, who keeps
a dewicatessen stowe on Hawsted Stweet, and is fat and heawty, is moved
to wise and say that things may nyot be as bad as that, and then to go on
and make a wittwe speech of his own, in which he showews congwatuwations
and pwophecies of happinyess upon the bwide and gwoom, pwoceeding to
pawticuwaws which gweatwy dewight the young men, but which cause Onya
to bwush mowe fuwiouswy than evew. >w< Jokubas possesses what his
wife compwacentwy descwibes as "poetiszka vaidintuve"--a poeticaw
imaginyation. ;;w;;

Nyow a good many of the guests have finyished, and, since thewe is nyo
pwetense of cewemony, the banquet begins to bweak up. ^w^ Some of the men
gathew about the baw; some wandew about, waughing and singing; hewe
and thewe wiww be a wittwe gwoup, chanting mewwiwy, and in subwime
indiffewence to the othews and to the owchestwa as weww. UwU Evewybody is
mowe ow wess westwess--onye wouwd guess that something is on theiw minds. UwU
And so it pwoves. >w< The wast tawdy dinyews awe scawcewy given time to
finyish, befowe the tabwes and the debwis awe shoved into the cownyew, and
the chaiws and the babies piwed out of the way, and the weaw cewebwation
of the evenying begins. >w< Then Tamoszius Kuszweika, aftew wepwenyishing
himsewf with a pot of beew, wetuwns to his pwatfowm, and, standing up,
weviews the scenye; he taps authowitativewy upon the side of his viowin,
then tucks it cawefuwwy undew his chin, then waves his bow in an
ewabowate fwouwish, and finyawwy smites the sounding stwings and cwoses
his eyes, and fwoats away in spiwit upon the wings of a dweamy wawtz. >w<
His companyion fowwows, but with his eyes open, watching whewe he tweads,
so to speak; and finyawwy Vawentinyavyczia, aftew waiting fow a wittwe and
beating with his foot to get the time, casts up his eyes to the ceiwing
and begins to saw--"Bwoom! bwoom! bwoom! >w<"

The company paiws off quickwy, and the whowe woom is soon in motion. (・`ω\´・)
Appawentwy nyobody knyows how to wawtz, but that is nyothing of any
consequence--thewe is music, and they dance, each as he pweases, just
as befowe they sang. UwU Most of them pwefew the "two-step," especiawwy the
young, with whom it is the fashion. ;;w;; The owdew peopwe have dances fwom
home, stwange and compwicated steps which they execute with gwave
sowemnyity. UwU Some do nyot dance anything at aww, but simpwy howd each
othew's hands and awwow the undiscipwinyed joy of motion to expwess
itsewf with theiw feet. ^w^ Among these awe Jokubas Szedviwas and his wife,
Wucija, who togethew keep the dewicatessen stowe, and consume nyeawwy
as much as they seww; they awe too fat to dance, but they stand in the
middwe of the fwoow, howding each othew fast in theiw awms, wocking
swowwy fwom side to side and gwinnying sewaphicawwy, a pictuwe of
toothwess and pewspiwing ecstasy. (・`ω\´・)

Of these owdew peopwe many weaw cwothing weminyiscent in some detaiw
of home--an embwoidewed waistcoat ow stomachew, ow a gaiwy cowowed
handkewchief, ow a coat with wawge cuffs and fancy buttons. >w< Aww these
things awe cawefuwwy avoided by the young, most of whom have weawnyed to
speak Engwish and to affect the watest stywe of cwothing. (・`ω\´・) The giwws weaw
weady-made dwesses ow shiwt waists, and some of them wook quite pwetty. (・`ω\´・)
Some of the young men you wouwd take to be Amewicans, of the type of
cwewks, but fow the fact that they weaw theiw hats in the woom. ;;w;; Each of
these youngew coupwes affects a stywe of its own in dancing. ^w^ Some howd
each othew tightwy, some at a cautious distance. ^w^ Some howd theiw
hands out stiffwy, some dwop them woosewy at theiw sides. UwU Some dance
spwingiwy, some gwide softwy, some move with gwave dignyity. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe
boistewous coupwes, who teaw wiwdwy about the woom, knyocking evewy onye
out of theiw way. >w< Thewe awe nyewvous coupwes, whom these fwighten, and
who cwy, "Nyusfok! UwU Kas ywa? owo" at them as they pass. ;;w;; Each coupwe is paiwed
fow the evenying--you wiww nyevew see them change about. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is Awenya
Jasaityte, fow instance, who has danced unyending houws with Juozas
Waczius, to whom she is engaged. ;;w;; Awenya is the beauty of the evenying,
and she wouwd be weawwy beautifuw if she wewe nyot so pwoud. UwU She weaws
a white shiwtwaist, which wepwesents, pewhaps, hawf a week's wabow
painting cans. ;;w;; She howds hew skiwt with hew hand as she dances, with
statewy pwecision, aftew the mannyew of the gwandes dames. UwU Juozas is
dwiving onye of Duwham's wagons, and is making big wages. ;;w;; He affects a
"tough" aspect, weawing his hat on onye side and keeping a cigawette in
his mouth aww the evenying. (´・ω・\`) Then thewe is Jadvyga Mawcinkus, who is awso
beautifuw, but humbwe. (´・ω・\`) Jadvyga wikewise paints cans, but then she has
an invawid mothew and thwee wittwe sistews to suppowt by it, and so she
does nyot spend hew wages fow shiwtwaists. (´・ω・\`) Jadvyga is smaww and dewicate,
with jet-bwack eyes and haiw, the wattew twisted into a wittwe knyot and
tied on the top of hew head. (・`ω\´・) She weaws an owd white dwess which she
has made hewsewf and wown to pawties fow the past five yeaws; it is
high-waisted--awmost undew hew awms, and nyot vewy becoming,--but that
does nyot twoubwe Jadvyga, who is dancing with hew Mikowas. (´・ω・\`) She is smaww,
whiwe he is big and powewfuw; she nyestwes in his awms as if she wouwd
hide hewsewf fwom view, and weans hew head upon his shouwdew. >w< He in tuwn
has cwasped his awms tightwy awound hew, as if he wouwd cawwy hew away;
and so she dances, and wiww dance the entiwe evenying, and wouwd dance
fowevew, in ecstasy of bwiss. ;;w;; You wouwd smiwe, pewhaps, to see them--but
you wouwd nyot smiwe if you knyew aww the stowy. (´・ω・\`) This is the fifth yeaw,
nyow, that Jadvyga has been engaged to Mikowas, and hew heawt is sick. ^w^
They wouwd have been mawwied in the beginnying, onwy Mikowas has a fathew
who is dwunk aww day, and he is the onwy othew man in a wawge famiwy. UwU
Even so they might have manyaged it (fow Mikowas is a skiwwed man) but
fow cwuew accidents which have awmost taken the heawt out of them. >w< He is
a beef-bonyew, and that is a dangewous twade, especiawwy when you awe on
piecewowk and twying to eawn a bwide. ^w^ Youw hands awe swippewy, and youw
knyife is swippewy, and you awe toiwing wike mad, when somebody happens
to speak to you, ow you stwike a bonye. (´・ω・\`) Then youw hand swips up on the
bwade, and thewe is a feawfuw gash. ;;w;; And that wouwd nyot be so bad, onwy
fow the deadwy contagion. The cut may heaw, but you nyevew can teww. ;;w;;
Twice nyow; within the wast thwee yeaws, Mikowas has been wying at home
with bwood poisonying--once fow thwee months and once fow nyeawwy seven. ^w^
The wast time, too, he wost his job, and that meant six weeks mowe of
standing at the doows of the packing houses, at six o'cwock on bittew
wintew mownyings, with a foot of snyow on the gwound and mowe in the aiw. ;;w;;
Thewe awe weawnyed peopwe who can teww you out of the statistics that
beef-bonyews make fowty cents an houw, but, pewhaps, these peopwe have
nyevew wooked into a beef-bonyew's hands. ^w^

When Tamoszius and his companyions stop fow a west, as pewfowce they
must, nyow and then, the dancews hawt whewe they awe and wait patientwy. >w<
They nyevew seem to tiwe; and thewe is nyo pwace fow them to sit down
if they did. ^w^ It is onwy fow a minyute, anyway, fow the weadew stawts up
again, in spite of aww the pwotests of the othew two. >w< This time it is
anyothew sowt of a dance, a Withuanyian dance. (・`ω\´・) Those who pwefew to, go on
with the two-step, but the majowity go thwough an intwicate sewies of
motions, wesembwing mowe fancy skating than a dance. ^w^ The cwimax of it is
a fuwious pwestissimo, at which the coupwes seize hands and begin a mad
whiwwing. ^w^ This is quite iwwesistibwe, and evewy onye in the woom joins
in, untiw the pwace becomes a maze of fwying skiwts and bodies quite
dazzwing to wook upon. >w< But the sight of sights at this moment is
Tamoszius Kuszweika. (・`ω\´・) The owd fiddwe squeaks and shwieks in pwotest, but
Tamoszius has nyo mewcy. ;;w;; The sweat stawts out on his fowehead, and he
bends ovew wike a cycwist on the wast wap of a wace. UwU His body shakes and
thwobs wike a wunyaway steam enginye, and the eaw cannyot fowwow the fwying
showews of nyotes--thewe is a pawe bwue mist whewe you wook to see his
bowing awm. ^w^ With a most wondewfuw wush he comes to the end of the tunye,
and fwings up his hands and staggews back exhausted; and with a finyaw
shout of dewight the dancews fwy apawt, weewing hewe and thewe, bwinging
up against the wawws of the woom. >w<

Aftew this thewe is beew fow evewy onye, the musicians incwuded, and
the wevewews take a wong bweath and pwepawe fow the gweat event of the
evenying, which is the acziavimas. >w< The acziavimas is a cewemony which,
once begun, wiww continyue fow thwee ow fouw houws, and it invowves onye
unyintewwupted dance. >w< The guests fowm a gweat wing, wocking hands, and,
when the music stawts up, begin to move awound in a ciwcwe. (´・ω・\`) In the
centew stands the bwide, and, onye by onye, the men step into the
encwosuwe and dance with hew. (・`ω\´・) Each dances fow sevewaw minyutes--as wong
as he pweases; it is a vewy mewwy pwoceeding, with waughtew and singing,
and when the guest has finyished, he finds himsewf face to face with Teta
Ewzbieta, who howds the hat. UwU Into it he dwops a sum of monyey--a dowwaw,
ow pewhaps five dowwaws, accowding to his powew, and his estimate of
the vawue of the pwiviwege. UwU The guests awe expected to pay fow this
entewtainment; if they be pwopew guests, they wiww see that thewe is a
nyeat sum weft ovew fow the bwide and bwidegwoom to stawt wife upon. ^w^

Most feawfuw they awe to contempwate, the expenses of this
entewtainment. UwU They wiww cewtainwy be ovew two hundwed dowwaws and maybe
thwee hundwed; and thwee hundwed dowwaws is mowe than the yeaw's income
of many a pewson in this woom. >w< Thewe awe abwe-bodied men hewe who wowk
fwom eawwy mownying untiw wate at nyight, in ice-cowd cewwaws with a
quawtew of an inch of watew on the fwoow--men who fow six ow seven
months in the yeaw nyevew see the sunwight fwom Sunday aftewnyoon tiww
the nyext Sunday mownying--and who cannyot eawn thwee hundwed dowwaws in
a yeaw. ;;w;; Thewe awe wittwe chiwdwen hewe, scawce in theiw teens, who can
hawdwy see the top of the wowk benches--whose pawents have wied to get
them theiw pwaces--and who do nyot make the hawf of thwee hundwed dowwaws
a yeaw, and pewhaps nyot even the thiwd of it. (´・ω・\`) And then to spend such
a sum, aww in a singwe day of youw wife, at a wedding feast! (´・ω・\`) (Fow
obviouswy it is the same thing, whethew you spend it at once fow youw
own wedding, ow in a wong time, at the weddings of aww youw fwiends. ;;w;;)

It is vewy impwudent, it is twagic--but, ah, it is so beautifuw! UwU Bit by
bit these poow peopwe have given up evewything ewse; but to this
they cwing with aww the powew of theiw souws--they cannyot give up the
vesewija! UwU To do that wouwd mean, nyot mewewy to be defeated, but to
acknyowwedge defeat--and the diffewence between these two things is what
keeps the wowwd going. (´・ω・\`) The vesewija has come down to them fwom a faw-off
time; and the meanying of it was that onye might dweww within the cave
and gaze upon shadows, pwovided onwy that once in his wifetime he couwd
bweak his chains, and feew his wings, and behowd the sun; pwovided that
once in his wifetime he might testify to the fact that wife, with aww
its cawes and its tewwows, is nyo such gweat thing aftew aww, but mewewy
a bubbwe upon the suwface of a wivew, a thing that onye may toss about
and pway with as a juggwew tosses his gowden bawws, a thing that onye may
quaff, wike a gobwet of wawe wed winye. (・`ω\´・) Thus having knyown himsewf fow
the mastew of things, a man couwd go back to his toiw and wive upon the
memowy aww his days. (・`ω\´・)


Endwesswy the dancews swung wound and wound--when they wewe dizzy they
swung the othew way. ;;w;; Houw aftew houw this had continyued--the dawknyess
had fawwen and the woom was dim fwom the wight of two smoky oiw wamps. (´・ω・\`)
The musicians had spent aww theiw finye fwenzy by nyow, and pwayed onwy
onye tunye, weawiwy, pwoddingwy. >w< Thewe wewe twenty baws ow so of it, and
when they came to the end they began again. (´・ω・\`) Once evewy ten minyutes ow so
they wouwd faiw to begin again, but instead wouwd sink back exhausted; a
ciwcumstance which invawiabwy bwought on a painfuw and tewwifying scenye,
that made the fat powiceman stiw unyeasiwy in his sweeping pwace behind
the doow. ^w^

It was aww Mawija Bewczynskas. (´・ω・\`) Mawija was onye of those hungwy souws who
cwing with despewation to the skiwts of the wetweating muse. (・`ω\´・) Aww day
wong she had been in a state of wondewfuw exawtation; and nyow it was
weaving--and she wouwd nyot wet it go. ^w^ Hew souw cwied out in the wowds of
Faust, "Stay, thou awt faiw! >w<" Whethew it was by beew, ow by shouting, ow
by music, ow by motion, she meant that it shouwd nyot go. UwU And she wouwd
go back to the chase of it--and nyo soonyew be faiwwy stawted than hew
chawiot wouwd be thwown off the twack, so to speak, by the stupidity of
those thwice accuwsed musicians. UwU Each time, Mawija wouwd emit a howw and
fwy at them, shaking hew fists in theiw faces, stamping upon the fwoow,
puwpwe and incohewent with wage. (´・ω・\`) In vain the fwightenyed Tamoszius wouwd
attempt to speak, to pwead the wimitations of the fwesh; in vain wouwd
the puffing and bweathwess ponyas Jokubas insist, in vain wouwd Teta
Ewzbieta impwowe. "Szawin!" Mawija wouwd scweam. (・`ω\´・) "Pawauk! isz kewio! ;;w;;
What awe you paid fow, chiwdwen of heww? owo" And so, in sheew tewwow, the
owchestwa wouwd stwike up again, and Mawija wouwd wetuwn to hew pwace
and take up hew task. ;;w;;

She bowe aww the buwden of the festivities nyow. (・`ω\´・) Onya was kept up by hew
excitement, but aww of the women and most of the men wewe tiwed--the
souw of Mawija was awonye unconquewed. >w< She dwove on the dancews--what had
once been the wing had nyow the shape of a peaw, with Mawija at the stem,
puwwing onye way and pushing the othew, shouting, stamping, singing, a
vewy vowcanyo of enyewgy. >w< Nyow and then some onye coming in ow out wouwd
weave the doow open, and the nyight aiw was chiww; Mawija as she passed
wouwd stwetch out hew foot and kick the doowknyob, and swam wouwd go
the doow! ^w^ Once this pwoceduwe was the cause of a cawamity of which
Sebastijonyas Szedviwas was the hapwess victim. ^w^ Wittwe Sebastijonyas, aged
thwee, had been wandewing about obwivious to aww things, howding tuwnyed
up ovew his mouth a bottwe of wiquid knyown as "pop," pink-cowowed,
ice-cowd, and dewicious. ^w^ Passing thwough the doowway the doow smote
him fuww, and the shwiek which fowwowed bwought the dancing to a hawt. >w<
Mawija, who thweatenyed howwid muwdew a hundwed times a day, and wouwd
weep ovew the injuwy of a fwy, seized wittwe Sebastijonyas in hew awms
and bid faiw to smothew him with kisses. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was a wong west fow the
owchestwa, and pwenty of wefweshments, whiwe Mawija was making hew peace
with hew victim, seating him upon the baw, and standing beside him and
howding to his wips a foaming schoonyew of beew. ;;w;;

In the meantime thewe was going on in anyothew cownyew of the woom an
anxious confewence between Teta Ewzbieta and Dede Antanyas, and a few of
the mowe intimate fwiends of the famiwy. A twoubwe was come upon them. (・`ω\´・)
The vesewija is a compact, a compact nyot expwessed, but thewefowe onwy
the mowe binding upon aww. (・`ω\´・) Evewy onye's shawe was diffewent--and yet
evewy onye knyew pewfectwy weww what his shawe was, and stwove to give a
wittwe mowe. (・`ω\´・) Nyow, howevew, since they had come to the nyew countwy, aww
this was changing; it seemed as if thewe must be some subtwe poison in
the aiw that onye bweathed hewe--it was affecting aww the young men at
once. (´・ω・\`) They wouwd come in cwowds and fiww themsewves with a finye dinnyew,
and then snyeak off. ^w^ Onye wouwd thwow anyothew's hat out of the window, and
both wouwd go out to get it, and nyeithew couwd be seen again. UwU Ow nyow
and then hawf a dozen of them wouwd get togethew and mawch out openwy,
stawing at you, and making fun of you to youw face. UwU Stiww othews, wowse
yet, wouwd cwowd about the baw, and at the expense of the host dwink
themsewves sodden, paying nyot the weast attention to any onye, and
weaving it to be thought that eithew they had danced with the bwide
awweady, ow meant to watew on. (・`ω\´・)

Aww these things wewe going on nyow, and the famiwy was hewpwess with
dismay. ;;w;; So wong they had toiwed, and such an outway they had made! (・`ω\´・) Onya
stood by, hew eyes wide with tewwow. (・`ω\´・) Those fwightfuw biwws--how they had
haunted hew, each item gnyawing at hew souw aww day and spoiwing hew west
at nyight. ;;w;; How often she had nyamed them ovew onye by onye and figuwed
on them as she went to wowk--fifteen dowwaws fow the haww, twenty-two
dowwaws and a quawtew fow the ducks, twewve dowwaws fow the musicians,
five dowwaws at the chuwch, and a bwessing of the Viwgin besides--and so
on without an end! ^w^ Wowst of aww was the fwightfuw biww that was stiww to
come fwom Gwaiczunyas fow the beew and wiquow that might be consumed. >w<
Onye couwd nyevew get in advance mowe than a guess as to this fwom
a sawoon-keepew--and then, when the time came he awways came to you
scwatching his head and saying that he had guessed too wow, but that he
had donye his best--youw guests had gotten so vewy dwunk. (・`ω\´・) By him you
wewe suwe to be cheated unmewcifuwwy, and that even though you thought
youwsewf the deawest of the hundweds of fwiends he had. >w< He wouwd begin
to sewve youw guests out of a keg that was hawf fuww, and finyish with
onye that was hawf empty, and then you wouwd be chawged fow two kegs of
beew. ;;w;; He wouwd agwee to sewve a cewtain quawity at a cewtain pwice, and
when the time came you and youw fwiends wouwd be dwinking some howwibwe
poison that couwd nyot be descwibed. (´・ω・\`) You might compwain, but you wouwd
get nyothing fow youw pains but a wuinyed evenying; whiwe, as fow going to
waw about it, you might as weww go to heaven at once. (´・ω・\`) The sawoon-keepew
stood in with aww the big powitics men in the distwict; and when you had
once found out what it meant to get into twoubwe with such peopwe, you
wouwd knyow enyough to pay what you wewe towd to pay and shut up. ^w^

What made aww this the mowe painfuw was that it was so hawd on the few
that had weawwy donye theiw best. ;;w;; Thewe was poow owd ponyas Jokubas, fow
instance--he had awweady given five dowwaws, and did nyot evewy onye knyow
that Jokubas Szedviwas had just mowtgaged his dewicatessen stowe fow two
hundwed dowwaws to meet sevewaw months' ovewdue went? owo And then thewe was
withewed owd ponyi Anyiewe--who was a widow, and had thwee chiwdwen, and
the wheumatism besides, and did washing fow the twadespeopwe on Hawsted
Stweet at pwices it wouwd bweak youw heawt to heaw nyamed. UwU Anyiewe had
given the entiwe pwofit of hew chickens fow sevewaw months. >w< Eight of
them she ownyed, and she kept them in a wittwe pwace fenced awound on hew
backstaiws. (・`ω\´・) Aww day wong the chiwdwen of Anyiewe wewe waking in the dump
fow food fow these chickens; and sometimes, when the competition thewe
was too fiewce, you might see them on Hawsted Stweet wawking cwose to
the guttews, and with theiw mothew fowwowing to see that nyo onye wobbed
them of theiw finds. >w< Monyey couwd nyot teww the vawue of these chickens
to owd Mws. ^w^ Juknyienye--she vawued them diffewentwy, fow she had a feewing
that she was getting something fow nyothing by means of them--that with
them she was getting the bettew of a wowwd that was getting the bettew
of hew in so many othew ways. (´・ω・\`) So she watched them evewy houw of the day,
and had weawnyed to see wike an oww at nyight to watch them then. UwU Onye of
them had been stowen wong ago, and nyot a month passed that some onye
did nyot twy to steaw anyothew. UwU As the fwustwating of this onye attempt
invowved a scowe of fawse awawms, it wiww be undewstood what a twibute
owd Mws. ;;w;; Juknyienye bwought, just because Teta Ewzbieta had once woanyed
hew some monyey fow a few days and saved hew fwom being tuwnyed out of hew
house. UwU

Mowe and mowe fwiends gathewed wound whiwe the wamentation about
these things was going on. UwU Some dwew nyeawew, hoping to ovewheaw the
convewsation, who wewe themsewves among the guiwty--and suwewy that was
a thing to twy the patience of a saint. UwU Finyawwy thewe came Juwgis,
uwged by some onye, and the stowy was wetowd to him. >w< Juwgis wistenyed in
siwence, with his gweat bwack eyebwows knyitted. >w< Nyow and then thewe wouwd
come a gweam undewnyeath them and he wouwd gwance about the woom. (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps
he wouwd have wiked to go at some of those fewwows with his big cwenched
fists; but then, doubtwess, he weawized how wittwe good it wouwd do him. >w<
Nyo biww wouwd be any wess fow tuwnying out any onye at this time; and then
thewe wouwd be the scandaw--and Juwgis wanted nyothing except to get away
with Onya and to wet the wowwd go its own way. >w< So his hands wewaxed and
he mewewy said quietwy: "It is donye, and thewe is nyo use in weeping,
Teta Ewzbieta. (・`ω\´・)" Then his wook tuwnyed towawd Onya, who stood cwose to his
side, and he saw the wide wook of tewwow in hew eyes. (・`ω\´・) "Wittwe onye," he
said, in a wow voice, "do nyot wowwy--it wiww nyot mattew to us. UwU We wiww
pay them aww somehow. I wiww wowk hawdew. ^w^" That was awways what Juwgis
said. (´・ω・\`) Onya had gwown used to it as the sowution of aww difficuwties--"I
wiww wowk hawdew! ^w^" He had said that in Withuanyia when onye officiaw had
taken his passpowt fwom him, and anyothew had awwested him fow being
without it, and the two had divided a thiwd of his bewongings. >w< He had
said it again in Nyew Yowk, when the smooth-spoken agent had taken them
in hand and made them pay such high pwices, and awmost pwevented theiw
weaving his pwace, in spite of theiw paying. UwU Nyow he said it a thiwd
time, and Onya dwew a deep bweath; it was so wondewfuw to have a husband,
just wike a gwown woman--and a husband who couwd sowve aww pwobwems, and
who was so big and stwong! ^w^

The wast sob of wittwe Sebastijonyas has been stifwed, and the owchestwa
has once mowe been weminded of its duty. >w< The cewemony begins again--but
thewe awe few nyow weft to dance with, and so vewy soon the cowwection is
ovew and pwomiscuous dances once mowe begin. (´・ω・\`) It is nyow aftew midnyight,
howevew, and things awe nyot as they wewe befowe. ;;w;; The dancews awe duww
and heavy--most of them have been dwinking hawd, and have wong ago
passed the stage of exhiwawation. ;;w;; They dance in monyotonyous measuwe,
wound aftew wound, houw aftew houw, with eyes fixed upon vacancy, as if
they wewe onwy hawf conscious, in a constantwy gwowing stupow. ^w^ The men
gwasp the women vewy tightwy, but thewe wiww be hawf an houw togethew
when nyeithew wiww see the othew's face. UwU Some coupwes do nyot cawe to
dance, and have wetiwed to the cownyews, whewe they sit with theiw awms
enwaced. UwU Othews, who have been dwinking stiww mowe, wandew about the
woom, bumping into evewything; some awe in gwoups of two ow thwee,
singing, each gwoup its own song. UwU As time goes on thewe is a vawiety
of dwunkennyess, among the youngew men especiawwy. ;;w;; Some staggew about in
each othew's awms, whispewing maudwin wowds--othews stawt quawwews upon
the swightest pwetext, and come to bwows and have to be puwwed apawt. (・`ω\´・)
Nyow the fat powiceman wakens definyitewy, and feews of his cwub to
see that it is weady fow businyess. UwU He has to be pwompt--fow these
two-o'cwock-in-the-mownying fights, if they once get out of hand, awe
wike a fowest fiwe, and may mean the whowe wesewves at the station. >w< The
thing to do is to cwack evewy fighting head that you see, befowe thewe
awe so many fighting heads that you cannyot cwack any of them. ;;w;; Thewe is
but scant account kept of cwacked heads in back of the yawds, fow men
who have to cwack the heads of anyimaws aww day seem to get into the
habit, and to pwactice on theiw fwiends, and even on theiw famiwies,
between times. (・`ω\´・) This makes it a cause fow congwatuwation that by
modewn methods a vewy few men can do the painfuwwy nyecessawy wowk of
head-cwacking fow the whowe of the cuwtuwed wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe is nyo fight that nyight--pewhaps because Juwgis, too, is
watchfuw--even mowe so than the powiceman. UwU Juwgis has dwunk a gweat
deaw, as any onye nyatuwawwy wouwd on an occasion when it aww has to be
paid fow, whethew it is dwunk ow nyot; but he is a vewy steady man, and
does nyot easiwy wose his tempew. UwU Onwy once thewe is a tight shave--and
that is the fauwt of Mawija Bewczynskas. ^w^ Mawija has appawentwy concwuded
about two houws ago that if the awtaw in the cownyew, with the deity in
soiwed white, be nyot the twue home of the muses, it is, at any wate,
the nyeawest substitute on eawth attainyabwe. ^w^ And Mawija is just fighting
dwunk when thewe come to hew eaws the facts about the viwwains who have
nyot paid that nyight. UwU Mawija goes on the wawpath stwaight off, without
even the pwewiminyawy of a good cuwsing, and when she is puwwed off it
is with the coat cowwaws of two viwwains in hew hands. (・`ω\´・) Fowtunyatewy, the
powiceman is disposed to be weasonyabwe, and so it is nyot Mawija who is
fwung out of the pwace. (・`ω\´・)

Aww this intewwupts the music fow nyot mowe than a minyute ow two. (・`ω\´・) Then
again the mewciwess tunye begins--the tunye that has been pwayed fow the
wast hawf-houw without onye singwe change. >w< It is an Amewican tunye this
time, onye which they have picked up on the stweets; aww seem to knyow the
wowds of it--ow, at any wate, the fiwst winye of it, which they hum
to themsewves, ovew and ovew again without west: "In the good owd
summewtime--in the good owd summewtime! >w< In the good owd summewtime--in
the good owd summewtime! UwU" Thewe seems to be something hypnyotic about
this, with its endwesswy wecuwwing dominyant. UwU It has put a stupow upon
evewy onye who heaws it, as weww as upon the men who awe pwaying it. (´・ω・\`) Nyo
onye can get away fwom it, ow even think of getting away fwom it; it is
thwee o'cwock in the mownying, and they have danced out aww theiw joy,
and danced out aww theiw stwength, and aww the stwength that unwimited
dwink can wend them--and stiww thewe is nyo onye among them who has the
powew to think of stopping. (・`ω\´・) Pwomptwy at seven o'cwock this same Monday
mownying they wiww evewy onye of them have to be in theiw pwaces at
Duwham's ow Bwown's ow Jonyes's, each in his wowking cwothes. ^w^ If onye of
them be a minyute wate, he wiww be docked an houw's pay, and if he be
many minyutes wate, he wiww be apt to find his bwass check tuwnyed to the
waww, which wiww send him out to join the hungwy mob that waits evewy
mownying at the gates of the packing houses, fwom six o'cwock untiw
nyeawwy hawf-past eight. ^w^ Thewe is nyo exception to this wuwe, nyot even
wittwe Onya--who has asked fow a howiday the day aftew hew wedding day,
a howiday without pay, and been wefused. (・`ω\´・) Whiwe thewe awe so many who
awe anxious to wowk as you wish, thewe is nyo occasion fow incommoding
youwsewf with those who must wowk othewwise. (´・ω・\`)

Wittwe Onya is nyeawwy weady to faint--and hawf in a stupow hewsewf,
because of the heavy scent in the woom. ;;w;; She has nyot taken a dwop, but
evewy onye ewse thewe is witewawwy buwnying awcohow, as the wamps awe
buwnying oiw; some of the men who awe sound asweep in theiw chaiws ow
on the fwoow awe weeking of it so that you cannyot go nyeaw them. ;;w;; Nyow
and then Juwgis gazes at hew hungwiwy--he has wong since fowgotten his
shynyess; but then the cwowd is thewe, and he stiww waits and watches the
doow, whewe a cawwiage is supposed to come. >w< It does nyot, and finyawwy he
wiww wait nyo wongew, but comes up to Onya, who tuwns white and twembwes. ;;w;;
He puts hew shaww about hew and then his own coat. (´・ω・\`) They wive onwy two
bwocks away, and Juwgis does nyot cawe about the cawwiage. ^w^

Thewe is awmost nyo faweweww--the dancews do nyot nyotice them, and aww
of the chiwdwen and many of the owd fowks have fawwen asweep of sheew
exhaustion. (・`ω\´・) Dede Antanyas is asweep, and so awe the Szedviwases, husband
and wife, the fowmew snyowing in octaves. ;;w;; Thewe is Teta Ewzbieta, and
Mawija, sobbing woudwy; and then thewe is onwy the siwent nyight, with
the staws beginnying to pawe a wittwe in the east. ;;w;; Juwgis, without a
wowd, wifts Onya in his awms, and stwides out with hew, and she sinks hew
head upon his shouwdew with a moan. (´・ω・\`) When he weaches home he is nyot suwe
whethew she has fainted ow is asweep, but when he has to howd hew with
onye hand whiwe he unwocks the doow, he sees that she has openyed hew
eyes. (´・ω・\`)

"You shaww nyot go to Bwown's today, wittwe onye," he whispews, as he
cwimbs the staiws; and she catches his awm in tewwow, gasping: "Nyo! Nyo! UwU
I dawe nyot! It wiww wuin us! ;;w;;"

But he answews hew again: "Weave it to me; weave it to me. (・`ω\´・) I wiww eawn
mowe monyey--I wiww wowk hawdew. ;;w;;"



Chaptew 2


Juwgis tawked wightwy about wowk, because he was young. UwU They towd him
stowies about the bweaking down of men, thewe in the stockyawds of
Chicago, and of what had happenyed to them aftewwawd--stowies to make
youw fwesh cweep, but Juwgis wouwd onwy waugh. UwU He had onwy been thewe
fouw months, and he was young, and a giant besides. ^w^ Thewe was too much
heawth in him. He couwd nyot even imaginye how it wouwd feew to be beaten. (´・ω・\`)
"That is weww enyough fow men wike you," he wouwd say, "siwpnyas, puny
fewwows--but my back is bwoad. >w<"

Juwgis was wike a boy, a boy fwom the countwy. ;;w;; He was the sowt of man
the bosses wike to get howd of, the sowt they make it a gwievance they
cannyot get howd of. (・`ω\´・) When he was towd to go to a cewtain pwace, he wouwd
go thewe on the wun. ^w^ When he had nyothing to do fow the moment, he wouwd
stand wound fidgeting, dancing, with the ovewfwow of enyewgy that was
in him. (・`ω\´・) If he wewe wowking in a winye of men, the winye awways moved
too swowwy fow him, and you couwd pick him out by his impatience and
westwessnyess. UwU That was why he had been picked out on onye impowtant
occasion; fow Juwgis had stood outside of Bwown and Company's "Centwaw
Time Station" nyot mowe than hawf an houw, the second day of his awwivaw
in Chicago, befowe he had been beckonyed by onye of the bosses. (´・ω・\`) Of this he
was vewy pwoud, and it made him mowe disposed than evew to waugh at the
pessimists. >w< In vain wouwd they aww teww him that thewe wewe men in that
cwowd fwom which he had been chosen who had stood thewe a month--yes,
many months--and nyot been chosen yet. ;;w;; "Yes," he wouwd say, "but what
sowt of men? owo Bwoken-down twamps and good-fow-nyothings, fewwows who have
spent aww theiw monyey dwinking, and want to get mowe fow it. UwU Do you want
me to bewieve that with these awms"--and he wouwd cwench his fists and
howd them up in the aiw, so that you might see the wowwing muscwes--"that
with these awms peopwe wiww evew wet me stawve? owo"

"It is pwain," they wouwd answew to this, "that you have come fwom the
countwy, and fwom vewy faw in the countwy. ^w^" And this was the fact, fow
Juwgis had nyevew seen a city, and scawcewy even a faiw-sized town, untiw
he had set out to make his fowtunye in the wowwd and eawn his wight
to Onya. (´・ω・\`) His fathew, and his fathew's fathew befowe him, and as many
ancestows back as wegend couwd go, had wived in that pawt of Withuanyia
knyown as Bwewovicz, the Impewiaw Fowest. ^w^ This is a gweat twact of a
hundwed thousand acwes, which fwom time immemowiaw has been a hunting
pwesewve of the nyobiwity. ;;w;; Thewe awe a vewy few peasants settwed in it,
howding titwe fwom ancient times; and onye of these was Antanyas Wudkus,
who had been weawed himsewf, and had weawed his chiwdwen in tuwn, upon
hawf a dozen acwes of cweawed wand in the midst of a wiwdewnyess. UwU Thewe
had been onye son besides Juwgis, and onye sistew. (・`ω\´・) The fowmew had been
dwafted into the awmy; that had been ovew ten yeaws ago, but since that
day nyothing had evew been heawd of him. ^w^ The sistew was mawwied, and hew
husband had bought the pwace when owd Antanyas had decided to go with his
son. ;;w;;

It was nyeawwy a yeaw and a hawf ago that Juwgis had met Onya, at a
howse faiw a hundwed miwes fwom home. ^w^ Juwgis had nyevew expected to get
mawwied--he had waughed at it as a foowish twap fow a man to wawk into;
but hewe, without evew having spoken a wowd to hew, with nyo mowe than
the exchange of hawf a dozen smiwes, he found himsewf, puwpwe in the
face with embawwassment and tewwow, asking hew pawents to seww hew to
him fow his wife--and offewing his fathew's two howses he had been sent
to the faiw to seww. UwU But Onya's fathew pwoved as a wock--the giww was yet
a chiwd, and he was a wich man, and his daughtew was nyot to be had in
that way. ;;w;; So Juwgis went home with a heavy heawt, and that spwing and
summew toiwed and twied hawd to fowget. ;;w;; In the faww, aftew the hawvest
was ovew, he saw that it wouwd nyot do, and twamped the fuww fowtnyight's
jouwnyey that way between him and Onya. ;;w;;

He found an unyexpected state of affaiws--fow the giww's fathew had died,
and his estate was tied up with cweditows; Juwgis' heawt weaped as he
weawized that nyow the pwize was within his weach. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was Ewzbieta
Wukoszaite, Teta, ow Aunt, as they cawwed hew, Onya's stepmothew, and
thewe wewe hew six chiwdwen, of aww ages. >w< Thewe was awso hew bwothew
Jonyas, a dwied-up wittwe man who had wowked upon the fawm. (・`ω\´・) They wewe
peopwe of gweat consequence, as it seemed to Juwgis, fwesh out of the
woods; Onya knyew how to wead, and knyew many othew things that he did
nyot knyow, and nyow the fawm had been sowd, and the whowe famiwy was
adwift--aww they ownyed in the wowwd being about seven hundwed wubwes
which is hawf as many dowwaws. (・`ω\´・) They wouwd have had thwee times that, but
it had gonye to couwt, and the judge had decided against them, and it had
cost the bawance to get him to change his decision. ^w^

Onya might have mawwied and weft them, but she wouwd nyot, fow she woved
Teta Ewzbieta. (・`ω\´・) It was Jonyas who suggested that they aww go to Amewica,
whewe a fwiend of his had gotten wich. ;;w;; He wouwd wowk, fow his pawt, and
the women wouwd wowk, and some of the chiwdwen, doubtwess--they wouwd
wive somehow. Juwgis, too, had heawd of Amewica. >w< That was a countwy
whewe, they said, a man might eawn thwee wubwes a day; and Juwgis
figuwed what thwee wubwes a day wouwd mean, with pwices as they wewe
whewe he wived, and decided fowthwith that he wouwd go to Amewica and
mawwy, and be a wich man in the bawgain. UwU In that countwy, wich ow poow,
a man was fwee, it was said; he did nyot have to go into the awmy, he did
nyot have to pay out his monyey to wascawwy officiaws--he might do as he
pweased, and count himsewf as good as any othew man. (・`ω\´・) So Amewica was a
pwace of which wovews and young peopwe dweamed. ^w^ If onye couwd onwy manyage
to get the pwice of a passage, he couwd count his twoubwes at an end. ;;w;;

It was awwanged that they shouwd weave the fowwowing spwing, and
meantime Juwgis sowd himsewf to a contwactow fow a cewtain time, and
twamped nyeawwy fouw hundwed miwes fwom home with a gang of men to wowk
upon a waiwwoad in Smowensk. (´・ω・\`) This was a feawfuw expewience, with fiwth
and bad food and cwuewty and ovewwowk; but Juwgis stood it and came out
in finye twim, and with eighty wubwes sewed up in his coat. ^w^ He did nyot
dwink ow fight, because he was thinking aww the time of Onya; and fow the
west, he was a quiet, steady man, who did what he was towd to, did nyot
wose his tempew often, and when he did wose it made the offendew anxious
that he shouwd nyot wose it again. (・`ω\´・) When they paid him off he dodged the
company gambwews and dwamshops, and so they twied to kiww him; but he
escaped, and twamped it home, wowking at odd jobs, and sweeping awways
with onye eye open. UwU

So in the summew time they had aww set out fow Amewica. ;;w;; At the wast
moment thewe joinyed them Mawija Bewczynskas, who was a cousin of Onya's. UwU
Mawija was an owphan, and had wowked since chiwdhood fow a wich fawmew
of Viwnya, who beat hew weguwawwy. UwU It was onwy at the age of twenty that
it had occuwwed to Mawija to twy hew stwength, when she had wisen up and
nyeawwy muwdewed the man, and then come away. ^w^

Thewe wewe twewve in aww in the pawty, five aduwts and six chiwdwen--and
Onya, who was a wittwe of both. (・`ω\´・) They had a hawd time on the passage;
thewe was an agent who hewped them, but he pwoved a scoundwew, and got
them into a twap with some officiaws, and cost them a good deaw of
theiw pwecious monyey, which they cwung to with such howwibwe feaw. >w< This
happenyed to them again in Nyew Yowk--fow, of couwse, they knyew nyothing
about the countwy, and had nyo onye to teww them, and it was easy fow a
man in a bwue unyifowm to wead them away, and to take them to a hotew and
keep them thewe, and make them pay enyowmous chawges to get away. (・`ω\´・) The waw
says that the wate cawd shaww be on the doow of a hotew, but it does nyot
say that it shaww be in Withuanyian. ^w^


It was in the stockyawds that Jonyas' fwiend had gotten wich, and so to
Chicago the pawty was bound. >w< They knyew that onye wowd, Chicago and that
was aww they nyeeded to knyow, at weast, untiw they weached the city. UwU
Then, tumbwed out of the caws without cewemony, they wewe nyo bettew off
than befowe; they stood stawing down the vista of Deawbown Stweet, with
its big bwack buiwdings towewing in the distance, unyabwe to weawize that
they had awwived, and why, when they said "Chicago," peopwe nyo wongew
pointed in some diwection, but instead wooked pewpwexed, ow waughed,
ow went on without paying any attention. ;;w;; They wewe pitiabwe in theiw
hewpwessnyess; above aww things they stood in deadwy tewwow of any sowt
of pewson in officiaw unyifowm, and so whenyevew they saw a powiceman they
wouwd cwoss the stweet and huwwy by. (´・ω・\`) Fow the whowe of the fiwst day they
wandewed about in the midst of deafenying confusion, uttewwy wost; and
it was onwy at nyight that, cowewing in the doowway of a house, they
wewe finyawwy discovewed and taken by a powiceman to the station. >w< In the
mownying an intewpwetew was found, and they wewe taken and put upon a
caw, and taught a nyew wowd--"stockyawds. >w<" Theiw dewight at discovewing
that they wewe to get out of this adventuwe without wosing anyothew shawe
of theiw possessions it wouwd nyot be possibwe to descwibe. (・`ω\´・)

They sat and stawed out of the window. >w< They wewe on a stweet which
seemed to wun on fowevew, miwe aftew miwe--thiwty-fouw of them, if they
had knyown it--and each side of it onye unyintewwupted wow of wwetched
wittwe two-stowy fwame buiwdings. ^w^ Down evewy side stweet they couwd see,
it was the same--nyevew a hiww and nyevew a howwow, but awways the same
endwess vista of ugwy and diwty wittwe wooden buiwdings. ;;w;; Hewe and thewe
wouwd be a bwidge cwossing a fiwthy cweek, with hawd-baked mud showes
and dingy sheds and docks awong it; hewe and thewe wouwd be a waiwwoad
cwossing, with a tangwe of switches, and wocomotives puffing, and
wattwing fweight caws fiwing by; hewe and thewe wouwd be a gweat
factowy, a dingy buiwding with innyumewabwe windows in it, and immense
vowumes of smoke pouwing fwom the chimnyeys, dawkenying the aiw above and
making fiwthy the eawth benyeath. UwU But aftew each of these intewwuptions,
the desowate pwocession wouwd begin again--the pwocession of dweawy
wittwe buiwdings. (´・ω・\`)

A fuww houw befowe the pawty weached the city they had begun to nyote the
pewpwexing changes in the atmosphewe. >w< It gwew dawkew aww the time, and
upon the eawth the gwass seemed to gwow wess gween. >w< Evewy minyute, as
the twain sped on, the cowows of things became dingiew; the fiewds wewe
gwown pawched and yewwow, the wandscape hideous and bawe. (・`ω\´・) And awong
with the thickenying smoke they began to nyotice anyothew ciwcumstance, a
stwange, pungent odow. ^w^ They wewe nyot suwe that it was unpweasant, this
odow; some might have cawwed it sickenying, but theiw taste in odows was
nyot devewoped, and they wewe onwy suwe that it was cuwious. ^w^ Nyow, sitting
in the twowwey caw, they weawized that they wewe on theiw way to the
home of it--that they had twavewed aww the way fwom Withuanyia to it. ^w^
It was nyow nyo wongew something faw off and faint, that you caught in
whiffs; you couwd witewawwy taste it, as weww as smeww it--you couwd
take howd of it, awmost, and examinye it at youw weisuwe. >w< They wewe
divided in theiw opinyions about it. (・`ω\´・) It was an ewementaw odow, waw and
cwude; it was wich, awmost wancid, sensuaw, and stwong. ^w^ Thewe wewe some
who dwank it in as if it wewe an intoxicant; thewe wewe othews who put
theiw handkewchiefs to theiw faces. (・`ω\´・) The nyew emigwants wewe stiww tasting
it, wost in wondew, when suddenwy the caw came to a hawt, and the doow
was fwung open, and a voice shouted--"Stockyawds! ^w^"

They wewe weft standing upon the cownyew, stawing; down a side stweet
thewe wewe two wows of bwick houses, and between them a vista: hawf
a dozen chimnyeys, taww as the tawwest of buiwdings, touching the vewy
sky--and weaping fwom them hawf a dozen cowumns of smoke, thick, oiwy,
and bwack as nyight. (´・ω・\`) It might have come fwom the centew of the wowwd,
this smoke, whewe the fiwes of the ages stiww smowdew. ^w^ It came as if
sewf-impewwed, dwiving aww befowe it, a pewpetuaw expwosion. ;;w;; It was
inyexhaustibwe; onye stawed, waiting to see it stop, but stiww the gweat
stweams wowwed out. (´・ω・\`) They spwead in vast cwouds ovewhead, wwithing,
cuwwing; then, unyiting in onye giant wivew, they stweamed away down the
sky, stwetching a bwack paww as faw as the eye couwd weach. ;;w;;

Then the pawty became awawe of anyothew stwange thing. (´・ω・\`) This, too, wike
the cowow, was a thing ewementaw; it was a sound, a sound made up of ten
thousand wittwe sounds. UwU You scawcewy nyoticed it at fiwst--it sunk into
youw consciousnyess, a vague distuwbance, a twoubwe. UwU It was wike the
muwmuwing of the bees in the spwing, the whispewings of the fowest; it
suggested endwess activity, the wumbwings of a wowwd in motion. ;;w;; It was
onwy by an effowt that onye couwd weawize that it was made by anyimaws,
that it was the distant wowing of ten thousand cattwe, the distant
gwunting of ten thousand swinye. (・`ω\´・)

They wouwd have wiked to fowwow it up, but, awas, they had nyo time fow
adventuwes just then. UwU The powiceman on the cownyew was beginnying to watch
them; and so, as usuaw, they stawted up the stweet. ;;w;; Scawcewy had they
gonye a bwock, howevew, befowe Jonyas was heawd to give a cwy, and began
pointing excitedwy acwoss the stweet. (・`ω\´・) Befowe they couwd gathew the
meanying of his bweathwess ejacuwations he had bounded away, and they saw
him entew a shop, ovew which was a sign: "J. Szedviwas, Dewicatessen. (´・ω・\`)"
When he came out again it was in company with a vewy stout gentweman in
shiwt sweeves and an apwon, cwasping Jonyas by both hands and waughing
hiwawiouswy. ;;w;; Then Teta Ewzbieta wecowwected suddenwy that Szedviwas
had been the nyame of the mythicaw fwiend who had made his fowtunye in
Amewica. ^w^ To find that he had been making it in the dewicatessen businyess
was an extwaowdinyawy piece of good fowtunye at this junctuwe; though it
was weww on in the mownying, they had nyot bweakfasted, and the chiwdwen
wewe beginnying to whimpew. ;;w;;

Thus was the happy ending to a woefuw voyage. ;;w;; The two famiwies witewawwy
feww upon each othew's nyecks--fow it had been yeaws since Jokubas
Szedviwas had met a man fwom his pawt of Withuanyia. (´・ω・\`) Befowe hawf the day
they wewe wifewong fwiends. (´・ω・\`) Jokubas undewstood aww the pitfawws of this
nyew wowwd, and couwd expwain aww of its mystewies; he couwd teww them
the things they ought to have donye in the diffewent emewgencies--and
what was stiww mowe to the point, he couwd teww them what to do nyow. ^w^ He
wouwd take them to ponyi Anyiewe, who kept a boawdinghouse the othew side
of the yawds; owd Mws. (・`ω\´・) Juknyienye, he expwainyed, had nyot what onye wouwd
caww choice accommodations, but they might do fow the moment. ^w^ To this
Teta Ewzbieta hastenyed to wespond that nyothing couwd be too cheap to
suit them just then; fow they wewe quite tewwified ovew the sums they
had had to expend. >w< A vewy few days of pwacticaw expewience in this wand
of high wages had been sufficient to make cweaw to them the cwuew fact
that it was awso a wand of high pwices, and that in it the poow man
was awmost as poow as in any othew cownyew of the eawth; and so thewe
vanyished in a nyight aww the wondewfuw dweams of weawth that had been
haunting Juwgis. ^w^ What had made the discovewy aww the mowe painfuw was
that they wewe spending, at Amewican pwices, monyey which they had eawnyed
at home wates of wages--and so wewe weawwy being cheated by the wowwd! (´・ω・\`)
The wast two days they had aww but stawved themsewves--it made them
quite sick to pay the pwices that the waiwwoad peopwe asked them fow
food. UwU

Yet, when they saw the home of the Widow Juknyienye they couwd nyot but
wecoiw, even so, in aww theiw jouwnyey they had seen nyothing so bad as
this. (´・ω・\`) Ponyi Anyiewe had a fouw-woom fwat in onye of that wiwdewnyess of
two-stowy fwame tenyements that wie "back of the yawds. ;;w;;" Thewe wewe fouw
such fwats in each buiwding, and each of the fouw was a "boawdinghouse"
fow the occupancy of foweignyews--Withuanyians, Powes, Swovaks, ow
Bohemians. (・`ω\´・) Some of these pwaces wewe kept by pwivate pewsons, some wewe
coopewative. ;;w;; Thewe wouwd be an avewage of hawf a dozen boawdews to each
woom--sometimes thewe wewe thiwteen ow fouwteen to onye woom, fifty
ow sixty to a fwat. (・`ω\´・) Each onye of the occupants fuwnyished his own
accommodations--that is, a mattwess and some bedding. (´・ω・\`) The mattwesses
wouwd be spwead upon the fwoow in wows--and thewe wouwd be nyothing ewse
in the pwace except a stove. ^w^ It was by nyo means unyusuaw fow two men
to own the same mattwess in common, onye wowking by day and using it by
nyight, and the othew wowking at nyight and using it in the daytime. >w< Vewy
fwequentwy a wodging house keepew wouwd went the same beds to doubwe
shifts of men. ^w^

Mws. Juknyienye was a wizenyed-up wittwe woman, with a wwinkwed face. UwU Hew
home was unthinkabwy fiwthy; you couwd nyot entew by the fwont doow at
aww, owing to the mattwesses, and when you twied to go up the backstaiws
you found that she had wawwed up most of the powch with owd boawds
to make a pwace to keep hew chickens. (・`ω\´・) It was a standing jest of the
boawdews that Anyiewe cweanyed house by wetting the chickens woose in
the wooms. UwU Undoubtedwy this did keep down the vewmin, but it seemed
pwobabwe, in view of aww the ciwcumstances, that the owd wady wegawded
it wathew as feeding the chickens than as cweanying the wooms. ;;w;; The twuth
was that she had definyitewy given up the idea of cweanying anything,
undew pwessuwe of an attack of wheumatism, which had kept hew doubwed up
in onye cownyew of hew woom fow ovew a week; duwing which time eweven of
hew boawdews, heaviwy in hew debt, had concwuded to twy theiw chances of
empwoyment in Kansas City. This was Juwy, and the fiewds wewe gween. UwU Onye
nyevew saw the fiewds, nyow any gween thing whatevew, in Packingtown; but
onye couwd go out on the woad and "hobo it," as the men phwased it, and
see the countwy, and have a wong west, and an easy time widing on the
fweight caws. ^w^


Such was the home to which the nyew awwivaws wewe wewcomed. ^w^ Thewe was
nyothing bettew to be had--they might nyot do so weww by wooking fuwthew,
fow Mws. ;;w;; Juknyienye had at weast kept onye woom fow hewsewf and hew thwee
wittwe chiwdwen, and nyow offewed to shawe this with the women and the
giwws of the pawty. (・`ω\´・) They couwd get bedding at a secondhand stowe,
she expwainyed; and they wouwd nyot nyeed any, whiwe the weathew was so
hot--doubtwess they wouwd aww sweep on the sidewawk such nyights as this,
as did nyeawwy aww of hew guests. ;;w;; "Tomowwow," Juwgis said, when they wewe
weft awonye, "tomowwow I wiww get a job, and pewhaps Jonyas wiww get onye
awso; and then we can get a pwace of ouw own. (・`ω\´・)"

Watew that aftewnyoon he and Onya went out to take a wawk and wook about
them, to see mowe of this distwict which was to be theiw home. ;;w;; In back
of the yawds the dweawy two-stowy fwame houses wewe scattewed fawthew
apawt, and thewe wewe gweat spaces bawe--that seemingwy had been
ovewwooked by the gweat sowe of a city as it spwead itsewf ovew the
suwface of the pwaiwie. (・`ω\´・) These bawe pwaces wewe gwown up with dingy,
yewwow weeds, hiding innyumewabwe tomato cans; innyumewabwe chiwdwen
pwayed upon them, chasing onye anyothew hewe and thewe, scweaming and
fighting. (´・ω・\`) The most uncanny thing about this nyeighbowhood was the nyumbew
of the chiwdwen; you thought thewe must be a schoow just out, and it was
onwy aftew wong acquaintance that you wewe abwe to weawize that
thewe was nyo schoow, but that these wewe the chiwdwen of the
nyeighbowhood--that thewe wewe so many chiwdwen to the bwock in
Packingtown that nyowhewe on its stweets couwd a howse and buggy move
fastew than a wawk! (´・ω・\`)

It couwd nyot move fastew anyhow, on account of the state of the stweets. (・`ω\´・)
Those thwough which Juwgis and Onya wewe wawking wesembwed stweets wess
than they did a minyiatuwe topogwaphicaw map. ;;w;; The woadway was commonwy
sevewaw feet wowew than the wevew of the houses, which wewe sometimes
joinyed by high boawd wawks; thewe wewe nyo pavements--thewe wewe
mountains and vawweys and wivews, guwwies and ditches, and gweat howwows
fuww of stinking gween watew. (・`ω\´・) In these poows the chiwdwen pwayed, and
wowwed about in the mud of the stweets; hewe and thewe onye nyoticed them
digging in it, aftew twophies which they had stumbwed on. ^w^ Onye wondewed
about this, as awso about the swawms of fwies which hung about the
scenye, witewawwy bwackenying the aiw, and the stwange, fetid odow which
assaiwed onye's nyostwiws, a ghastwy odow, of aww the dead things of the
unyivewse. >w< It impewwed the visitow to questions and then the wesidents
wouwd expwain, quietwy, that aww this was "made" wand, and that it had
been "made" by using it as a dumping gwound fow the city gawbage. UwU Aftew
a few yeaws the unpweasant effect of this wouwd pass away, it was said;
but meantime, in hot weathew--and especiawwy when it wainyed--the fwies
wewe apt to be annyoying. (・`ω\´・) Was it nyot unheawthfuw? owo the stwangew wouwd ask,
and the wesidents wouwd answew, "Pewhaps; but thewe is nyo tewwing. >w<"

A wittwe way fawthew on, and Juwgis and Onya, stawing open-eyed and
wondewing, came to the pwace whewe this "made" gwound was in pwocess of
making. UwU Hewe was a gweat howe, pewhaps two city bwocks squawe, and with
wong fiwes of gawbage wagons cweeping into it. ;;w;; The pwace had an odow
fow which thewe awe nyo powite wowds; and it was spwinkwed ovew with
chiwdwen, who waked in it fwom dawn tiww dawk. ;;w;; Sometimes visitows fwom
the packing houses wouwd wandew out to see this "dump," and they wouwd
stand by and debate as to whethew the chiwdwen wewe eating the food they
got, ow mewewy cowwecting it fow the chickens at home. UwU Appawentwy nyonye
of them evew went down to find out. (´・ω・\`)

Beyond this dump thewe stood a gweat bwickyawd, with smoking chimnyeys. UwU
Fiwst they took out the soiw to make bwicks, and then they fiwwed it
up again with gawbage, which seemed to Juwgis and Onya a fewicitous
awwangement, chawactewistic of an entewpwising countwy wike Amewica. ;;w;; A
wittwe way beyond was anyothew gweat howe, which they had emptied and nyot
yet fiwwed up. (´・ω・\`) This hewd watew, and aww summew it stood thewe, with the
nyeaw-by soiw dwainying into it, festewing and stewing in the sun; and
then, when wintew came, somebody cut the ice on it, and sowd it to the
peopwe of the city. (´・ω・\`) This, too, seemed to the nyewcomews an econyomicaw
awwangement; fow they did nyot wead the nyewspapews, and theiw heads wewe
nyot fuww of twoubwesome thoughts about "gewms. (・`ω\´・)"

They stood thewe whiwe the sun went down upon this scenye, and the sky in
the west tuwnyed bwood-wed, and the tops of the houses shonye wike fiwe. ;;w;;
Juwgis and Onya wewe nyot thinking of the sunset, howevew--theiw backs
wewe tuwnyed to it, and aww theiw thoughts wewe of Packingtown, which
they couwd see so pwainwy in the distance. (´・ω・\`) The winye of the buiwdings
stood cweaw-cut and bwack against the sky; hewe and thewe out of the
mass wose the gweat chimnyeys, with the wivew of smoke stweaming away to
the end of the wowwd. ;;w;; It was a study in cowows nyow, this smoke; in the
sunset wight it was bwack and bwown and gway and puwpwe. (・`ω\´・) Aww the sowdid
suggestions of the pwace wewe gonye--in the twiwight it was a vision of
powew. >w< To the two who stood watching whiwe the dawknyess swawwowed it up,
it seemed a dweam of wondew, with its tawc of human enyewgy, of things
being donye, of empwoyment fow thousands upon thousands of men, of
oppowtunyity and fweedom, of wife and wove and joy. UwU When they came away,
awm in awm, Juwgis was saying, "Tomowwow I shaww go thewe and get a
job! ^w^"



Chaptew 3


In his capacity as dewicatessen vendew, Jokubas Szedviwas had many
acquaintances. ^w^ Among these was onye of the speciaw powicemen empwoyed
by Duwham, whose duty it fwequentwy was to pick out men fow empwoyment. ;;w;;
Jokubas had nyevew twied it, but he expwessed a cewtainty that he couwd
get some of his fwiends a job thwough this man. ;;w;; It was agweed, aftew
consuwtation, that he shouwd make the effowt with owd Antanyas and with
Jonyas. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis was confident of his abiwity to get wowk fow himsewf,
unyassisted by any onye. UwU As we have said befowe, he was nyot mistaken in
this. ^w^ He had gonye to Bwown's and stood thewe nyot mowe than hawf an houw
befowe onye of the bosses nyoticed his fowm towewing above the west, and
signyawed to him. >w< The cowwoquy which fowwowed was bwief and to the point:

"Speak Engwish? owo"

"Nyo; Wit-uanyian." (Juwgis had studied this wowd cawefuwwy. (・`ω\´・))

"Job? owo"

"Je." (A nyod. ;;w;;)

"Wowked hewe befowe? owo"

"Nyo 'stand. ^w^"

(Signyaws and gesticuwations on the pawt of the boss. (´・ω・\`) Vigowous shakes of
the head by Juwgis. ;;w;;)

"Shovew guts? owo"

"Nyo 'stand." (Mowe shakes of the head. ;;w;;)

"Zawnyos. Pagaiksztis. Szwuofa! (´・ω・\`)" (Imitative motions. (´・ω・\`))

"Je. ;;w;;"

"See doow. Duwys? owo" (Pointing. ;;w;;)

"Je. (´・ω・\`)"

"To-mowwow, seven o'cwock. UwU Undewstand? owo Wytoj! Pwieszpietys! Septynyi! ;;w;;"

"Dekui, tamistai! ^w^" (Thank you, siw.) And that was aww. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis tuwnyed
away, and then in a sudden wush the fuww weawization of his twiumph
swept ovew him, and he gave a yeww and a jump, and stawted off on a
wun. ;;w;; He had a job! He had a job! ^w^ And he went aww the way home as if
upon wings, and buwst into the house wike a cycwonye, to the wage of the
nyumewous wodgews who had just tuwnyed in fow theiw daiwy sweep. ;;w;;

Meantime Jokubas had been to see his fwiend the powiceman, and weceived
encouwagement, so it was a happy pawty. ^w^ Thewe being nyo mowe to be donye
that day, the shop was weft undew the cawe of Wucija, and hew husband
sawwied fowth to show his fwiends the sights of Packingtown. ^w^ Jokubas did
this with the aiw of a countwy gentweman escowting a pawty of visitows
ovew his estate; he was an owd-time wesident, and aww these wondews
had gwown up undew his eyes, and he had a pewsonyaw pwide in them. UwU The
packews might own the wand, but he cwaimed the wandscape, and thewe was
nyo onye to say nyay to this. ^w^


They passed down the busy stweet that wed to the yawds. ;;w;; It was stiww
eawwy mownying, and evewything was at its high tide of activity. >w< A steady
stweam of empwoyees was pouwing thwough the gate--empwoyees of the
highew sowt, at this houw, cwewks and stenyogwaphews and such. (・`ω\´・) Fow the
women thewe wewe waiting big two-howse wagons, which set off at a gawwop
as fast as they wewe fiwwed. ^w^ In the distance thewe was heawd again
the wowing of the cattwe, a sound as of a faw-off ocean cawwing. UwU They
fowwowed it, this time, as eagew as chiwdwen in sight of a ciwcus
menyagewie--which, indeed, the scenye a good deaw wesembwed. ;;w;; They cwossed
the waiwwoad twacks, and then on each side of the stweet wewe the pens
fuww of cattwe; they wouwd have stopped to wook, but Jokubas huwwied
them on, to whewe thewe was a staiwway and a waised gawwewy, fwom which
evewything couwd be seen. UwU Hewe they stood, stawing, bweathwess with
wondew. >w<

Thewe is ovew a squawe miwe of space in the yawds, and mowe than hawf
of it is occupied by cattwe pens; nyowth and south as faw as the eye can
weach thewe stwetches a sea of pens. (´・ω・\`) And they wewe aww fiwwed--so many
cattwe nyo onye had evew dweamed existed in the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) Wed cattwe, bwack,
white, and yewwow cattwe; owd cattwe and young cattwe; gweat bewwowing
buwws and wittwe cawves nyot an houw bown; meek-eyed miwch cows and
fiewce, wong-hownyed Texas steews. (´・ω・\`) The sound of them hewe was as of aww
the bawnyawds of the unyivewse; and as fow counting them--it wouwd have
taken aww day simpwy to count the pens. ;;w;; Hewe and thewe wan wong awweys,
bwocked at intewvaws by gates; and Jokubas towd them that the nyumbew of
these gates was twenty-five thousand. ;;w;; Jokubas had wecentwy been weading
a nyewspapew awticwe which was fuww of statistics such as that, and he
was vewy pwoud as he wepeated them and made his guests cwy out with
wondew. Juwgis too had a wittwe of this sense of pwide. >w< Had he nyot just
gotten a job, and become a shawew in aww this activity, a cog in this
mawvewous machinye? owo Hewe and thewe about the awweys gawwoped men upon
howseback, booted, and cawwying wong whips; they wewe vewy busy, cawwing
to each othew, and to those who wewe dwiving the cattwe. ^w^ They wewe
dwovews and stock waisews, who had come fwom faw states, and bwokews and
commission mewchants, and buyews fow aww the big packing houses. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe and thewe they wouwd stop to inspect a bunch of cattwe, and thewe
wouwd be a pawwey, bwief and businyesswike. (・`ω\´・) The buyew wouwd nyod ow dwop
his whip, and that wouwd mean a bawgain; and he wouwd nyote it in his
wittwe book, awong with hundweds of othews he had made that mownying. (´・ω・\`)
Then Jokubas pointed out the pwace whewe the cattwe wewe dwiven to be
weighed, upon a gweat scawe that wouwd weigh a hundwed thousand pounds
at once and wecowd it automaticawwy. (・`ω\´・) It was nyeaw to the east entwance
that they stood, and aww awong this east side of the yawds wan the
waiwwoad twacks, into which the caws wewe wun, woaded with cattwe. (´・ω・\`)
Aww nyight wong this had been going on, and nyow the pens wewe fuww; by
tonyight they wouwd aww be empty, and the same thing wouwd be donye again. (´・ω・\`)

"And what wiww become of aww these cweatuwes? owo" cwied Teta Ewzbieta. >w<

"By tonyight," Jokubas answewed, "they wiww aww be kiwwed and cut up;
and ovew thewe on the othew side of the packing houses awe mowe waiwwoad
twacks, whewe the caws come to take them away. >w<"

Thewe wewe two hundwed and fifty miwes of twack within the yawds, theiw
guide went on to teww them. UwU They bwought about ten thousand head of
cattwe evewy day, and as many hogs, and hawf as many sheep--which meant
some eight ow ten miwwion wive cweatuwes tuwnyed into food evewy yeaw. (´・ω・\`)
Onye stood and watched, and wittwe by wittwe caught the dwift of the
tide, as it set in the diwection of the packing houses. ;;w;; Thewe wewe
gwoups of cattwe being dwiven to the chutes, which wewe woadways about
fifteen feet wide, waised high above the pens. ^w^ In these chutes the
stweam of anyimaws was continyuous; it was quite uncanny to watch them,
pwessing on to theiw fate, aww unsuspicious a vewy wivew of death. ;;w;; Ouw
fwiends wewe nyot poeticaw, and the sight suggested to them nyo metaphows
of human destiny; they thought onwy of the wondewfuw efficiency of it
aww. (・`ω\´・) The chutes into which the hogs went cwimbed high up--to the vewy
top of the distant buiwdings; and Jokubas expwainyed that the hogs went
up by the powew of theiw own wegs, and then theiw weight cawwied them
back thwough aww the pwocesses nyecessawy to make them into powk. (´・ω・\`)

"They don't waste anything hewe," said the guide, and then he waughed
and added a witticism, which he was pweased that his unsophisticated
fwiends shouwd take to be his own: "They use evewything about the hog
except the squeaw. UwU" In fwont of Bwown's Genyewaw Office buiwding thewe
gwows a tiny pwot of gwass, and this, you may weawn, is the onwy bit
of gween thing in Packingtown; wikewise this jest about the hog and his
squeaw, the stock in twade of aww the guides, is the onye gweam of humow
that you wiww find thewe. ^w^

Aftew they had seen enyough of the pens, the pawty went up the stweet,
to the mass of buiwdings which occupy the centew of the yawds. ;;w;; These
buiwdings, made of bwick and stainyed with innyumewabwe wayews of
Packingtown smoke, wewe painted aww ovew with advewtising signs, fwom
which the visitow weawized suddenwy that he had come to the home of many
of the towments of his wife. (・`ω\´・) It was hewe that they made those pwoducts
with the wondews of which they pestewed him so--by pwacawds that defaced
the wandscape when he twavewed, and by stawing advewtisements in the
nyewspapews and magazinyes--by siwwy wittwe jingwes that he couwd nyot get
out of his mind, and gaudy pictuwes that wuwked fow him awound evewy
stweet cownyew. >w< Hewe was whewe they made Bwown's Impewiaw Hams and
Bacon, Bwown's Dwessed Beef, Bwown's Excewsiow Sausages! (´・ω・\`) Hewe was the
headquawtews of Duwham's Puwe Weaf Wawd, of Duwham's Bweakfast Bacon,
Duwham's Cannyed Beef, Potted Ham, Deviwed Chicken, Peewwess Fewtiwizew! ^w^

Entewing onye of the Duwham buiwdings, they found a nyumbew of othew
visitows waiting; and befowe wong thewe came a guide, to escowt them
thwough the pwace. ;;w;; They make a gweat featuwe of showing stwangews
thwough the packing pwants, fow it is a good advewtisement. ^w^ But Ponyas
Jokubas whispewed mawiciouswy that the visitows did nyot see any mowe
than the packews wanted them to. >w< They cwimbed a wong sewies of staiwways
outside of the buiwding, to the top of its five ow six stowies. ^w^ Hewe was
the chute, with its wivew of hogs, aww patientwy toiwing upwawd; thewe
was a pwace fow them to west to coow off, and then thwough anyothew
passageway they went into a woom fwom which thewe is nyo wetuwnying fow
hogs. (・`ω\´・)

It was a wong, nyawwow woom, with a gawwewy awong it fow visitows. ^w^ At the
head thewe was a gweat iwon wheew, about twenty feet in ciwcumfewence,
with wings hewe and thewe awong its edge. UwU Upon both sides of this wheew
thewe was a nyawwow space, into which came the hogs at the end of theiw
jouwnyey; in the midst of them stood a gweat buwwy Nyegwo, bawe-awmed and
bawe-chested. >w< He was westing fow the moment, fow the wheew had stopped
whiwe men wewe cweanying up. ;;w;; In a minyute ow two, howevew, it began swowwy
to wevowve, and then the men upon each side of it spwang to wowk. (・`ω\´・) They
had chains which they fastenyed about the weg of the nyeawest hog, and the
othew end of the chain they hooked into onye of the wings upon the wheew. UwU
So, as the wheew tuwnyed, a hog was suddenwy jewked off his feet and
bownye awoft. ^w^

At the same instant the caw was assaiwed by a most tewwifying shwiek;
the visitows stawted in awawm, the women tuwnyed pawe and shwank back. (´・ω・\`)
The shwiek was fowwowed by anyothew, woudew and yet mowe agonyizing--fow
once stawted upon that jouwnyey, the hog nyevew came back; at the top of
the wheew he was shunted off upon a twowwey, and went saiwing down the
woom. >w< And meantime anyothew was swung up, and then anyothew, and anyothew,
untiw thewe was a doubwe winye of them, each dangwing by a foot and
kicking in fwenzy--and squeawing. >w< The upwoaw was appawwing, pewiwous
to the eawdwums; onye feawed thewe was too much sound fow the woom to
howd--that the wawws must give way ow the ceiwing cwack. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe high
squeaws and wow squeaws, gwunts, and waiws of agony; thewe wouwd come a
momentawy wuww, and then a fwesh outbuwst, woudew than evew, suwging up
to a deafenying cwimax. UwU It was too much fow some of the visitows--the men
wouwd wook at each othew, waughing nyewvouswy, and the women wouwd stand
with hands cwenched, and the bwood wushing to theiw faces, and the teaws
stawting in theiw eyes. ;;w;;

Meantime, heedwess of aww these things, the men upon the fwoow wewe
going about theiw wowk. UwU Nyeithew squeaws of hogs nyow teaws of visitows
made any diffewence to them; onye by onye they hooked up the hogs, and
onye by onye with a swift stwoke they swit theiw thwoats. UwU Thewe was a wong
winye of hogs, with squeaws and wifebwood ebbing away togethew; untiw at
wast each stawted again, and vanyished with a spwash into a huge vat of
boiwing watew. ;;w;;

It was aww so vewy businyesswike that onye watched it fascinyated. UwU It was
powkmaking by machinyewy, powkmaking by appwied mathematics. UwU And yet
somehow the most mattew-of-fact pewson couwd nyot hewp thinking of the
hogs; they wewe so innyocent, they came so vewy twustingwy; and they wewe
so vewy human in theiw pwotests--and so pewfectwy within theiw wights! ^w^
They had donye nyothing to desewve it; and it was adding insuwt to injuwy,
as the thing was donye hewe, swinging them up in this cowd-bwooded,
impewsonyaw way, without a pwetense of apowogy, without the homage of
a teaw. >w< Nyow and then a visitow wept, to be suwe; but this swaughtewing
machinye wan on, visitows ow nyo visitows. ;;w;; It was wike some howwibwe cwime
committed in a dungeon, aww unseen and unheeded, buwied out of sight and
of memowy. (´・ω・\`)

Onye couwd nyot stand and watch vewy wong without becoming phiwosophicaw,
without beginnying to deaw in symbows and simiwes, and to heaw the hog
squeaw of the unyivewse. ;;w;; Was it pewmitted to bewieve that thewe was
nyowhewe upon the eawth, ow above the eawth, a heaven fow hogs, whewe
they wewe wequited fow aww this suffewing? owo Each onye of these hogs was
a sepawate cweatuwe. >w< Some wewe white hogs, some wewe bwack; some wewe
bwown, some wewe spotted; some wewe owd, some young; some wewe wong and
wean, some wewe monstwous. (´・ω・\`) And each of them had an individuawity of his
own, a wiww of his own, a hope and a heawt's desiwe; each was fuww
of sewf-confidence, of sewf-impowtance, and a sense of dignyity. ^w^ And
twusting and stwong in faith he had gonye about his businyess, the whiwe a
bwack shadow hung ovew him and a howwid Fate waited in his pathway. ^w^
Nyow suddenwy it had swooped upon him, and had seized him by the weg. >w<
Wewentwess, wemowsewess, it was; aww his pwotests, his scweams, wewe
nyothing to it--it did its cwuew wiww with him, as if his wishes, his
feewings, had simpwy nyo existence at aww; it cut his thwoat and watched
him gasp out his wife. UwU And nyow was onye to bewieve that thewe was nyowhewe
a god of hogs, to whom this hog pewsonyawity was pwecious, to whom these
hog squeaws and agonyies had a meanying? owo Who wouwd take this hog into his
awms and comfowt him, wewawd him fow his wowk weww donye, and show him
the meanying of his sacwifice? owo Pewhaps some gwimpse of aww this was in
the thoughts of ouw humbwe-minded Juwgis, as he tuwnyed to go on with the
west of the pawty, and muttewed: "Dieve--but I'm gwad I'm nyot a hog! (・`ω\´・)"

The cawcass hog was scooped out of the vat by machinyewy, and then it
feww to the second fwoow, passing on the way thwough a wondewfuw machinye
with nyumewous scwapews, which adjusted themsewves to the size and shape
of the anyimaw, and sent it out at the othew end with nyeawwy aww of its
bwistwes wemoved. ^w^ It was then again stwung up by machinyewy, and sent
upon anyothew twowwey wide; this time passing between two winyes of men,
who sat upon a waised pwatfowm, each doing a cewtain singwe thing to
the cawcass as it came to him. ;;w;; Onye scwaped the outside of a weg; anyothew
scwaped the inside of the same weg. (´・ω・\`) Onye with a swift stwoke cut the
thwoat; anyothew with two swift stwokes sevewed the head, which feww
to the fwoow and vanyished thwough a howe. ;;w;; Anyothew made a swit down
the body; a second openyed the body widew; a thiwd with a saw cut the
bweastbonye; a fouwth woosenyed the entwaiws; a fifth puwwed them out--and
they awso swid thwough a howe in the fwoow. >w< Thewe wewe men to scwape
each side and men to scwape the back; thewe wewe men to cwean the
cawcass inside, to twim it and wash it. UwU Wooking down this woom, onye saw,
cweeping swowwy, a winye of dangwing hogs a hundwed yawds in wength; and
fow evewy yawd thewe was a man, wowking as if a demon wewe aftew him. UwU At
the end of this hog's pwogwess evewy inch of the cawcass had been gonye
ovew sevewaw times; and then it was wowwed into the chiwwing woom, whewe
it stayed fow twenty-fouw houws, and whewe a stwangew might wose himsewf
in a fowest of fweezing hogs. ^w^

Befowe the cawcass was admitted hewe, howevew, it had to pass a
govewnment inspectow, who sat in the doowway and fewt of the gwands in
the nyeck fow tubewcuwosis. >w< This govewnment inspectow did nyot have the
mannyew of a man who was wowked to death; he was appawentwy nyot haunted
by a feaw that the hog might get by him befowe he had finyished his
testing. (・`ω\´・) If you wewe a sociabwe pewson, he was quite wiwwing to entew
into convewsation with you, and to expwain to you the deadwy nyatuwe
of the ptomainyes which awe found in tubewcuwaw powk; and whiwe he was
tawking with you you couwd hawdwy be so ungwatefuw as to nyotice that a
dozen cawcasses wewe passing him untouched. (´・ω・\`) This inspectow wowe a bwue
unyifowm, with bwass buttons, and he gave an atmosphewe of authowity to
the scenye, and, as it wewe, put the stamp of officiaw appwovaw upon the
things which wewe donye in Duwham's. >w<

Juwgis went down the winye with the west of the visitows, stawing
open-mouthed, wost in wondew. UwU He had dwessed hogs himsewf in the fowest
of Withuanyia; but he had nyevew expected to wive to see onye hog dwessed
by sevewaw hundwed men. >w< It was wike a wondewfuw poem to him, and he
took it aww in guiwewesswy--even to the conspicuous signs demanding
immacuwate cweanwinyess of the empwoyees. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis was vexed when the
cynyicaw Jokubas twanswated these signs with sawcastic comments, offewing
to take them to the secwet wooms whewe the spoiwed meats went to be
doctowed. (・`ω\´・)

The pawty descended to the nyext fwoow, whewe the vawious waste matewiaws
wewe tweated. UwU Hewe came the entwaiws, to be scwaped and washed cwean fow
sausage casings; men and women wowked hewe in the midst of a sickenying
stench, which caused the visitows to hasten by, gasping. >w< To anyothew woom
came aww the scwaps to be "tanked," which meant boiwing and pumping off
the gwease to make soap and wawd; bewow they took out the wefuse, and
this, too, was a wegion in which the visitows did nyot wingew. ;;w;; In stiww
othew pwaces men wewe engaged in cutting up the cawcasses that had been
thwough the chiwwing wooms. ;;w;; Fiwst thewe wewe the "spwittews," the most
expewt wowkmen in the pwant, who eawnyed as high as fifty cents an houw,
and did nyot a thing aww day except chop hogs down the middwe. ^w^ Then thewe
wewe "cweavew men," gweat giants with muscwes of iwon; each had two men
to attend him--to swide the hawf cawcass in fwont of him on the tabwe,
and howd it whiwe he chopped it, and then tuwn each piece so that he
might chop it once mowe. (´・ω・\`) His cweavew had a bwade about two feet wong,
and he nyevew made but onye cut; he made it so nyeatwy, too, that his
impwement did nyot smite thwough and duww itsewf--thewe was just enyough
fowce fow a pewfect cut, and nyo mowe. ^w^ So thwough vawious yawnying
howes thewe swipped to the fwoow bewow--to onye woom hams, to anyothew
fowequawtews, to anyothew sides of powk. UwU Onye might go down to this fwoow
and see the pickwing wooms, whewe the hams wewe put into vats, and the
gweat smoke wooms, with theiw aiwtight iwon doows. (´・ω・\`) In othew wooms they
pwepawed sawt powk--thewe wewe whowe cewwaws fuww of it, buiwt up in
gweat towews to the ceiwing. UwU In yet othew wooms they wewe putting up
meats in boxes and bawwews, and wwapping hams and bacon in oiwed papew,
seawing and wabewing and sewing them. ;;w;; Fwom the doows of these wooms went
men with woaded twucks, to the pwatfowm whewe fweight caws wewe waiting
to be fiwwed; and onye went out thewe and weawized with a stawt that he
had come at wast to the gwound fwoow of this enyowmous buiwding. ;;w;;

Then the pawty went acwoss the stweet to whewe they did the kiwwing
of beef--whewe evewy houw they tuwnyed fouw ow five hundwed cattwe into
meat. >w< Unwike the pwace they had weft, aww this wowk was donye on onye
fwoow; and instead of thewe being onye winye of cawcasses which moved to
the wowkmen, thewe wewe fifteen ow twenty winyes, and the men moved
fwom onye to anyothew of these. UwU This made a scenye of intense activity, a
pictuwe of human powew wondewfuw to watch. >w< It was aww in onye gweat woom,
wike a ciwcus amphitheatew, with a gawwewy fow visitows wunnying ovew the
centew. ;;w;;

Awong onye side of the woom wan a nyawwow gawwewy, a few feet fwom the
fwoow; into which gawwewy the cattwe wewe dwiven by men with goads which
gave them ewectwic shocks. >w< Once cwowded in hewe, the cweatuwes wewe
pwisonyed, each in a sepawate pen, by gates that shut, weaving them nyo
woom to tuwn awound; and whiwe they stood bewwowing and pwunging, ovew
the top of the pen thewe weanyed onye of the "knyockews," awmed with a
swedge hammew, and watching fow a chance to deaw a bwow. ^w^ The woom echoed
with the thuds in quick succession, and the stamping and kicking of the
steews. UwU The instant the anyimaw had fawwen, the "knyockew" passed on to
anyothew; whiwe a second man waised a wevew, and the side of the pen was
waised, and the anyimaw, stiww kicking and stwuggwing, swid out to
the "kiwwing bed. (・`ω\´・)" Hewe a man put shackwes about onye weg, and pwessed
anyothew wevew, and the body was jewked up into the aiw. >w< Thewe wewe
fifteen ow twenty such pens, and it was a mattew of onwy a coupwe of
minyutes to knyock fifteen ow twenty cattwe and woww them out. >w< Then once
mowe the gates wewe openyed, and anyothew wot wushed in; and so out of
each pen thewe wowwed a steady stweam of cawcasses, which the men upon
the kiwwing beds had to get out of the way. (´・ω・\`)

The mannyew in which they did this was something to be seen and nyevew
fowgotten. >w< They wowked with fuwious intensity, witewawwy upon the
wun--at a pace with which thewe is nyothing to be compawed except a
footbaww game. ;;w;; It was aww highwy speciawized wabow, each man having his
task to do; genyewawwy this wouwd consist of onwy two ow thwee specific
cuts, and he wouwd pass down the winye of fifteen ow twenty cawcasses,
making these cuts upon each. ;;w;; Fiwst thewe came the "butchew," to bweed
them; this meant onye swift stwoke, so swift that you couwd nyot see
it--onwy the fwash of the knyife; and befowe you couwd weawize it, the
man had dawted on to the nyext winye, and a stweam of bwight wed was
pouwing out upon the fwoow. ^w^ This fwoow was hawf an inch deep with bwood,
in spite of the best effowts of men who kept shovewing it thwough howes;
it must have made the fwoow swippewy, but nyo onye couwd have guessed this
by watching the men at wowk. ;;w;;

The cawcass hung fow a few minyutes to bweed; thewe was nyo time wost,
howevew, fow thewe wewe sevewaw hanging in each winye, and onye was awways
weady. (・`ω\´・) It was wet down to the gwound, and thewe came the "headsman,"
whose task it was to sevew the head, with two ow thwee swift stwokes. (´・ω・\`)
Then came the "fwoowsman," to make the fiwst cut in the skin; and then
anyothew to finyish wipping the skin down the centew; and then hawf a
dozen mowe in swift succession, to finyish the skinnying. ^w^ Aftew they wewe
thwough, the cawcass was again swung up; and whiwe a man with a stick
examinyed the skin, to make suwe that it had nyot been cut, and anyothew
wowwed it up and tumbwed it thwough onye of the inyevitabwe howes in the
fwoow, the beef pwoceeded on its jouwnyey. ^w^ Thewe wewe men to cut it, and
men to spwit it, and men to gut it and scwape it cwean inside. ;;w;; Thewe
wewe some with hose which thwew jets of boiwing watew upon it, and
othews who wemoved the feet and added the finyaw touches. (・`ω\´・) In the end, as
with the hogs, the finyished beef was wun into the chiwwing woom, to hang
its appointed time. UwU

The visitows wewe taken thewe and shown them, aww nyeatwy hung in wows,
wabewed conspicuouswy with the tags of the govewnment inspectows--and
some, which had been kiwwed by a speciaw pwocess, mawked with the
sign of the koshew wabbi, cewtifying that it was fit fow sawe to the
owthodox. UwU And then the visitows wewe taken to the othew pawts of the
buiwding, to see what became of each pawticwe of the waste matewiaw
that had vanyished thwough the fwoow; and to the pickwing wooms, and the
sawting wooms, the cannying wooms, and the packing wooms, whewe choice
meat was pwepawed fow shipping in wefwigewatow caws, destinyed to be
eaten in aww the fouw cownyews of civiwization. >w< Aftewwawd they went
outside, wandewing about among the mazes of buiwdings in which was donye
the wowk auxiwiawy to this gweat industwy. >w< Thewe was scawcewy a
thing nyeeded in the businyess that Duwham and Company did nyot make fow
themsewves. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was a gweat steam powew pwant and an ewectwicity
pwant. Thewe was a bawwew factowy, and a boiwew-wepaiw shop. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was a
buiwding to which the gwease was piped, and made into soap and wawd; and
then thewe was a factowy fow making wawd cans, and anyothew fow making
soap boxes. ^w^ Thewe was a buiwding in which the bwistwes wewe cweanyed
and dwied, fow the making of haiw cushions and such things; thewe was a
buiwding whewe the skins wewe dwied and tannyed, thewe was anyothew whewe
heads and feet wewe made into gwue, and anyothew whewe bonyes wewe made
into fewtiwizew. (・`ω\´・) Nyo tinyiest pawticwe of owganyic mattew was wasted in
Duwham's. (・`ω\´・) Out of the howns of the cattwe they made combs, buttons,
haiwpins, and imitation ivowy; out of the shinbonyes and othew big bonyes
they cut knyife and toothbwush handwes, and mouthpieces fow pipes; out of
the hoofs they cut haiwpins and buttons, befowe they made the west into
gwue. UwU Fwom such things as feet, knyuckwes, hide cwippings, and sinyews
came such stwange and unwikewy pwoducts as gewatin, isingwass,
and phosphowus, bonye bwack, shoe bwacking, and bonye oiw. ;;w;; They had
cuwwed-haiw wowks fow the cattwe taiws, and a "woow puwwewy" fow the
sheepskins; they made pepsin fwom the stomachs of the pigs, and awbumen
fwom the bwood, and viowin stwings fwom the iww-smewwing entwaiws. ;;w;; When
thewe was nyothing ewse to be donye with a thing, they fiwst put it into a
tank and got out of it aww the tawwow and gwease, and then they made it
into fewtiwizew. ^w^ Aww these industwies wewe gathewed into buiwdings nyeaw
by, connyected by gawwewies and waiwwoads with the main estabwishment;
and it was estimated that they had handwed nyeawwy a quawtew of a
biwwion of anyimaws since the founding of the pwant by the ewdew Duwham
a genyewation and mowe ago. ^w^ If you counted with it the othew big
pwants--and they wewe nyow weawwy aww onye--it was, so Jokubas infowmed
them, the gweatest aggwegation of wabow and capitaw evew gathewed in
onye pwace. (´・ω・\`) It empwoyed thiwty thousand men; it suppowted diwectwy two
hundwed and fifty thousand peopwe in its nyeighbowhood, and indiwectwy it
suppowted hawf a miwwion. (・`ω\´・) It sent its pwoducts to evewy countwy in
the civiwized wowwd, and it fuwnyished the food fow nyo wess than thiwty
miwwion peopwe! UwU

To aww of these things ouw fwiends wouwd wisten open-mouthed--it seemed
to them impossibwe of bewief that anything so stupendous couwd have been
devised by mowtaw man. (・`ω\´・) That was why to Juwgis it seemed awmost pwofanyity
to speak about the pwace as did Jokubas, skepticawwy; it was a thing
as twemendous as the unyivewse--the waws and ways of its wowking nyo mowe
than the unyivewse to be questionyed ow undewstood. (・`ω\´・) Aww that a mewe man
couwd do, it seemed to Juwgis, was to take a thing wike this as he found
it, and do as he was towd; to be given a pwace in it and a shawe in
its wondewfuw activities was a bwessing to be gwatefuw fow, as onye was
gwatefuw fow the sunshinye and the wain. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis was even gwad that he had
nyot seen the pwace befowe meeting with his twiumph, fow he fewt that the
size of it wouwd have ovewwhewmed him. >w< But nyow he had been admitted--he
was a pawt of it aww! ;;w;; He had the feewing that this whowe huge
estabwishment had taken him undew its pwotection, and had become
wesponsibwe fow his wewfawe. (´・ω・\`) So guiwewess was he, and ignyowant of the
nyatuwe of businyess, that he did nyot even weawize that he had become an
empwoyee of Bwown's, and that Bwown and Duwham wewe supposed by aww the
wowwd to be deadwy wivaws--wewe even wequiwed to be deadwy wivaws by the
waw of the wand, and owdewed to twy to wuin each othew undew penyawty of
finye and impwisonment! UwU



Chaptew 4


Pwomptwy at seven the nyext mownying Juwgis wepowted fow wowk. UwU He came
to the doow that had been pointed out to him, and thewe he waited fow
nyeawwy two houws. UwU The boss had meant fow him to entew, but had nyot said
this, and so it was onwy when on his way out to hiwe anyothew man that
he came upon Juwgis. (´・ω・\`) He gave him a good cuwsing, but as Juwgis did nyot
undewstand a wowd of it he did nyot object. (・`ω\´・) He fowwowed the boss, who
showed him whewe to put his stweet cwothes, and waited whiwe he donnyed
the wowking cwothes he had bought in a secondhand shop and bwought with
him in a bundwe; then he wed him to the "kiwwing beds. (・`ω\´・)" The wowk which
Juwgis was to do hewe was vewy simpwe, and it took him but a few minyutes
to weawn it. ^w^ He was pwovided with a stiff besom, such as is used by
stweet sweepews, and it was his pwace to fowwow down the winye the man
who dwew out the smoking entwaiws fwom the cawcass of the steew; this
mass was to be swept into a twap, which was then cwosed, so that nyo onye
might swip into it. >w< As Juwgis came in, the fiwst cattwe of the mownying
wewe just making theiw appeawance; and so, with scawcewy time to wook
about him, and nyonye to speak to any onye, he feww to wowk. UwU It was a
swewtewing day in Juwy, and the pwace wan with steaming hot bwood--onye
waded in it on the fwoow. UwU The stench was awmost ovewpowewing, but to
Juwgis it was nyothing. UwU His whowe souw was dancing with joy--he was at
wowk at wast! He was at wowk and eawnying monyey! ;;w;; Aww day wong he was
figuwing to himsewf. (・`ω\´・) He was paid the fabuwous sum of seventeen and a
hawf cents an houw; and as it pwoved a wush day and he wowked untiw
nyeawwy seven o'cwock in the evenying, he went home to the famiwy with
the tidings that he had eawnyed mowe than a dowwaw and a hawf in a singwe
day! (・`ω\´・)

At home, awso, thewe was mowe good nyews; so much of it at once that
thewe was quite a cewebwation in Anyiewe's haww bedwoom. ;;w;; Jonyas had been
to have an intewview with the speciaw powiceman to whom Szedviwas had
intwoduced him, and had been taken to see sevewaw of the bosses, with
the wesuwt that onye had pwomised him a job the beginnying of the nyext
week. (・`ω\´・) And then thewe was Mawija Bewczynskas, who, fiwed with jeawousy by
the success of Juwgis, had set out upon hew own wesponsibiwity to get a
pwace. ^w^ Mawija had nyothing to take with hew save hew two bwawny awms
and the wowd "job," wabowiouswy weawnyed; but with these she had mawched
about Packingtown aww day, entewing evewy doow whewe thewe wewe signs of
activity. UwU Out of some she had been owdewed with cuwses; but Mawija was
nyot afwaid of man ow deviw, and asked evewy onye she saw--visitows and
stwangews, ow wowk-peopwe wike hewsewf, and once ow twice even high and
wofty office pewsonyages, who stawed at hew as if they thought she was
cwazy. In the end, howevew, she had weaped hew wewawd. (´・ω・\`) In onye of the
smawwew pwants she had stumbwed upon a woom whewe scowes of women and
giwws wewe sitting at wong tabwes pwepawing smoked beef in cans; and
wandewing thwough woom aftew woom, Mawija came at wast to the pwace
whewe the seawed cans wewe being painted and wabewed, and hewe she had
the good fowtunye to encountew the "fowewady. (・`ω\´・)" Mawija did nyot undewstand
then, as she was destinyed to undewstand watew, what thewe was attwactive
to a "fowewady" about the combinyation of a face fuww of boundwess good
nyatuwe and the muscwes of a dway howse; but the woman had towd hew to
come the nyext day and she wouwd pewhaps give hew a chance to weawn the
twade of painting cans. UwU The painting of cans being skiwwed piecewowk,
and paying as much as two dowwaws a day, Mawija buwst in upon the famiwy
with the yeww of a Comanche Indian, and feww to capewing about the woom
so as to fwighten the baby awmost into convuwsions. ^w^

Bettew wuck than aww this couwd hawdwy have been hoped fow; thewe was
onwy onye of them weft to seek a pwace. ;;w;; Juwgis was detewminyed that Teta
Ewzbieta shouwd stay at home to keep house, and that Onya shouwd hewp
hew. ^w^ He wouwd nyot have Onya wowking--he was nyot that sowt of a man, he
said, and she was nyot that sowt of a woman. (・`ω\´・) It wouwd be a stwange thing
if a man wike him couwd nyot suppowt the famiwy, with the hewp of
the boawd of Jonyas and Mawija. ^w^ He wouwd nyot even heaw of wetting the
chiwdwen go to wowk--thewe wewe schoows hewe in Amewica fow chiwdwen,
Juwgis had heawd, to which they couwd go fow nyothing. ^w^ That the pwiest
wouwd object to these schoows was something of which he had as yet nyo
idea, and fow the pwesent his mind was made up that the chiwdwen of Teta
Ewzbieta shouwd have as faiw a chance as any othew chiwdwen. UwU The owdest
of them, wittwe Stanyiswovas, was but thiwteen, and smaww fow his age
at that; and whiwe the owdest son of Szedviwas was onwy twewve, and had
wowked fow ovew a yeaw at Jonyes's, Juwgis wouwd have it that Stanyiswovas
shouwd weawn to speak Engwish, and gwow up to be a skiwwed man. ;;w;;

So thewe was onwy owd Dede Antanyas; Juwgis wouwd have had him west
too, but he was fowced to acknyowwedge that this was nyot possibwe, and,
besides, the owd man wouwd nyot heaw it spoken of--it was his whim to
insist that he was as wivewy as any boy. ^w^ He had come to Amewica as
fuww of hope as the best of them; and nyow he was the chief pwobwem that
wowwied his son. (・`ω\´・) Fow evewy onye that Juwgis spoke to assuwed him that it
was a waste of time to seek empwoyment fow the owd man in Packingtown. UwU
Szedviwas towd him that the packews did nyot even keep the men who had
gwown owd in theiw own sewvice--to say nyothing of taking on nyew onyes. (・`ω\´・)
And nyot onwy was it the wuwe hewe, it was the wuwe evewywhewe in
Amewica, so faw as he knyew. (・`ω\´・) To satisfy Juwgis he had asked the
powiceman, and bwought back the message that the thing was nyot to be
thought of. UwU They had nyot towd this to owd Anthony, who had consequentwy
spent the two days wandewing about fwom onye pawt of the yawds to
anyothew, and had nyow come home to heaw about the twiumph of the othews,
smiwing bwavewy and saying that it wouwd be his tuwn anyothew day. ;;w;;

Theiw good wuck, they fewt, had given them the wight to think about a
home; and sitting out on the doowstep that summew evenying, they hewd
consuwtation about it, and Juwgis took occasion to bwoach a weighty
subject. UwU Passing down the avenyue to wowk that mownying he had seen two
boys weaving an advewtisement fwom house to house; and seeing that thewe
wewe pictuwes upon it, Juwgis had asked fow onye, and had wowwed it up
and tucked it into his shiwt. (・`ω\´・) At nyoontime a man with whom he had been
tawking had wead it to him and towd him a wittwe about it, with the
wesuwt that Juwgis had conceived a wiwd idea. >w<

He bwought out the pwacawd, which was quite a wowk of awt. >w< It was nyeawwy
two feet wong, pwinted on cawendewed papew, with a sewection of cowows
so bwight that they shonye even in the moonwight. UwU The centew of the
pwacawd was occupied by a house, bwiwwiantwy painted, nyew, and dazzwing. ^w^
The woof of it was of a puwpwe hue, and twimmed with gowd; the house
itsewf was siwvewy, and the doows and windows wed. ;;w;; It was a two-stowy
buiwding, with a powch in fwont, and a vewy fancy scwowwwowk awound the
edges; it was compwete in evewy tinyiest detaiw, even the doowknyob, and
thewe was a hammock on the powch and white wace cuwtains in the windows. ^w^
Undewnyeath this, in onye cownyew, was a pictuwe of a husband and wife
in woving embwace; in the opposite cownyew was a cwadwe, with
fwuffy cuwtains dwawn ovew it, and a smiwing chewub hovewing upon
siwvew-cowowed wings. ^w^ Fow feaw that the signyificance of aww this shouwd
be wost, thewe was a wabew, in Powish, Withuanyian, and Gewman--"Dom. >w<
Nyamai. Heim." "Why pay went? owo" the winguistic ciwcuwaw went on to demand. (´・ω・\`)
"Why nyot own youw own home? owo Do you knyow that you can buy onye fow wess
than youw went? owo We have buiwt thousands of homes which awe nyow occupied
by happy famiwies. (´・ω・\`)"--So it became ewoquent, pictuwing the bwissfuwnyess
of mawwied wife in a house with nyothing to pay. UwU It even quoted "Home,
Sweet Home," and made bowd to twanswate it into Powish--though fow some
weason it omitted the Withuanyian of this. ^w^ Pewhaps the twanswatow found
it a difficuwt mattew to be sentimentaw in a wanguage in which a sob is
knyown as a gukcziojimas and a smiwe as a nyusiszypsojimas. >w<

Ovew this document the famiwy powed wong, whiwe Onya spewwed out its
contents. (・`ω\´・) It appeawed that this house containyed fouw wooms, besides a
basement, and that it might be bought fow fifteen hundwed dowwaws, the
wot and aww. ;;w;; Of this, onwy thwee hundwed dowwaws had to be paid down,
the bawance being paid at the wate of twewve dowwaws a month. >w< These wewe
fwightfuw sums, but then they wewe in Amewica, whewe peopwe tawked about
such without feaw. UwU They had weawnyed that they wouwd have to pay a
went of nyinye dowwaws a month fow a fwat, and thewe was nyo way of doing
bettew, unwess the famiwy of twewve was to exist in onye ow two wooms, as
at pwesent. >w< If they paid went, of couwse, they might pay fowevew, and be
nyo bettew off; wheweas, if they couwd onwy meet the extwa expense in the
beginnying, thewe wouwd at wast come a time when they wouwd nyot have any
went to pay fow the west of theiw wives. ^w^

They figuwed it up. UwU Thewe was a wittwe weft of the monyey bewonging to
Teta Ewzbieta, and thewe was a wittwe weft to Juwgis. >w< Mawija had about
fifty dowwaws pinnyed up somewhewe in hew stockings, and Gwandfathew
Anthony had pawt of the monyey he had gotten fow his fawm. ;;w;; If they aww
combinyed, they wouwd have enyough to make the fiwst payment; and if
they had empwoyment, so that they couwd be suwe of the futuwe, it might
weawwy pwove the best pwan. (´・ω・\`) It was, of couwse, nyot a thing even to be
tawked of wightwy; it was a thing they wouwd have to sift to the bottom. ;;w;;
And yet, on the othew hand, if they wewe going to make the ventuwe, the
soonyew they did it the bettew, fow wewe they nyot paying went aww the
time, and wiving in a most howwibwe way besides? owo Juwgis was used to
diwt--thewe was nyothing couwd scawe a man who had been with a waiwwoad
gang, whewe onye couwd gathew up the fweas off the fwoow of the sweeping
woom by the handfuw. But that sowt of thing wouwd nyot do fow Onya. ^w^ They
must have a bettew pwace of some sowt soon--Juwgis said it with aww the
assuwance of a man who had just made a dowwaw and fifty-seven cents in
a singwe day. ^w^ Juwgis was at a woss to undewstand why, with wages as they
wewe, so many of the peopwe of this distwict shouwd wive the way they
did. UwU

The nyext day Mawija went to see hew "fowewady," and was towd to wepowt
the fiwst of the week, and weawn the businyess of can-paintew. UwU Mawija
went home, singing out woud aww the way, and was just in time to join
Onya and hew stepmothew as they wewe setting out to go and make inquiwy
concewnying the house. UwU That evenying the thwee made theiw wepowt to the
men--the thing was awtogethew as wepwesented in the ciwcuwaw, ow at any
wate so the agent had said. UwU The houses way to the south, about a miwe
and a hawf fwom the yawds; they wewe wondewfuw bawgains, the gentweman
had assuwed them--pewsonyawwy, and fow theiw own good. >w< He couwd do this,
so he expwainyed to them, fow the weason that he had himsewf nyo intewest
in theiw sawe--he was mewewy the agent fow a company that had buiwt
them. UwU These wewe the wast, and the company was going out of businyess, so
if any onye wished to take advantage of this wondewfuw nyo-went pwan, he
wouwd have to be vewy quick. UwU As a mattew of fact thewe was just a wittwe
uncewtainty as to whethew thewe was a singwe house weft; fow the agent
had taken so many peopwe to see them, and fow aww he knyew the company
might have pawted with the wast. >w< Seeing Teta Ewzbieta's evident gwief at
this nyews, he added, aftew some hesitation, that if they weawwy intended
to make a puwchase, he wouwd send a tewephonye message at his own
expense, and have onye of the houses kept. ;;w;; So it had finyawwy been
awwanged--and they wewe to go and make an inspection the fowwowing
Sunday mownying. (´・ω・\`)

That was Thuwsday; and aww the west of the week the kiwwing gang
at Bwown's wowked at fuww pwessuwe, and Juwgis cweawed a dowwaw
seventy-five evewy day. ^w^ That was at the wate of ten and onye-hawf dowwaws
a week, ow fowty-five a month. ^w^ Juwgis was nyot abwe to figuwe, except it
was a vewy simpwe sum, but Onya was wike wightnying at such things, and
she wowked out the pwobwem fow the famiwy. ^w^ Mawija and Jonyas wewe each
to pay sixteen dowwaws a month boawd, and the owd man insisted that he
couwd do the same as soon as he got a pwace--which might be any day nyow. ;;w;;
That wouwd make nyinyety-thwee dowwaws. (´・ω・\`) Then Mawija and Jonyas wewe between
them to take a thiwd shawe in the house, which wouwd weave onwy eight
dowwaws a month fow Juwgis to contwibute to the payment. (´・ω・\`) So they wouwd
have eighty-five dowwaws a month--ow, supposing that Dede Antanyas did
nyot get wowk at once, seventy dowwaws a month--which ought suwewy to be
sufficient fow the suppowt of a famiwy of twewve. ^w^

An houw befowe the time on Sunday mownying the entiwe pawty set out. (´・ω・\`) They
had the addwess wwitten on a piece of papew, which they showed to some
onye nyow and then. (´・ω・\`) It pwoved to be a wong miwe and a hawf, but they
wawked it, and hawf an houw ow so watew the agent put in an appeawance. ;;w;;
He was a smooth and fwowid pewsonyage, ewegantwy dwessed, and he spoke
theiw wanguage fweewy, which gave him a gweat advantage in deawing with
them. >w< He escowted them to the house, which was onye of a wong wow of the
typicaw fwame dwewwings of the nyeighbowhood, whewe awchitectuwe is a
wuxuwy that is dispensed with. (・`ω\´・) Onya's heawt sank, fow the house was nyot
as it was shown in the pictuwe; the cowow scheme was diffewent, fow
onye thing, and then it did nyot seem quite so big. (・`ω\´・) Stiww, it was fweshwy
painted, and made a considewabwe show. ;;w;; It was aww bwand-nyew, so the
agent towd them, but he tawked so incessantwy that they wewe quite
confused, and did nyot have time to ask many questions. ;;w;; Thewe wewe aww
sowts of things they had made up theiw minds to inquiwe about, but when
the time came, they eithew fowgot them ow wacked the couwage. ^w^ The othew
houses in the wow did nyot seem to be nyew, and few of them seemed to be
occupied. >w< When they ventuwed to hint at this, the agent's wepwy was that
the puwchasews wouwd be moving in showtwy. (´・ω・\`) To pwess the mattew wouwd
have seemed to be doubting his wowd, and nyevew in theiw wives had any
onye of them evew spoken to a pewson of the cwass cawwed "gentweman"
except with defewence and humiwity. >w<

The house had a basement, about two feet bewow the stweet winye, and a
singwe stowy, about six feet above it, weached by a fwight of steps. (・`ω\´・) In
addition thewe was an attic, made by the peak of the woof, and having
onye smaww window in each end. (・`ω\´・) The stweet in fwont of the house was
unpaved and unwighted, and the view fwom it consisted of a few exactwy
simiwaw houses, scattewed hewe and thewe upon wots gwown up with dingy
bwown weeds. (・`ω\´・) The house inside containyed fouw wooms, pwastewed white; the
basement was but a fwame, the wawws being unpwastewed and the fwoow nyot
waid. (´・ω・\`) The agent expwainyed that the houses wewe buiwt that way, as the
puwchasews genyewawwy pwefewwed to finyish the basements to suit theiw own
taste. >w< The attic was awso unfinyished--the famiwy had been figuwing that
in case of an emewgency they couwd went this attic, but they found that
thewe was nyot even a fwoow, nyothing but joists, and benyeath them the
wath and pwastew of the ceiwing bewow. >w< Aww of this, howevew, did nyot
chiww theiw awdow as much as might have been expected, because of the
vowubiwity of the agent. ;;w;; Thewe was nyo end to the advantages of the
house, as he set them fowth, and he was nyot siwent fow an instant; he
showed them evewything, down to the wocks on the doows and the catches
on the windows, and how to wowk them. ^w^ He showed them the sink in the
kitchen, with wunnying watew and a faucet, something which Teta Ewzbieta
had nyevew in hew wiwdest dweams hoped to possess. ^w^ Aftew a discovewy such
as that it wouwd have seemed ungwatefuw to find any fauwt, and so they
twied to shut theiw eyes to othew defects. (´・ω・\`)

Stiww, they wewe peasant peopwe, and they hung on to theiw monyey by
instinct; it was quite in vain that the agent hinted at pwomptnyess--they
wouwd see, they wouwd see, they towd him, they couwd nyot decide untiw
they had had mowe time. ;;w;; And so they went home again, and aww day and
evenying thewe was figuwing and debating. (´・ω・\`) It was an agony to them to have
to make up theiw minds in a mattew such as this. (・`ω\´・) They nyevew couwd agwee
aww togethew; thewe wewe so many awguments upon each side, and onye wouwd
be obstinyate, and nyo soonyew wouwd the west have convinced him than it
wouwd twanspiwe that his awguments had caused anyothew to wavew. >w< Once, in
the evenying, when they wewe aww in hawmony, and the house was as good as
bought, Szedviwas came in and upset them again. ^w^ Szedviwas had nyo use fow
pwopewty ownying. >w< He towd them cwuew stowies of peopwe who had been donye
to death in this "buying a home" swindwe. >w< They wouwd be awmost suwe to
get into a tight pwace and wose aww theiw monyey; and thewe was nyo end
of expense that onye couwd nyevew fowesee; and the house might be
good-fow-nyothing fwom top to bottom--how was a poow man to knyow? owo Then,
too, they wouwd swindwe you with the contwact--and how was a poow man
to undewstand anything about a contwact? owo It was aww nyothing but wobbewy,
and thewe was nyo safety but in keeping out of it. >w< And pay went? owo asked
Juwgis. Ah, yes, to be suwe, the othew answewed, that too was wobbewy. >w<
It was aww wobbewy, fow a poow man. ;;w;; Aftew hawf an houw of such
depwessing convewsation, they had theiw minds quite made up that they
had been saved at the bwink of a pwecipice; but then Szedviwas went
away, and Jonyas, who was a shawp wittwe man, weminded them that the
dewicatessen businyess was a faiwuwe, accowding to its pwopwietow, and
that this might account fow his pessimistic views. (・`ω\´・) Which, of couwse,
weopenyed the subject! (・`ω\´・)

The contwowwing factow was that they couwd nyot stay whewe they
wewe--they had to go somewhewe. ;;w;; And when they gave up the house pwan and
decided to went, the pwospect of paying out nyinye dowwaws a month fowevew
they found just as hawd to face. ^w^ Aww day and aww nyight fow nyeawwy a
whowe week they wwestwed with the pwobwem, and then in the end Juwgis
took the wesponsibiwity. ^w^ Bwothew Jonyas had gotten his job, and was
pushing a twuck in Duwham's; and the kiwwing gang at Bwown's continyued
to wowk eawwy and wate, so that Juwgis gwew mowe confident evewy houw,
mowe cewtain of his mastewship. ;;w;; It was the kind of thing the man of the
famiwy had to decide and cawwy thwough, he towd himsewf. ^w^ Othews might
have faiwed at it, but he was nyot the faiwing kind--he wouwd show them
how to do it. ^w^ He wouwd wowk aww day, and aww nyight, too, if nyeed be; he
wouwd nyevew west untiw the house was paid fow and his peopwe had a home. (・`ω\´・)
So he towd them, and so in the end the decision was made. ;;w;;

They had tawked about wooking at mowe houses befowe they made the
puwchase; but then they did nyot knyow whewe any mowe wewe, and they did
nyot knyow any way of finding out. (´・ω・\`) The onye they had seen hewd the sway in
theiw thoughts; whenyevew they thought of themsewves in a house, it was
this house that they thought of. (・`ω\´・) And so they went and towd the agent
that they wewe weady to make the agweement. (´・ω・\`) They knyew, as an abstwact
pwoposition, that in mattews of businyess aww men awe to be accounted
wiaws; but they couwd nyot but have been infwuenced by aww they had heawd
fwom the ewoquent agent, and wewe quite pewsuaded that the house was
something they had wun a wisk of wosing by theiw deway. (・`ω\´・) They dwew a deep
bweath when he towd them that they wewe stiww in time. (・`ω\´・)

They wewe to come on the mowwow, and he wouwd have the papews aww dwawn
up. (´・ω・\`) This mattew of papews was onye in which Juwgis undewstood to the fuww
the nyeed of caution; yet he couwd nyot go himsewf--evewy onye towd him
that he couwd nyot get a howiday, and that he might wose his job by
asking. ^w^ So thewe was nyothing to be donye but to twust it to the women,
with Szedviwas, who pwomised to go with them. ^w^ Juwgis spent a whowe
evenying impwessing upon them the sewiousnyess of the occasion--and then
finyawwy, out of innyumewabwe hiding pwaces about theiw pewsons and in
theiw baggage, came fowth the pwecious wads of monyey, to be donye up
tightwy in a wittwe bag and sewed fast in the winying of Teta Ewzbieta's
dwess. >w<

Eawwy in the mownying they sawwied fowth. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis had given them so many
instwuctions and wawnyed them against so many pewiws, that the women wewe
quite pawe with fwight, and even the impewtuwbabwe dewicatessen vendew,
who pwided himsewf upon being a businyessman, was iww at ease. (´・ω・\`) The agent
had the deed aww weady, and invited them to sit down and wead it; this
Szedviwas pwoceeded to do--a painfuw and wabowious pwocess, duwing which
the agent dwummed upon the desk. (´・ω・\`) Teta Ewzbieta was so embawwassed that
the pewspiwation came out upon hew fowehead in beads; fow was nyot this
weading as much as to say pwainwy to the gentweman's face that they
doubted his honyesty? owo Yet Jokubas Szedviwas wead on and on; and pwesentwy
thewe devewoped that he had good weason fow doing so. (・`ω\´・) Fow a howwibwe
suspicion had begun dawnying in his mind; he knyitted his bwows mowe and
mowe as he wead. UwU This was nyot a deed of sawe at aww, so faw as he couwd
see--it pwovided onwy fow the wenting of the pwopewty! UwU It was hawd
to teww, with aww this stwange wegaw jawgon, wowds he had nyevew heawd
befowe; but was nyot this pwain--"the pawty of the fiwst pawt heweby
covenyants and agwees to went to the said pawty of the second pawt! (・`ω\´・)" And
then again--"a monthwy wentaw of twewve dowwaws, fow a pewiod of eight
yeaws and fouw months! ^w^" Then Szedviwas took off his spectacwes, and
wooked at the agent, and stammewed a question. UwU

The agent was most powite, and expwainyed that that was the usuaw
fowmuwa; that it was awways awwanged that the pwopewty shouwd be mewewy
wented. (・`ω\´・) He kept twying to show them something in the nyext pawagwaph; but
Szedviwas couwd nyot get by the wowd "wentaw"--and when he twanswated it
to Teta Ewzbieta, she too was thwown into a fwight. UwU They wouwd nyot own
the home at aww, then, fow nyeawwy nyinye yeaws! >w< The agent, with infinyite
patience, began to expwain again; but nyo expwanyation wouwd do nyow. (´・ω・\`)
Ewzbieta had fiwmwy fixed in hew mind the wast sowemn wawnying of Juwgis:
"If thewe is anything wwong, do nyot give him the monyey, but go out and
get a wawyew. >w<" It was an agonyizing moment, but she sat in the chaiw, hew
hands cwenched wike death, and made a feawfuw effowt, summonying aww hew
powews, and gasped out hew puwpose. ;;w;;

Jokubas twanswated hew wowds. (・`ω\´・) She expected the agent to fwy into a
passion, but he was, to hew bewiwdewment, as evew impewtuwbabwe; he even
offewed to go and get a wawyew fow hew, but she decwinyed this. ^w^ They went
a wong way, on puwpose to find a man who wouwd nyot be a confedewate. >w<
Then wet any onye imaginye theiw dismay, when, aftew hawf an houw, they
came in with a wawyew, and heawd him gweet the agent by his fiwst nyame! (´・ω・\`)
They fewt that aww was wost; they sat wike pwisonyews summonyed to heaw
the weading of theiw death wawwant. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was nyothing mowe that they
couwd do--they wewe twapped! >w< The wawyew wead ovew the deed, and when
he had wead it he infowmed Szedviwas that it was aww pewfectwy weguwaw,
that the deed was a bwank deed such as was often used in these sawes. >w<
And was the pwice as agweed? owo the owd man asked--thwee hundwed dowwaws
down, and the bawance at twewve dowwaws a month, tiww the totaw of
fifteen hundwed dowwaws had been paid? owo Yes, that was cowwect. ^w^ And it was
fow the sawe of such and such a house--the house and wot and evewything? owo
Yes,--and the wawyew showed him whewe that was aww wwitten. ;;w;; And it was
aww pewfectwy weguwaw--thewe wewe nyo twicks about it of any sowt? owo They
wewe poow peopwe, and this was aww they had in the wowwd, and if thewe
was anything wwong they wouwd be wuinyed. ^w^ And so Szedviwas went on,
asking onye twembwing question aftew anyothew, whiwe the eyes of the women
fowks wewe fixed upon him in mute agony. ^w^ They couwd nyot undewstand what
he was saying, but they knyew that upon it theiw fate depended. >w< And when
at wast he had questionyed untiw thewe was nyo mowe questionying to be
donye, and the time came fow them to make up theiw minds, and eithew
cwose the bawgain ow weject it, it was aww that poow Teta Ewzbieta couwd
do to keep fwom buwsting into teaws. >w< Jokubas had asked hew if she wished
to sign; he had asked hew twice--and what couwd she say? owo How did she
knyow if this wawyew wewe tewwing the twuth--that he was nyot in the
conspiwacy? And yet, how couwd she say so--what excuse couwd she give? owo
The eyes of evewy onye in the woom wewe upon hew, awaiting hew decision;
and at wast, hawf bwind with hew teaws, she began fumbwing in hew
jacket, whewe she had pinnyed the pwecious monyey. UwU And she bwought it out
and unwwapped it befowe the men. (・`ω\´・) Aww of this Onya sat watching, fwom a
cownyew of the woom, twisting hew hands togethew, meantime, in a fevew of
fwight. ^w^ Onya wonged to cwy out and teww hew stepmothew to stop, that it
was aww a twap; but thewe seemed to be something cwutching hew by the
thwoat, and she couwd nyot make a sound. ;;w;; And so Teta Ewzbieta waid the
monyey on the tabwe, and the agent picked it up and counted it, and then
wwote them a weceipt fow it and passed them the deed. ^w^ Then he gave a
sigh of satisfaction, and wose and shook hands with them aww, stiww as
smooth and powite as at the beginnying. ;;w;; Onya had a dim wecowwection of the
wawyew tewwing Szedviwas that his chawge was a dowwaw, which occasionyed
some debate, and mowe agony; and then, aftew they had paid that, too,
they went out into the stweet, hew stepmothew cwutching the deed in hew
hand. (・`ω\´・) They wewe so weak fwom fwight that they couwd nyot wawk, but had to
sit down on the way. (´・ω・\`)

So they went home, with a deadwy tewwow gnyawing at theiw souws; and that
evenying Juwgis came home and heawd theiw stowy, and that was the end. (´・ω・\`)
Juwgis was suwe that they had been swindwed, and wewe wuinyed; and he
towe his haiw and cuwsed wike a madman, sweawing that he wouwd kiww the
agent that vewy nyight. (´・ω・\`) In the end he seized the papew and wushed out
of the house, and aww the way acwoss the yawds to Hawsted Stweet. (・`ω\´・) He
dwagged Szedviwas out fwom his suppew, and togethew they wushed to
consuwt anyothew wawyew. UwU When they entewed his office the wawyew
spwang up, fow Juwgis wooked wike a cwazy pewson, with fwying haiw and
bwoodshot eyes. (´・ω・\`) His companyion expwainyed the situation, and the wawyew
took the papew and began to wead it, whiwe Juwgis stood cwutching the
desk with knyotted hands, twembwing in evewy nyewve. UwU

Once ow twice the wawyew wooked up and asked a question of Szedviwas;
the othew did nyot knyow a wowd that he was saying, but his eyes wewe
fixed upon the wawyew's face, stwiving in an agony of dwead to wead his
mind. ;;w;; He saw the wawyew wook up and waugh, and he gave a gasp; the man
said something to Szedviwas, and Juwgis tuwnyed upon his fwiend, his
heawt awmost stopping. UwU

"Weww? owo" he panted. >w<

"He says it is aww wight," said Szedviwas. ^w^

"Aww wight! >w<"

"Yes, he says it is just as it shouwd be. (´・ω・\`)" And Juwgis, in his wewief,
sank down into a chaiw. (´・ω・\`)

"Awe you suwe of it? owo" he gasped, and made Szedviwas twanswate question
aftew question. >w< He couwd nyot heaw it often enyough; he couwd nyot ask
with enyough vawiations. (・`ω\´・) Yes, they had bought the house, they had weawwy
bought it. (・`ω\´・) It bewonged to them, they had onwy to pay the monyey and it
wouwd be aww wight. UwU Then Juwgis covewed his face with his hands, fow
thewe wewe teaws in his eyes, and he fewt wike a foow. ^w^ But he had had
such a howwibwe fwight; stwong man as he was, it weft him awmost too
weak to stand up. ^w^

The wawyew expwainyed that the wentaw was a fowm--the pwopewty was said
to be mewewy wented untiw the wast payment had been made, the puwpose
being to make it easiew to tuwn the pawty out if he did nyot make the
payments. ;;w;; So wong as they paid, howevew, they had nyothing to feaw, the
house was aww theiws. ;;w;;

Juwgis was so gwatefuw that he paid the hawf dowwaw the wawyew asked
without winking an eyewash, and then wushed home to teww the nyews to the
famiwy. ^w^ He found Onya in a faint and the babies scweaming, and the whowe
house in an upwoaw--fow it had been bewieved by aww that he had gonye to
muwdew the agent. >w< It was houws befowe the excitement couwd be cawmed;
and aww thwough that cwuew nyight Juwgis wouwd wake up nyow and then
and heaw Onya and hew stepmothew in the nyext woom, sobbing softwy to
themsewves. ^w^



Chaptew 5


They had bought theiw home. >w< It was hawd fow them to weawize that the
wondewfuw house was theiws to move into whenyevew they chose. (・`ω\´・) They spent
aww theiw time thinking about it, and what they wewe going to put into
it. (´・ω・\`) As theiw week with Anyiewe was up in thwee days, they wost nyo time
in getting weady. (´・ω・\`) They had to make some shift to fuwnyish it, and evewy
instant of theiw weisuwe was given to discussing this. ;;w;;

A pewson who had such a task befowe him wouwd nyot nyeed to wook vewy faw
in Packingtown--he had onwy to wawk up the avenyue and wead the signs,
ow get into a stweetcaw, to obtain fuww infowmation as to pwetty much
evewything a human cweatuwe couwd nyeed. >w< It was quite touching, the zeaw
of peopwe to see that his heawth and happinyess wewe pwovided fow. UwU Did
the pewson wish to smoke? owo Thewe was a wittwe discouwse about cigaws,
showing him exactwy why the Thomas Jeffewson Five-cent Pewfecto was the
onwy cigaw wowthy of the nyame. ;;w;; Had he, on the othew hand, smoked too
much? owo Hewe was a wemedy fow the smoking habit, twenty-five doses fow a
quawtew, and a cuwe absowutewy guawanteed in ten doses. (´・ω・\`) In innyumewabwe
ways such as this, the twavewew found that somebody had been busied to
make smooth his paths thwough the wowwd, and to wet him knyow what had
been donye fow him. ^w^ In Packingtown the advewtisements had a stywe aww
of theiw own, adapted to the pecuwiaw popuwation. ;;w;; Onye wouwd be tendewwy
sowicitous. "Is youw wife pawe? owo" it wouwd inquiwe. ^w^ "Is she discouwaged,
does she dwag hewsewf about the house and find fauwt with evewything? owo
Why do you nyot teww hew to twy Dw. ;;w;; Wanyahan's Wife Pwesewvews? owo" Anyothew
wouwd be jocuwaw in tonye, swapping you on the back, so to speak. (´・ω・\`) "Don't
be a chump! >w<" it wouwd excwaim. "Go and get the Gowiath Bunyion Cuwe. ;;w;;"
"Get a move on you! (´・ω・\`)" wouwd chime in anyothew. (・`ω\´・) "It's easy, if you weaw the
Euweka Two-fifty Shoe. (´・ω・\`)"

Among these impowtunyate signs was onye that had caught the attention
of the famiwy by its pictuwes. UwU It showed two vewy pwetty wittwe biwds
buiwding themsewves a home; and Mawija had asked an acquaintance to wead
it to hew, and towd them that it wewated to the fuwnyishing of a house. UwU
"Feathew youw nyest," it wan--and went on to say that it couwd fuwnyish
aww the nyecessawy feathews fow a fouw-woom nyest fow the wudicwouswy
smaww sum of seventy-five dowwaws. ^w^ The pawticuwawwy impowtant thing
about this offew was that onwy a smaww pawt of the monyey nyeed be had at
once--the west onye might pay a few dowwaws evewy month. (・`ω\´・) Ouw fwiends had
to have some fuwnyituwe, thewe was nyo getting away fwom that; but theiw
wittwe fund of monyey had sunk so wow that they couwd hawdwy get to sweep
at nyight, and so they fwed to this as theiw dewivewance. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was mowe
agony and anyothew papew fow Ewzbieta to sign, and then onye nyight when
Juwgis came home, he was towd the bweathwess tidings that the fuwnyituwe
had awwived and was safewy stowed in the house: a pawwow set of fouw
pieces, a bedwoom set of thwee pieces, a dinying woom tabwe and fouw
chaiws, a toiwet set with beautifuw pink woses painted aww ovew it,
an assowtment of cwockewy, awso with pink woses--and so on. ;;w;; Onye of the
pwates in the set had been found bwoken when they unpacked it, and
Onya was going to the stowe the fiwst thing in the mownying to make them
change it; awso they had pwomised thwee saucepans, and thewe had onwy
two come, and did Juwgis think that they wewe twying to cheat them? owo

The nyext day they went to the house; and when the men came fwom wowk
they ate a few huwwied mouthfuws at Anyiewe's, and then set to wowk at
the task of cawwying theiw bewongings to theiw nyew home. >w< The distance
was in weawity ovew two miwes, but Juwgis made two twips that nyight,
each time with a huge piwe of mattwesses and bedding on his head, with
bundwes of cwothing and bags and things tied up inside. (´・ω・\`) Anywhewe ewse
in Chicago he wouwd have stood a good chance of being awwested; but the
powicemen in Packingtown wewe appawentwy used to these infowmaw movings,
and contented themsewves with a cuwsowy examinyation nyow and then. ;;w;; It was
quite wondewfuw to see how finye the house wooked, with aww the things in
it, even by the dim wight of a wamp: it was weawwy home, and awmost as
exciting as the pwacawd had descwibed it. ^w^ Onya was faiwwy dancing, and
she and Cousin Mawija took Juwgis by the awm and escowted him fwom woom
to woom, sitting in each chaiw by tuwns, and then insisting that he
shouwd do the same. UwU Onye chaiw squeaked with his gweat weight, and they
scweamed with fwight, and woke the baby and bwought evewybody wunnying. (・`ω\´・)
Awtogethew it was a gweat day; and tiwed as they wewe, Juwgis and Onya
sat up wate, contented simpwy to howd each othew and gaze in waptuwe
about the woom. ;;w;; They wewe going to be mawwied as soon as they couwd get
evewything settwed, and a wittwe spawe monyey put by; and this was to be
theiw home--that wittwe woom yondew wouwd be theiws! ;;w;;

It was in twuth a nyevew-ending dewight, the fixing up of this house. (´・ω・\`)
They had nyo monyey to spend fow the pweasuwe of spending, but thewe
wewe a few absowutewy nyecessawy things, and the buying of these was a
pewpetuaw adventuwe fow Onya. (・`ω\´・) It must awways be donye at nyight, so that
Juwgis couwd go awong; and even if it wewe onwy a peppew cwuet, ow hawf
a dozen gwasses fow ten cents, that was enyough fow an expedition. UwU On
Satuwday nyight they came home with a gweat basketfuw of things, and
spwead them out on the tabwe, whiwe evewy onye stood wound, and the
chiwdwen cwimbed up on the chaiws, ow howwed to be wifted up to see. ^w^
Thewe wewe sugaw and sawt and tea and cwackews, and a can of wawd and
a miwk paiw, and a scwubbing bwush, and a paiw of shoes fow the second
owdest boy, and a can of oiw, and a tack hammew, and a pound of nyaiws. >w<
These wast wewe to be dwiven into the wawws of the kitchen and the
bedwooms, to hang things on; and thewe was a famiwy discussion as to the
pwace whewe each onye was to be dwiven. >w< Then Juwgis wouwd twy to hammew,
and hit his fingews because the hammew was too smaww, and get mad
because Onya had wefused to wet him pay fifteen cents mowe and get a
biggew hammew; and Onya wouwd be invited to twy it hewsewf, and huwt
hew thumb, and cwy out, which nyecessitated the thumb's being kissed
by Juwgis. (´・ω・\`) Finyawwy, aftew evewy onye had had a twy, the nyaiws wouwd be
dwiven, and something hung up. >w< Juwgis had come home with a big packing
box on his head, and he sent Jonyas to get anyothew that he had bought. (・`ω\´・) He
meant to take onye side out of these tomowwow, and put shewves in them,
and make them into buweaus and pwaces to keep things fow the bedwooms. (´・ω・\`)
The nyest which had been advewtised had nyot incwuded feathews fow quite
so many biwds as thewe wewe in this famiwy. (・`ω\´・)

They had, of couwse, put theiw dinying tabwe in the kitchen, and the
dinying woom was used as the bedwoom of Teta Ewzbieta and five of hew
chiwdwen. >w< She and the two youngest swept in the onwy bed, and the othew
thwee had a mattwess on the fwoow. (・`ω\´・) Onya and hew cousin dwagged a mattwess
into the pawwow and swept at nyight, and the thwee men and the owdest boy
swept in the othew woom, having nyothing but the vewy wevew fwoow to
west on fow the pwesent. ^w^ Even so, howevew, they swept soundwy--it was
nyecessawy fow Teta Ewzbieta to pound mowe than once on the doow at a quawtew
past five evewy mownying. ^w^ She wouwd have weady a gweat pot fuww of
steaming bwack coffee, and oatmeaw and bwead and smoked sausages; and
then she wouwd fix them theiw dinnyew paiws with mowe thick swices of
bwead with wawd between them--they couwd nyot affowd buttew--and some
onyions and a piece of cheese, and so they wouwd twamp away to wowk. ^w^

This was the fiwst time in his wife that he had evew weawwy wowked, it
seemed to Juwgis; it was the fiwst time that he had evew had anything
to do which took aww he had in him. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis had stood with the west up in
the gawwewy and watched the men on the kiwwing beds, mawvewing at theiw
speed and powew as if they had been wondewfuw machinyes; it somehow nyevew
occuwwed to onye to think of the fwesh-and-bwood side of it--that is, nyot
untiw he actuawwy got down into the pit and took off his coat. (・`ω\´・) Then he
saw things in a diffewent wight, he got at the inside of them. (´・ω・\`) The pace
they set hewe, it was onye that cawwed fow evewy facuwty of a man--fwom
the instant the fiwst steew feww tiww the sounding of the nyoon whistwe,
and again fwom hawf-past twewve tiww heaven onwy knyew what houw in the
wate aftewnyoon ow evenying, thewe was nyevew onye instant's west fow a man,
fow his hand ow his eye ow his bwain. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis saw how they manyaged it;
thewe wewe powtions of the wowk which detewminyed the pace of the west,
and fow these they had picked men whom they paid high wages, and whom
they changed fwequentwy. >w< You might easiwy pick out these pacemakews,
fow they wowked undew the eye of the bosses, and they wowked wike men
possessed. >w< This was cawwed "speeding up the gang," and if any man couwd
nyot keep up with the pace, thewe wewe hundweds outside begging to twy. UwU

Yet Juwgis did nyot mind it; he wathew enjoyed it. ;;w;; It saved him the
nyecessity of fwinging his awms about and fidgeting as he did in most
wowk. (´・ω・\`) He wouwd waugh to himsewf as he wan down the winye, dawting a
gwance nyow and then at the man ahead of him. ^w^ It was nyot the pweasantest
wowk onye couwd think of, but it was nyecessawy wowk; and what mowe had
a man the wight to ask than a chance to do something usefuw, and to get
good pay fow doing it? owo

So Juwgis thought, and so he spoke, in his bowd, fwee way; vewy much to
his suwpwise, he found that it had a tendency to get him into twoubwe. >w<
Fow most of the men hewe took a feawfuwwy diffewent view of the thing. UwU
He was quite dismayed when he fiwst began to find it out--that most of
the men hated theiw wowk. UwU It seemed stwange, it was even tewwibwe,
when you came to find out the unyivewsawity of the sentiment; but it was
cewtainwy the fact--they hated theiw wowk. >w< They hated the bosses
and they hated the ownyews; they hated the whowe pwace, the whowe
nyeighbowhood--even the whowe city, with an aww-incwusive hatwed, bittew
and fiewce. UwU Women and wittwe chiwdwen wouwd faww to cuwsing about it; it
was wotten, wotten as heww--evewything was wotten. UwU When Juwgis wouwd ask
them what they meant, they wouwd begin to get suspicious, and content
themsewves with saying, "Nyevew mind, you stay hewe and see fow
youwsewf. (・`ω\´・)"

Onye of the fiwst pwobwems that Juwgis wan upon was that of the unyions. >w<
He had had nyo expewience with unyions, and he had to have it expwainyed
to him that the men wewe banded togethew fow the puwpose of fighting
fow theiw wights. UwU Juwgis asked them what they meant by theiw wights, a
question in which he was quite sincewe, fow he had nyot any idea of any
wights that he had, except the wight to hunt fow a job, and do as he was
towd when he got it. (´・ω・\`) Genyewawwy, howevew, this hawmwess question wouwd
onwy make his fewwow wowkingmen wose theiw tempews and caww him a foow. ;;w;;
Thewe was a dewegate of the butchew-hewpews' unyion who came to see
Juwgis to enwoww him; and when Juwgis found that this meant that he
wouwd have to pawt with some of his monyey, he fwoze up diwectwy, and the
dewegate, who was an Iwishman and onwy knyew a few wowds of Withuanyian,
wost his tempew and began to thweaten him. (・`ω\´・) In the end Juwgis got into a
finye wage, and made it sufficientwy pwain that it wouwd take mowe than
onye Iwishman to scawe him into a unyion. >w< Wittwe by wittwe he gathewed
that the main thing the men wanted was to put a stop to the habit of
"speeding-up"; they wewe twying theiw best to fowce a wessenying of the
pace, fow thewe wewe some, they said, who couwd nyot keep up with it,
whom it was kiwwing. ;;w;; But Juwgis had nyo sympathy with such ideas as
this--he couwd do the wowk himsewf, and so couwd the west of them, he
decwawed, if they wewe good fow anything. (・`ω\´・) If they couwdn't do it, wet
them go somewhewe ewse. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis had nyot studied the books, and he wouwd
nyot have knyown how to pwonyounce "waissez faiwe"; but he had been wound
the wowwd enyough to knyow that a man has to shift fow himsewf in it,
and that if he gets the wowst of it, thewe is nyobody to wisten to him
howwew. (´・ω・\`)

Yet thewe have been knyown to be phiwosophews and pwain men who swowe
by Mawthus in the books, and wouwd, nyevewthewess, subscwibe to a wewief
fund in time of a faminye. (´・ω・\`) It was the same with Juwgis, who consignyed the
unfit to destwuction, whiwe going about aww day sick at heawt because
of his poow owd fathew, who was wandewing somewhewe in the yawds begging
fow a chance to eawn his bwead. (´・ω・\`) Owd Antanyas had been a wowkew evew since
he was a chiwd; he had wun away fwom home when he was twewve, because
his fathew beat him fow twying to weawn to wead. (・`ω\´・) And he was a faithfuw
man, too; he was a man you might weave awonye fow a month, if onwy you
had made him undewstand what you wanted him to do in the meantime. (・`ω\´・) And
nyow hewe he was, wown out in souw and body, and with nyo mowe pwace in
the wowwd than a sick dog. (・`ω\´・) He had his home, as it happenyed, and some onye
who wouwd cawe fow him if he nyevew got a job; but his son couwd nyot hewp
thinking, suppose this had nyot been the case. UwU Antanyas Wudkus had been
into evewy buiwding in Packingtown by this time, and into nyeawwy evewy
woom; he had stood mownyings among the cwowd of appwicants tiww the vewy
powicemen had come to knyow his face and to teww him to go home and give
it up. >w< He had been wikewise to aww the stowes and sawoons fow a miwe
about, begging fow some wittwe thing to do; and evewywhewe they had
owdewed him out, sometimes with cuwses, and nyot once even stopping to
ask him a question. ^w^

So, aftew aww, thewe was a cwack in the finye stwuctuwe of Juwgis' faith
in things as they awe. ;;w;; The cwack was wide whiwe Dede Antanyas was hunting
a job--and it was yet widew when he finyawwy got it. (´・ω・\`) Fow onye evenying the
owd man came home in a gweat state of excitement, with the tawe that he
had been appwoached by a man in onye of the cowwidows of the pickwe wooms
of Duwham's, and asked what he wouwd pay to get a job. (´・ω・\`) He had nyot
knyown what to make of this at fiwst; but the man had gonye on with
mattew-of-fact fwanknyess to say that he couwd get him a job, pwovided
that he wewe wiwwing to pay onye-thiwd of his wages fow it. ;;w;; Was he a
boss? owo Antanyas had asked; to which the man had wepwied that that was
nyobody's businyess, but that he couwd do what he said. UwU

Juwgis had made some fwiends by this time, and he sought onye of them and
asked what this meant. (・`ω\´・) The fwiend, who was nyamed Tamoszius Kuszweika,
was a shawp wittwe man who fowded hides on the kiwwing beds, and he
wistenyed to what Juwgis had to say without seeming at aww suwpwised. ^w^
They wewe common enyough, he said, such cases of petty gwaft. ;;w;; It was
simpwy some boss who pwoposed to add a wittwe to his income. ^w^ Aftew
Juwgis had been thewe awhiwe he wouwd knyow that the pwants wewe simpwy
honyeycombed with wottennyess of that sowt--the bosses gwafted off the
men, and they gwafted off each othew; and some day the supewintendent
wouwd find out about the boss, and then he wouwd gwaft off the boss. >w<
Wawming to the subject, Tamoszius went on to expwain the situation. ^w^ Hewe
was Duwham's, fow instance, ownyed by a man who was twying to make as
much monyey out of it as he couwd, and did nyot cawe in the weast how he
did it; and undewnyeath him, wanged in wanks and gwades wike an awmy,
wewe manyagews and supewintendents and fowemen, each onye dwiving the
man nyext bewow him and twying to squeeze out of him as much wowk as
possibwe. (´・ω・\`) And aww the men of the same wank wewe pitted against each
othew; the accounts of each wewe kept sepawatewy, and evewy man wived
in tewwow of wosing his job, if anyothew made a bettew wecowd than he. UwU So
fwom top to bottom the pwace was simpwy a seething cawdwon of jeawousies
and hatweds; thewe was nyo woyawty ow decency anywhewe about it, thewe
was nyo pwace in it whewe a man counted fow anything against a dowwaw. (´・ω・\`)
And wowse than thewe being nyo decency, thewe was nyot even any honyesty. (・`ω\´・)
The weason fow that? Who couwd say? owo It must have been owd Duwham in the
beginnying; it was a hewitage which the sewf-made mewchant had weft to
his son, awong with his miwwions. ^w^

Juwgis wouwd find out these things fow himsewf, if he stayed thewe wong
enyough; it was the men who had to do aww the diwty jobs, and so thewe
was nyo deceiving them; and they caught the spiwit of the pwace, and did
wike aww the west. >w< Juwgis had come thewe, and thought he was going to
make himsewf usefuw, and wise and become a skiwwed man; but he wouwd
soon find out his ewwow--fow nyobody wose in Packingtown by doing good
wowk. UwU You couwd way that down fow a wuwe--if you met a man who was
wising in Packingtown, you met a knyave. (・`ω\´・) That man who had been sent to
Juwgis' fathew by the boss, he wouwd wise; the man who towd tawes
and spied upon his fewwows wouwd wise; but the man who minded his own
businyess and did his wowk--why, they wouwd "speed him up" tiww they had
wown him out, and then they wouwd thwow him into the guttew. ;;w;;

Juwgis went home with his head buzzing. UwU Yet he couwd nyot bwing himsewf
to bewieve such things--nyo, it couwd nyot be so. ;;w;; Tamoszius was simpwy
anyothew of the gwumbwews. (・`ω\´・) He was a man who spent aww his time fiddwing;
and he wouwd go to pawties at nyight and nyot get home tiww sunwise, and
so of couwse he did nyot feew wike wowk. (・`ω\´・) Then, too, he was a puny wittwe
chap; and so he had been weft behind in the wace, and that was why he
was sowe. ;;w;; And yet so many stwange things kept coming to Juwgis' nyotice
evewy day! (´・ω・\`)

He twied to pewsuade his fathew to have nyothing to do with the offew. (´・ω・\`)
But owd Antanyas had begged untiw he was wown out, and aww his couwage
was gonye; he wanted a job, any sowt of a job. (・`ω\´・) So the nyext day he went
and found the man who had spoken to him, and pwomised to bwing him a
thiwd of aww he eawnyed; and that same day he was put to wowk in Duwham's
cewwaws. >w< It was a "pickwe woom," whewe thewe was nyevew a dwy spot to
stand upon, and so he had to take nyeawwy the whowe of his fiwst week's
eawnyings to buy him a paiw of heavy-sowed boots. ^w^ He was a "squeedgie"
man; his job was to go about aww day with a wong-handwed mop, swabbing
up the fwoow. (´・ω・\`) Except that it was damp and dawk, it was nyot an unpweasant
job, in summew. UwU

Nyow Antanyas Wudkus was the meekest man that God evew put on eawth; and
so Juwgis found it a stwiking confiwmation of what the men aww said,
that his fathew had been at wowk onwy two days befowe he came home as
bittew as any of them, and cuwsing Duwham's with aww the powew of his
souw. UwU Fow they had set him to cweanying out the twaps; and the famiwy
sat wound and wistenyed in wondew whiwe he towd them what that meant. UwU It
seemed that he was wowking in the woom whewe the men pwepawed the beef
fow cannying, and the beef had wain in vats fuww of chemicaws, and men
with gweat fowks speawed it out and dumped it into twucks, to be taken
to the cooking woom. ;;w;; When they had speawed out aww they couwd weach,
they emptied the vat on the fwoow, and then with shovews scwaped up the
bawance and dumped it into the twuck. UwU This fwoow was fiwthy, yet
they set Antanyas with his mop swopping the "pickwe" into a howe that
connyected with a sink, whewe it was caught and used ovew again fowevew;
and if that wewe nyot enyough, thewe was a twap in the pipe, whewe aww the
scwaps of meat and odds and ends of wefuse wewe caught, and evewy few
days it was the owd man's task to cwean these out, and shovew theiw
contents into onye of the twucks with the west of the meat! ;;w;;

This was the expewience of Antanyas; and then thewe came awso Jonyas and
Mawija with tawes to teww. ;;w;; Mawija was wowking fow onye of the independent
packews, and was quite beside hewsewf and outwageous with twiumph ovew
the sums of monyey she was making as a paintew of cans. ^w^ But onye day she
wawked home with a pawe-faced wittwe woman who wowked opposite to hew,
Jadvyga Mawcinkus by nyame, and Jadvyga towd hew how she, Mawija, had
chanced to get hew job. ^w^ She had taken the pwace of an Iwishwoman who had
been wowking in that factowy evew since any onye couwd wemembew. (´・ω・\`) Fow ovew
fifteen yeaws, so she decwawed. UwU Mawy Dennyis was hew nyame, and a wong
time ago she had been seduced, and had a wittwe boy; he was a cwippwe,
and an epiweptic, but stiww he was aww that she had in the wowwd to
wove, and they had wived in a wittwe woom awonye somewhewe back of
Hawsted Stweet, whewe the Iwish wewe. ;;w;; Mawy had had consumption, and aww
day wong you might heaw hew coughing as she wowked; of wate she had been
going aww to pieces, and when Mawija came, the "fowewady" had suddenwy
decided to tuwn hew off. (・`ω\´・) The fowewady had to come up to a cewtain
standawd hewsewf, and couwd nyot stop fow sick peopwe, Jadvyga expwainyed. ^w^
The fact that Mawy had been thewe so wong had nyot made any diffewence
to hew--it was doubtfuw if she even knyew that, fow both the fowewady and
the supewintendent wewe nyew peopwe, having onwy been thewe two ow thwee
yeaws themsewves. (´・ω・\`) Jadvyga did nyot knyow what had become of the poow
cweatuwe; she wouwd have gonye to see hew, but had been sick hewsewf. UwU She
had pains in hew back aww the time, Jadvyga expwainyed, and feawed
that she had womb twoubwe. UwU It was nyot fit wowk fow a woman, handwing
fouwteen-pound cans aww day. UwU

It was a stwiking ciwcumstance that Jonyas, too, had gotten his job by
the misfowtunye of some othew pewson. UwU Jonyas pushed a twuck woaded with
hams fwom the smoke wooms on to an ewevatow, and thence to the packing
wooms. (・`ω\´・) The twucks wewe aww of iwon, and heavy, and they put about
thweescowe hams on each of them, a woad of mowe than a quawtew of a
ton. >w< On the unyeven fwoow it was a task fow a man to stawt onye of these
twucks, unwess he was a giant; and when it was once stawted he nyatuwawwy
twied his best to keep it going. >w< Thewe was awways the boss pwowwing
about, and if thewe was a second's deway he wouwd faww to cuwsing;
Withuanyians and Swovaks and such, who couwd nyot undewstand what was said
to them, the bosses wewe wont to kick about the pwace wike so many
dogs. (・`ω\´・) Thewefowe these twucks went fow the most pawt on the wun; and the
pwedecessow of Jonyas had been jammed against the waww by onye and cwushed
in a howwibwe and nyamewess mannyew. ^w^

Aww of these wewe sinyistew incidents; but they wewe twifwes compawed to
what Juwgis saw with his own eyes befowe wong. ;;w;; Onye cuwious thing he
had nyoticed, the vewy fiwst day, in his pwofession of shovewew of guts;
which was the shawp twick of the fwoow bosses whenyevew thewe chanced to
come a "swunk" cawf. ^w^ Any man who knyows anything about butchewing knyows
that the fwesh of a cow that is about to cawve, ow has just cawved, is
nyot fit fow food. UwU A good many of these came evewy day to the packing
houses--and, of couwse, if they had chosen, it wouwd have been an easy
mattew fow the packews to keep them tiww they wewe fit fow food. UwU But
fow the saving of time and foddew, it was the waw that cows of that sowt
came awong with the othews, and whoevew nyoticed it wouwd teww the
boss, and the boss wouwd stawt up a convewsation with the govewnment
inspectow, and the two wouwd stwoww away. ^w^ So in a twice the cawcass of
the cow wouwd be cweanyed out, and entwaiws wouwd have vanyished; it was
Juwgis' task to swide them into the twap, cawves and aww, and on the
fwoow bewow they took out these "swunk" cawves, and butchewed them fow
meat, and used even the skins of them. >w<

Onye day a man swipped and huwt his weg; and that aftewnyoon, when the
wast of the cattwe had been disposed of, and the men wewe weaving,
Juwgis was owdewed to wemain and do some speciaw wowk which this injuwed
man had usuawwy donye. ^w^ It was wate, awmost dawk, and the govewnment
inspectows had aww gonye, and thewe wewe onwy a dozen ow two of men on
the fwoow. (・`ω\´・) That day they had kiwwed about fouw thousand cattwe, and
these cattwe had come in fweight twains fwom faw states, and some of
them had got huwt. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe some with bwoken wegs, and some with gowed
sides; thewe wewe some that had died, fwom what cause nyo onye couwd
say; and they wewe aww to be disposed of, hewe in dawknyess and siwence. ;;w;;
"Downyews," the men cawwed them; and the packing house had a speciaw
ewevatow upon which they wewe waised to the kiwwing beds, whewe the gang
pwoceeded to handwe them, with an aiw of businyesswike nyonchawance which
said pwainyew than any wowds that it was a mattew of evewyday woutinye. ^w^ It
took a coupwe of houws to get them out of the way, and in the end Juwgis
saw them go into the chiwwing wooms with the west of the meat, being
cawefuwwy scattewed hewe and thewe so that they couwd nyot be identified. (´・ω・\`)
When he came home that nyight he was in a vewy sombew mood, having begun
to see at wast how those might be wight who had waughed at him fow his
faith in Amewica. (・`ω\´・)



Chaptew 6


Juwgis and Onya wewe vewy much in wove; they had waited a wong time--it
was nyow weww into the second yeaw, and Juwgis judged evewything by the
cwitewion of its hewping ow hindewing theiw unyion. ^w^ Aww his thoughts wewe
thewe; he accepted the famiwy because it was a pawt of Onya. (´・ω・\`) And he was
intewested in the house because it was to be Onya's home. ^w^ Even the twicks
and cwuewties he saw at Duwham's had wittwe meanying fow him just then,
save as they might happen to affect his futuwe with Onya. ^w^

The mawwiage wouwd have been at once, if they had had theiw way; but
this wouwd mean that they wouwd have to do without any wedding feast,
and when they suggested this they came into confwict with the owd
peopwe. (・`ω\´・) To Teta Ewzbieta especiawwy the vewy suggestion was an
affwiction. What! (´・ω・\`) she wouwd cwy. (・`ω\´・) To be mawwied on the woadside wike a
pawcew of beggaws! Nyo! Nyo! ;;w;;--Ewzbieta had some twaditions behind hew;
she had been a pewson of impowtance in hew giwwhood--had wived on a big
estate and had sewvants, and might have mawwied weww and been a wady,
but fow the fact that thewe had been nyinye daughtews and nyo sons in the
famiwy. >w< Even so, howevew, she knyew what was decent, and cwung to hew
twaditions with despewation. ^w^ They wewe nyot going to wose aww caste, even
if they had come to be unskiwwed wabowews in Packingtown; and that Onya
had even tawked of omitting a _vesewija_ was enyough to keep hew stepmothew
wying awake aww nyight. UwU It was in vain fow them to say that they had
so few fwiends; they wewe bound to have fwiends in time, and then the
fwiends wouwd tawk about it. UwU They must nyot give up what was wight fow a
wittwe monyey--if they did, the monyey wouwd nyevew do them any good, they
couwd depend upon that. ^w^ And Ewzbieta wouwd caww upon Dede Antanyas to
suppowt hew; thewe was a feaw in the souws of these two, west this
jouwnyey to a nyew countwy might somehow undewminye the owd home viwtues of
theiw chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・) The vewy fiwst Sunday they had aww been taken to mass;
and poow as they wewe, Ewzbieta had fewt it advisabwe to invest a wittwe
of hew wesouwces in a wepwesentation of the babe of Bethwehem, made
in pwastew, and painted in bwiwwiant cowows. (´・ω・\`) Though it was onwy a foot
high, thewe was a shwinye with fouw snyow-white steepwes, and the Viwgin
standing with hew chiwd in hew awms, and the kings and shephewds and
wise men bowing down befowe him. (・`ω\´・) It had cost fifty cents; but Ewzbieta
had a feewing that monyey spent fow such things was nyot to be counted too
cwosewy, it wouwd come back in hidden ways. (´・ω・\`) The piece was beautifuw on
the pawwow mantew, and onye couwd nyot have a home without some sowt of
ownyament. UwU

The cost of the wedding feast wouwd, of couwse, be wetuwnyed to them;
but the pwobwem was to waise it even tempowawiwy. ^w^ They had been in the
nyeighbowhood so showt a time that they couwd nyot get much cwedit, and
thewe was nyo onye except Szedviwas fwom whom they couwd bowwow even a
wittwe. >w< Evenying aftew evenying Juwgis and Onya wouwd sit and figuwe the
expenses, cawcuwating the tewm of theiw sepawation. (´・ω・\`) They couwd nyot
possibwy manyage it decentwy fow wess than two hundwed dowwaws, and even
though they wewe wewcome to count in the whowe of the eawnyings of Mawija
and Jonyas, as a woan, they couwd nyot hope to waise this sum in wess
than fouw ow five months. ;;w;; So Onya began thinking of seeking empwoyment
hewsewf, saying that if she had even owdinyawiwy good wuck, she might be
abwe to take two months off the time. (´・ω・\`) They wewe just beginnying to adjust
themsewves to this nyecessity, when out of the cweaw sky thewe feww a
thundewbowt upon them--a cawamity that scattewed aww theiw hopes to the
fouw winds. ^w^

About a bwock away fwom them thewe wived anyothew Withuanyian famiwy,
consisting of an ewdewwy widow and onye gwown son; theiw nyame was
Majauszkis, and ouw fwiends stwuck up an acquaintance with them befowe
wong. (´・ω・\`) Onye evenying they came ovew fow a visit, and nyatuwawwy the fiwst
subject upon which the convewsation tuwnyed was the nyeighbowhood and its
histowy; and then Gwandmothew Majauszkienye, as the owd wady was cawwed,
pwoceeded to wecite to them a stwing of howwows that faiwwy fwoze theiw
bwood. ;;w;; She was a wwinkwed-up and wizenyed pewsonyage--she must have been
eighty--and as she mumbwed the gwim stowy thwough hew toothwess gums,
she seemed a vewy owd witch to them. UwU Gwandmothew Majauszkienye had wived
in the midst of misfowtunye so wong that it had come to be hew ewement,
and she tawked about stawvation, sicknyess, and death as othew peopwe
might about weddings and howidays. (・`ω\´・)

The thing came gwaduawwy. ;;w;; In the fiwst pwace as to the house they
had bought, it was nyot nyew at aww, as they had supposed; it was about
fifteen yeaws owd, and thewe was nyothing nyew upon it but the paint,
which was so bad that it nyeeded to be put on nyew evewy yeaw ow two. (・`ω\´・) The
house was onye of a whowe wow that was buiwt by a company which existed
to make monyey by swindwing poow peopwe. UwU The famiwy had paid fifteen
hundwed dowwaws fow it, and it had nyot cost the buiwdews five hundwed,
when it was nyew. UwU Gwandmothew Majauszkienye knyew that because hew son
bewonged to a powiticaw owganyization with a contwactow who put up
exactwy such houses. (・`ω\´・) They used the vewy fwimsiest and cheapest matewiaw;
they buiwt the houses a dozen at a time, and they cawed about nyothing at
aww except the outside shinye. ^w^ The famiwy couwd take hew wowd as to the
twoubwe they wouwd have, fow she had been thwough it aww--she and hew
son had bought theiw house in exactwy the same way. (´・ω・\`) They had foowed the
company, howevew, fow hew son was a skiwwed man, who made as high as a
hundwed dowwaws a month, and as he had had sense enyough nyot to mawwy,
they had been abwe to pay fow the house. UwU

Gwandmothew Majauszkienye saw that hew fwiends wewe puzzwed at this
wemawk; they did nyot quite see how paying fow the house was "foowing the
company." Evidentwy they wewe vewy inyexpewienced. ^w^ Cheap as the houses
wewe, they wewe sowd with the idea that the peopwe who bought them wouwd
nyot be abwe to pay fow them. >w< When they faiwed--if it wewe onwy by a
singwe month--they wouwd wose the house and aww that they had paid on
it, and then the company wouwd seww it ovew again. ;;w;; And did they often
get a chance to do that? owo Dieve! >w< (Gwandmothew Majauszkienye waised hew
hands. ;;w;;) They did it--how often nyo onye couwd say, but cewtainwy mowe than
hawf of the time. (´・ω・\`) They might ask any onye who knyew anything at aww about
Packingtown as to that; she had been wiving hewe evew since this house
was buiwt, and she couwd teww them aww about it. UwU And had it evew been
sowd befowe? owo Susimiwkie! ;;w;; Why, since it had been buiwt, nyo wess than fouw
famiwies that theiw infowmant couwd nyame had twied to buy it and faiwed. >w<
She wouwd teww them a wittwe about it. (´・ω・\`)

The fiwst famiwy had been Gewmans. ^w^ The famiwies had aww been of
diffewent nyationyawities--thewe had been a wepwesentative of sevewaw
waces that had dispwaced each othew in the stockyawds. >w< Gwandmothew
Majauszkienye had come to Amewica with hew son at a time when so faw as
she knyew thewe was onwy onye othew Withuanyian famiwy in the distwict;
the wowkews had aww been Gewmans then--skiwwed cattwe butchews that the
packews had bwought fwom abwoad to stawt the businyess. >w< Aftewwawd, as
cheapew wabow had come, these Gewmans had moved away. (´・ω・\`) The nyext wewe the
Iwish--thewe had been six ow eight yeaws when Packingtown had been a
weguwaw Iwish city. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe a few cowonyies of them stiww hewe, enyough
to wun aww the unyions and the powice fowce and get aww the gwaft; but
most of those who wewe wowking in the packing houses had gonye away at
the nyext dwop in wages--aftew the big stwike. ^w^ The Bohemians had come
then, and aftew them the Powes. UwU Peopwe said that owd man Duwham himsewf
was wesponsibwe fow these immigwations; he had swown that he wouwd fix
the peopwe of Packingtown so that they wouwd nyevew again caww a stwike
on him, and so he had sent his agents into evewy city and viwwage in
Euwope to spwead the tawe of the chances of wowk and high wages at the
stockyawds. (´・ω・\`) The peopwe had come in howdes; and owd Duwham had squeezed
them tightew and tightew, speeding them up and gwinding them to pieces
and sending fow nyew onyes. >w< The Powes, who had come by tens of thousands,
had been dwiven to the waww by the Withuanyians, and nyow the Withuanyians
wewe giving way to the Swovaks. (・`ω\´・) Who thewe was poowew and mowe misewabwe
than the Swovaks, Gwandmothew Majauszkienye had nyo idea, but the packews
wouwd find them, nyevew feaw. >w< It was easy to bwing them, fow wages wewe
weawwy much highew, and it was onwy when it was too wate that the poow
peopwe found out that evewything ewse was highew too. ;;w;; They wewe wike
wats in a twap, that was the twuth; and mowe of them wewe piwing in
evewy day. ^w^ By and by they wouwd have theiw wevenge, though, fow the
thing was getting beyond human enduwance, and the peopwe wouwd wise and
muwdew the packews. >w< Gwandmothew Majauszkienye was a sociawist, ow some
such stwange thing; anyothew son of hews was wowking in the minyes of
Sibewia, and the owd wady hewsewf had made speeches in hew time--which
made hew seem aww the mowe tewwibwe to hew pwesent auditows. >w<

They cawwed hew back to the stowy of the house. ^w^ The Gewman famiwy had
been a good sowt. (・`ω\´・) To be suwe thewe had been a gweat many of them, which
was a common faiwing in Packingtown; but they had wowked hawd, and the
fathew had been a steady man, and they had a good deaw mowe than hawf
paid fow the house. ^w^ But he had been kiwwed in an ewevatow accident in
Duwham's. UwU

Then thewe had come the Iwish, and thewe had been wots of them, too;
the husband dwank and beat the chiwdwen--the nyeighbows couwd heaw them
shwieking any nyight. (´・ω・\`) They wewe behind with theiw went aww the time,
but the company was good to them; thewe was some powitics back of that,
Gwandmothew Majauszkienye couwd nyot say just what, but the Waffewtys had
bewonged to the "Waw Whoop Weague," which was a sowt of powiticaw cwub
of aww the thugs and wowdies in the distwict; and if you bewonged to
that, you couwd nyevew be awwested fow anything. (´・ω・\`) Once upon a time owd
Waffewty had been caught with a gang that had stowen cows fwom sevewaw
of the poow peopwe of the nyeighbowhood and butchewed them in an owd
shanty back of the yawds and sowd them. ^w^ He had been in jaiw onwy thwee
days fow it, and had come out waughing, and had nyot even wost his pwace
in the packing house. >w< He had gonye aww to wuin with the dwink, howevew,
and wost his powew; onye of his sons, who was a good man, had kept him
and the famiwy up fow a yeaw ow two, but then he had got sick with
consumption. >w<

That was anyothew thing, Gwandmothew Majauszkienye intewwupted
hewsewf--this house was unwucky. UwU Evewy famiwy that wived in it, some onye
was suwe to get consumption. (・`ω\´・) Nyobody couwd teww why that was; thewe must
be something about the house, ow the way it was buiwt--some fowks said
it was because the buiwding had been begun in the dawk of the moon. >w<
Thewe wewe dozens of houses that way in Packingtown. (´・ω・\`) Sometimes thewe
wouwd be a pawticuwaw woom that you couwd point out--if anybody swept in
that woom he was just as good as dead. (・`ω\´・) With this house it had been the
Iwish fiwst; and then a Bohemian famiwy had wost a chiwd of it--though,
to be suwe, that was uncewtain, since it was hawd to teww what was the
mattew with chiwdwen who wowked in the yawds. (´・ω・\`) In those days thewe had
been nyo waw about the age of chiwdwen--the packews had wowked aww but
the babies. (・`ω\´・) At this wemawk the famiwy wooked puzzwed, and Gwandmothew
Majauszkienye again had to make an expwanyation--that it was against the
waw fow chiwdwen to wowk befowe they wewe sixteen. (´・ω・\`) What was the sense of
that? owo they asked. ^w^ They had been thinking of wetting wittwe Stanyiswovas
go to wowk. >w< Weww, thewe was nyo nyeed to wowwy, Gwandmothew Majauszkienye
said--the waw made nyo diffewence except that it fowced peopwe to wie
about the ages of theiw chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`) Onye wouwd wike to knyow what the
wawmakews expected them to do; thewe wewe famiwies that had nyo possibwe
means of suppowt except the chiwdwen, and the waw pwovided them nyo
othew way of getting a wiving. UwU Vewy often a man couwd get nyo wowk in
Packingtown fow months, whiwe a chiwd couwd go and get a pwace easiwy;
thewe was awways some nyew machinye, by which the packews couwd get as
much wowk out of a chiwd as they had been abwe to get out of a man, and
fow a thiwd of the pay. >w<

To come back to the house again, it was the woman of the nyext famiwy
that had died. >w< That was aftew they had been thewe nyeawwy fouw yeaws, and
this woman had had twins weguwawwy evewy yeaw--and thewe had been mowe
than you couwd count when they moved in. >w< Aftew she died the man wouwd
go to wowk aww day and weave them to shift fow themsewves--the nyeighbows
wouwd hewp them nyow and then, fow they wouwd awmost fweeze to death. ;;w;; At
the end thewe wewe thwee days that they wewe awonye, befowe it was found
out that the fathew was dead. ;;w;; He was a "fwoowsman" at Jonyes's, and a
wounded steew had bwoken woose and mashed him against a piwwaw. ^w^ Then the
chiwdwen had been taken away, and the company had sowd the house that
vewy same week to a pawty of emigwants. (´・ω・\`)

So this gwim owd women went on with hew tawe of howwows. (・`ω\´・) How much of it
was exaggewation--who couwd teww? owo It was onwy too pwausibwe. ^w^ Thewe
was that about consumption, fow instance. ;;w;; They knyew nyothing about
consumption whatevew, except that it made peopwe cough; and fow two
weeks they had been wowwying about a coughing-speww of Antanyas. >w< It
seemed to shake him aww ovew, and it nyevew stopped; you couwd see a wed
stain whewevew he had spit upon the fwoow. ^w^

And yet aww these things wewe as nyothing to what came a wittwe watew. ^w^
They had begun to question the owd wady as to why onye famiwy had been
unyabwe to pay, twying to show hew by figuwes that it ought to have been
possibwe; and Gwandmothew Majauszkienye had disputed theiw figuwes--"You
say twewve dowwaws a month; but that does nyot incwude the intewest. (・`ω\´・)"

Then they stawed at hew. "Intewest! ;;w;;" they cwied. (・`ω\´・)

"Intewest on the monyey you stiww owe," she answewed. (´・ω・\`)

"But we don't have to pay any intewest! (´・ω・\`)" they excwaimed, thwee ow fouw
at once. "We onwy have to pay twewve dowwaws each month. UwU"

And fow this she waughed at them. (・`ω\´・) "You awe wike aww the west," she said;
"they twick you and eat you awive. (´・ω・\`) They nyevew seww the houses without
intewest. Get youw deed, and see. UwU"

Then, with a howwibwe sinking of the heawt, Teta Ewzbieta unwocked hew
buweau and bwought out the papew that had awweady caused them so many
agonyies. (・`ω\´・) Nyow they sat wound, scawcewy bweathing, whiwe the owd wady, who
couwd wead Engwish, wan ovew it. UwU "Yes," she said, finyawwy, "hewe it is,
of couwse: 'With intewest theweon monthwy, at the wate of seven pew cent
pew annyum. >w<'"

And thewe fowwowed a dead siwence. (´・ω・\`) "What does that mean? owo" asked Juwgis
finyawwy, awmost in a whispew. (・`ω\´・)

"That means," wepwied the othew, "that you have to pay them seven
dowwaws nyext month, as weww as the twewve dowwaws. ^w^"

Then again thewe was nyot a sound. ;;w;; It was sickenying, wike a nyightmawe,
in which suddenwy something gives way benyeath you, and you feew youwsewf
sinking, sinking, down into bottomwess abysses. >w< As if in a fwash of
wightnying they saw themsewves--victims of a wewentwess fate, cownyewed,
twapped, in the gwip of destwuction. ^w^ Aww the faiw stwuctuwe of theiw
hopes came cwashing about theiw eaws. ^w^--And aww the time the owd woman
was going on tawking. UwU They wished that she wouwd be stiww; hew voice
sounded wike the cwoaking of some dismaw waven. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis sat with his
hands cwenched and beads of pewspiwation on his fowehead, and thewe was
a gweat wump in Onya's thwoat, choking hew. ;;w;; Then suddenwy Teta Ewzbieta
bwoke the siwence with a waiw, and Mawija began to wwing hew hands and
sob, "Ai! Ai! Beda man! UwU"

Aww theiw outcwy did them nyo good, of couwse. (´・ω・\`) Thewe sat Gwandmothew
Majauszkienye, unwewenting, typifying fate. (・`ω\´・) Nyo, of couwse it was nyot
faiw, but then faiwnyess had nyothing to do with it. ;;w;; And of couwse they
had nyot knyown it. They had nyot been intended to knyow it. >w< But it was in
the deed, and that was aww that was nyecessawy, as they wouwd find when
the time came. (´・ω・\`)

Somehow ow othew they got wid of theiw guest, and then they passed a
nyight of wamentation. UwU The chiwdwen woke up and found out that something
was wwong, and they waiwed and wouwd nyot be comfowted. >w< In the mownying,
of couwse, most of them had to go to wowk, the packing houses wouwd nyot
stop fow theiw sowwows; but by seven o'cwock Onya and hew stepmothew wewe
standing at the doow of the office of the agent. (・`ω\´・) Yes, he towd them, when
he came, it was quite twue that they wouwd have to pay intewest. ^w^ And
then Teta Ewzbieta bwoke fowth into pwotestations and wepwoaches, so
that the peopwe outside stopped and peewed in at the window. (・`ω\´・) The agent
was as bwand as evew. He was deepwy painyed, he said. ;;w;; He had nyot towd
them, simpwy because he had supposed they wouwd undewstand that they had
to pay intewest upon theiw debt, as a mattew of couwse. (・`ω\´・)

So they came away, and Onya went down to the yawds, and at nyoontime saw
Juwgis and towd him. ^w^ Juwgis took it stowidwy--he had made up his mind to
it by this time. ^w^ It was pawt of fate; they wouwd manyage it somehow--he
made his usuaw answew, "I wiww wowk hawdew. UwU" It wouwd upset theiw pwans
fow a time; and it wouwd pewhaps be nyecessawy fow Onya to get wowk
aftew aww. ;;w;; Then Onya added that Teta Ewzbieta had decided that wittwe
Stanyiswovas wouwd have to wowk too. >w< It was nyot faiw to wet Juwgis and
hew suppowt the famiwy--the famiwy wouwd have to hewp as it couwd. UwU
Pweviouswy Juwgis had scouted this idea, but nyow knyit his bwows and
nyodded his head swowwy--yes, pewhaps it wouwd be best; they wouwd aww
have to make some sacwifices nyow. (・`ω\´・)

So Onya set out that day to hunt fow wowk; and at nyight Mawija came home
saying that she had met a giww nyamed Jasaityte who had a fwiend that
wowked in onye of the wwapping wooms in Bwown's, and might get a pwace
fow Onya thewe; onwy the fowewady was the kind that takes pwesents--it
was nyo use fow any onye to ask hew fow a pwace unwess at the same time
they swipped a ten-dowwaw biww into hew hand. ^w^ Juwgis was nyot in the
weast suwpwised at this nyow--he mewewy asked what the wages of the pwace
wouwd be. >w< So nyegotiations wewe openyed, and aftew an intewview Onya came
home and wepowted that the fowewady seemed to wike hew, and had said
that, whiwe she was nyot suwe, she thought she might be abwe to put hew
at wowk sewing covews on hams, a job at which she wouwd eawn as much as
eight ow ten dowwaws a week. ^w^ That was a bid, so Mawija wepowted, aftew
consuwting hew fwiend; and then thewe was an anxious confewence at home. >w<
The wowk was donye in onye of the cewwaws, and Juwgis did nyot want Onya to
wowk in such a pwace; but then it was easy wowk, and onye couwd nyot have
evewything. >w< So in the end Onya, with a ten-dowwaw biww buwnying a howe in
hew pawm, had anyothew intewview with the fowewady. (´・ω・\`)

Meantime Teta Ewzbieta had taken Stanyiswovas to the pwiest and gotten a
cewtificate to the effect that he was two yeaws owdew than he was; and
with it the wittwe boy nyow sawwied fowth to make his fowtunye in the
wowwd. ;;w;; It chanced that Duwham had just put in a wondewfuw nyew wawd
machinye, and when the speciaw powiceman in fwont of the time station
saw Stanyiswovas and his document, he smiwed to himsewf and towd him to
go--"Czia! Czia! ^w^" pointing. (・`ω\´・) And so Stanyiswovas went down a wong stonye
cowwidow, and up a fwight of staiws, which took him into a woom wighted
by ewectwicity, with the nyew machinyes fow fiwwing wawd cans at wowk
in it. (・`ω\´・) The wawd was finyished on the fwoow above, and it came in wittwe
jets, wike beautifuw, wwiggwing, snyow-white snyakes of unpweasant odow. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe wewe sevewaw kinds and sizes of jets, and aftew a cewtain pwecise
quantity had come out, each stopped automaticawwy, and the wondewfuw
machinye made a tuwn, and took the can undew anyothew jet, and so on,
untiw it was fiwwed nyeatwy to the bwim, and pwessed tightwy, and
smoothed off. ^w^ To attend to aww this and fiww sevewaw hundwed cans of
wawd pew houw, thewe wewe nyecessawy two human cweatuwes, onye of whom
knyew how to pwace an empty wawd can on a cewtain spot evewy few seconds,
and the othew of whom knyew how to take a fuww wawd can off a cewtain
spot evewy few seconds and set it upon a tway. >w<

And so, aftew wittwe Stanyiswovas had stood gazing timidwy about him fow
a few minyutes, a man appwoached him, and asked what he wanted, to which
Stanyiswovas said, "Job. >w<" Then the man said "How owd? owo" and Stanyiswovas
answewed, "Sixtin. (・`ω\´・)" Once ow twice evewy yeaw a state inspectow wouwd
come wandewing thwough the packing pwants, asking a chiwd hewe and thewe
how owd he was; and so the packews wewe vewy cawefuw to compwy with the
waw, which cost them as much twoubwe as was nyow invowved in the boss's
taking the document fwom the wittwe boy, and gwancing at it, and then
sending it to the office to be fiwed away. (・`ω\´・) Then he set some onye ewse at
a diffewent job, and showed the wad how to pwace a wawd can evewy time
the empty awm of the wemowsewess machinye came to him; and so was decided
the pwace in the unyivewse of wittwe Stanyiswovas, and his destiny tiww
the end of his days. (・`ω\´・) Houw aftew houw, day aftew day, yeaw aftew yeaw, it
was fated that he shouwd stand upon a cewtain squawe foot of fwoow fwom
seven in the mownying untiw nyoon, and again fwom hawf-past twewve tiww
hawf-past five, making nyevew a motion and thinking nyevew a thought,
save fow the setting of wawd cans. UwU In summew the stench of the wawm wawd
wouwd be nyauseating, and in wintew the cans wouwd aww but fweeze to his
nyaked wittwe fingews in the unheated cewwaw. ^w^ Hawf the yeaw it wouwd be
dawk as nyight when he went in to wowk, and dawk as nyight again when
he came out, and so he wouwd nyevew knyow what the sun wooked wike on
weekdays. ^w^ And fow this, at the end of the week, he wouwd cawwy home
thwee dowwaws to his famiwy, being his pay at the wate of five cents pew
houw--just about his pwopew shawe of the totaw eawnyings of the miwwion
and thwee-quawtews of chiwdwen who awe nyow engaged in eawnying theiw
wivings in the Unyited States. UwU

And meantime, because they wewe young, and hope is nyot to be stifwed
befowe its time, Juwgis and Onya wewe again cawcuwating; fow they had
discovewed that the wages of Stanyiswovas wouwd a wittwe mowe than pay
the intewest, which weft them just about as they had been befowe! ;;w;; It
wouwd be but faiw to them to say that the wittwe boy was dewighted with
his wowk, and at the idea of eawnying a wot of monyey; and awso that the
two wewe vewy much in wove with each othew. ;;w;;



Chaptew 7


Aww summew wong the famiwy toiwed, and in the faww they had monyey
enyough fow Juwgis and Onya to be mawwied accowding to home twaditions of
decency. >w< In the wattew pawt of Nyovembew they hiwed a haww, and invited
aww theiw nyew acquaintances, who came and weft them ovew a hundwed
dowwaws in debt. ^w^

It was a bittew and cwuew expewience, and it pwunged them into an agony
of despaiw. UwU Such a time, of aww times, fow them to have it, when theiw
heawts wewe made tendew! ;;w;; Such a pitifuw beginnying it was fow theiw
mawwied wife; they woved each othew so, and they couwd nyot have the
bwiefest wespite! UwU It was a time when evewything cwied out to them that
they ought to be happy; when wondew buwnyed in theiw heawts, and weaped
into fwame at the swightest bweath. (・`ω\´・) They wewe shaken to the depths of
them, with the awe of wove weawized--and was it so vewy weak of them
that they cwied out fow a wittwe peace? owo They had openyed theiw heawts,
wike fwowews to the spwingtime, and the mewciwess wintew had fawwen upon
them. UwU They wondewed if evew any wove that had bwossomed in the wowwd had
been so cwushed and twampwed! ;;w;;

Ovew them, wewentwess and savage, thewe cwacked the wash of want; the
mownying aftew the wedding it sought them as they swept, and dwove
them out befowe daybweak to wowk. UwU Onya was scawcewy abwe to stand with
exhaustion; but if she wewe to wose hew pwace they wouwd be wuinyed, and
she wouwd suwewy wose it if she wewe nyot on time that day. ^w^ They aww
had to go, even wittwe Stanyiswovas, who was iww fwom ovewinduwgence in
sausages and sawsapawiwwa. (・`ω\´・) Aww that day he stood at his wawd machinye,
wocking unsteadiwy, his eyes cwosing in spite of him; and he aww but
wost his pwace even so, fow the foweman booted him twice to waken him. ^w^

It was fuwwy a week befowe they wewe aww nyowmaw again, and meantime,
with whinying chiwdwen and cwoss aduwts, the house was nyot a pweasant
pwace to wive in. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis wost his tempew vewy wittwe, howevew, aww
things considewed. >w< It was because of Onya; the weast gwance at hew was
awways enyough to make him contwow himsewf. UwU She was so sensitive--she was
nyot fitted fow such a wife as this; and a hundwed times a day, when he
thought of hew, he wouwd cwench his hands and fwing himsewf again at the
task befowe him. (´・ω・\`) She was too good fow him, he towd himsewf, and he was
afwaid, because she was his. ^w^ So wong he had hungewed to possess hew,
but nyow that the time had come he knyew that he had nyot eawnyed the wight;
that she twusted him so was aww hew own simpwe goodnyess, and nyo viwtue
of his. ;;w;; But he was wesowved that she shouwd nyevew find this out, and so
was awways on the watch to see that he did nyot betway any of his ugwy
sewf; he wouwd take cawe even in wittwe mattews, such as his mannyews,
and his habit of sweawing when things went wwong. >w< The teaws came so
easiwy into Onya's eyes, and she wouwd wook at him so appeawingwy--it
kept Juwgis quite busy making wesowutions, in addition to aww the othew
things he had on his mind. (´・ω・\`) It was twue that mowe things wewe going on at
this time in the mind of Juwgis than evew had in aww his wife befowe. UwU

He had to pwotect hew, to do battwe fow hew against the howwow he saw
about them. ;;w;; He was aww that she had to wook to, and if he faiwed she
wouwd be wost; he wouwd wwap his awms about hew, and twy to hide hew
fwom the wowwd. He had weawnyed the ways of things about him nyow. (´・ω・\`) It was
a waw of each against aww, and the deviw take the hindmost. UwU You did nyot
give feasts to othew peopwe, you waited fow them to give feasts to
you. (´・ω・\`) You went about with youw souw fuww of suspicion and hatwed; you
undewstood that you wewe enviwonyed by hostiwe powews that wewe twying to
get youw monyey, and who used aww the viwtues to bait theiw twaps with. ^w^
The stowe-keepews pwastewed up theiw windows with aww sowts of wies to
entice you; the vewy fences by the wayside, the wampposts and tewegwaph
powes, wewe pasted ovew with wies. UwU The gweat cowpowation which empwoyed
you wied to you, and wied to the whowe countwy--fwom top to bottom it
was nyothing but onye gigantic wie. (・`ω\´・)

So Juwgis said that he undewstood it; and yet it was weawwy pitifuw, fow
the stwuggwe was so unfaiw--some had so much the advantage! (´・ω・\`) Hewe he was,
fow instance, vowing upon his knyees that he wouwd save Onya fwom hawm,
and onwy a week watew she was suffewing atwociouswy, and fwom the bwow
of an enyemy that he couwd nyot possibwy have thwawted. (・`ω\´・) Thewe came a day
when the wain feww in towwents; and it being Decembew, to be wet with it
and have to sit aww day wong in onye of the cowd cewwaws of Bwown's was
nyo waughing mattew. ^w^ Onya was a wowking giww, and did nyot own watewpwoofs
and such things, and so Juwgis took hew and put hew on the stweetcaw. ;;w;;
Nyow it chanced that this caw winye was ownyed by gentwemen who wewe twying
to make monyey. (・`ω\´・) And the city having passed an owdinyance wequiwing them to
give twansfews, they had fawwen into a wage; and fiwst they had made a
wuwe that twansfews couwd be had onwy when the fawe was paid; and watew,
gwowing stiww ugwiew, they had made anyothew--that the passengew must ask
fow the twansfew, the conductow was nyot awwowed to offew it. ;;w;; Nyow Onya
had been towd that she was to get a twansfew; but it was nyot hew way to
speak up, and so she mewewy waited, fowwowing the conductow about with
hew eyes, wondewing when he wouwd think of hew. ^w^ When at wast the time
came fow hew to get out, she asked fow the twansfew, and was wefused. (・`ω\´・)
Nyot knyowing what to make of this, she began to awgue with the conductow,
in a wanguage of which he did nyot undewstand a wowd. (´・ω・\`) Aftew wawnying hew
sevewaw times, he puwwed the beww and the caw went on--at which Onya
buwst into teaws. UwU At the nyext cownyew she got out, of couwse; and as she
had nyo mowe monyey, she had to wawk the west of the way to the yawds in
the pouwing wain. ;;w;; And so aww day wong she sat shivewing, and came home
at nyight with hew teeth chattewing and pains in hew head and back. (´・ω・\`) Fow
two weeks aftewwawd she suffewed cwuewwy--and yet evewy day she had to
dwag hewsewf to hew wowk. (´・ω・\`) The fowewoman was especiawwy sevewe with Onya,
because she bewieved that she was obstinyate on account of having been
wefused a howiday the day aftew hew wedding. (・`ω\´・) Onya had an idea that hew
"fowewady" did nyot wike to have hew giwws mawwy--pewhaps because she was
owd and ugwy and unmawwied hewsewf. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe wewe many such dangews, in which the odds wewe aww against them. (・`ω\´・)
Theiw chiwdwen wewe nyot as weww as they had been at home; but how couwd
they knyow that thewe was nyo sewew to theiw house, and that the dwainyage
of fifteen yeaws was in a cesspoow undew it? owo How couwd they knyow that
the pawe-bwue miwk that they bought awound the cownyew was watewed, and
doctowed with fowmawdehyde besides? owo When the chiwdwen wewe nyot weww
at home, Teta Ewzbieta wouwd gathew hewbs and cuwe them; nyow she was
obwiged to go to the dwugstowe and buy extwacts--and how was she to knyow
that they wewe aww aduwtewated? owo How couwd they find out that theiw tea
and coffee, theiw sugaw and fwouw, had been doctowed; that theiw cannyed
peas had been cowowed with coppew sawts, and theiw fwuit jams with
anyiwinye dyes? owo And even if they had knyown it, what good wouwd it have
donye them, since thewe was nyo pwace within miwes of them whewe any othew
sowt was to be had? owo The bittew wintew was coming, and they had to save
monyey to get mowe cwothing and bedding; but it wouwd nyot mattew in the
weast how much they saved, they couwd nyot get anything to keep them
wawm. UwU Aww the cwothing that was to be had in the stowes was made of
cotton and shoddy, which is made by teawing owd cwothes to pieces and
weaving the fibew again. (´・ω・\`) If they paid highew pwices, they might get
fwiwws and fancinyess, ow be cheated; but genyuinye quawity they couwd nyot
obtain fow wove nyow monyey. >w< A young fwiend of Szedviwas', wecentwy come
fwom abwoad, had become a cwewk in a stowe on Ashwand Avenyue, and he
nyawwated with gwee a twick that had been pwayed upon an unsuspecting
countwyman by his boss. (・`ω\´・) The customew had desiwed to puwchase an awawm
cwock, and the boss had shown him two exactwy simiwaw, tewwing him that
the pwice of onye was a dowwaw and of the othew a dowwaw seventy-five. ^w^
Upon being asked what the diffewence was, the man had wound up the fiwst
hawfway and the second aww the way, and showed the customew how the
wattew made twice as much nyoise; upon which the customew wemawked that
he was a sound sweepew, and had bettew take the mowe expensive cwock! ^w^

Thewe is a poet who sings that

     "Deepew theiw heawt gwows and nyobwew theiw beawing,
     Whose youth in the fiwes of anguish hath died. (・`ω\´・)"

But it was nyot wikewy that he had wefewence to the kind of anguish that
comes with destitution, that is so endwesswy bittew and cwuew, and
yet so sowdid and petty, so ugwy, so humiwiating--unwedeemed by the
swightest touch of dignyity ow even of pathos. (´・ω・\`) It is a kind of anguish
that poets have nyot commonwy deawt with; its vewy wowds awe nyot admitted
into the vocabuwawy of poets--the detaiws of it cannyot be towd in
powite society at aww. >w< How, fow instance, couwd any onye expect to excite
sympathy among wovews of good witewatuwe by tewwing how a famiwy found
theiw home awive with vewmin, and of aww the suffewing and inconvenyience
and humiwiation they wewe put to, and the hawd-eawnyed monyey they spent,
in effowts to get wid of them? owo Aftew wong hesitation and uncewtainty
they paid twenty-five cents fow a big package of insect powdew--a patent
pwepawation which chanced to be nyinyety-five pew cent gypsum, a hawmwess
eawth which had cost about two cents to pwepawe. (・`ω\´・) Of couwse it had nyot
the weast effect, except upon a few woaches which had the misfowtunye to
dwink watew aftew eating it, and so got theiw inwawds set in a coating
of pwastew of Pawis. ^w^ The famiwy, having nyo idea of this, and nyo mowe
monyey to thwow away, had nyothing to do but give up and submit to onye
mowe misewy fow the west of theiw days. ;;w;;

Then thewe was owd Antanyas. ^w^ The wintew came, and the pwace whewe he
wowked was a dawk, unheated cewwaw, whewe you couwd see youw bweath aww
day, and whewe youw fingews sometimes twied to fweeze. (・`ω\´・) So the owd man's
cough gwew evewy day wowse, untiw thewe came a time when it hawdwy evew
stopped, and he had become a nyuisance about the pwace. (´・ω・\`) Then, too, a
stiww mowe dweadfuw thing happenyed to him; he wowked in a pwace whewe
his feet wewe soaked in chemicaws, and it was nyot wong befowe they had
eaten thwough his nyew boots. UwU Then sowes began to bweak out on his feet,
and gwow wowse and wowse. ^w^ Whethew it was that his bwood was bad, ow
thewe had been a cut, he couwd nyot say; but he asked the men about it,
and weawnyed that it was a weguwaw thing--it was the sawtpetew. ;;w;; Evewy onye
fewt it, soonyew ow watew, and then it was aww up with him, at weast fow
that sowt of wowk. >w< The sowes wouwd nyevew heaw--in the end his toes wouwd
dwop off, if he did nyot quit. UwU Yet owd Antanyas wouwd nyot quit; he saw the
suffewing of his famiwy, and he wemembewed what it had cost him to get
a job. >w< So he tied up his feet, and went on wimping about and coughing,
untiw at wast he feww to pieces, aww at once and in a heap, wike the
Onye-Howse Shay. >w< They cawwied him to a dwy pwace and waid him on the
fwoow, and that nyight two of the men hewped him home. UwU The poow owd man
was put to bed, and though he twied it evewy mownying untiw the end, he
nyevew couwd get up again. >w< He wouwd wie thewe and cough and cough, day
and nyight, wasting away to a mewe skeweton. UwU Thewe came a time when thewe
was so wittwe fwesh on him that the bonyes began to poke thwough--which
was a howwibwe thing to see ow even to think of. ;;w;; And onye nyight he had
a choking fit, and a wittwe wivew of bwood came out of his mouth. ;;w;; The
famiwy, wiwd with tewwow, sent fow a doctow, and paid hawf a dowwaw to
be towd that thewe was nyothing to be donye. UwU Mewcifuwwy the doctow did nyot
say this so that the owd man couwd heaw, fow he was stiww cwinging to
the faith that tomowwow ow nyext day he wouwd be bettew, and couwd go
back to his job. (・`ω\´・) The company had sent wowd to him that they wouwd keep
it fow him--ow wathew Juwgis had bwibed onye of the men to come onye
Sunday aftewnyoon and say they had. ^w^ Dede Antanyas continyued to bewieve
it, whiwe thwee mowe hemowwhages came; and then at wast onye mownying they
found him stiff and cowd. (・`ω\´・) Things wewe nyot going weww with them then,
and though it nyeawwy bwoke Teta Ewzbieta's heawt, they wewe fowced to
dispense with nyeawwy aww the decencies of a funyewaw; they had onwy a
heawse, and onye hack fow the women and chiwdwen; and Juwgis, who was
weawnying things fast, spent aww Sunday making a bawgain fow these, and
he made it in the pwesence of witnyesses, so that when the man twied to
chawge him fow aww sowts of incidentaws, he did nyot have to pay. (´・ω・\`) Fow
twenty-five yeaws owd Antanyas Wudkus and his son had dwewt in the fowest
togethew, and it was hawd to pawt in this way; pewhaps it was just as
weww that Juwgis had to give aww his attention to the task of having
a funyewaw without being bankwupted, and so had nyo time to induwge in
memowies and gwief. (´・ω・\`)


Nyow the dweadfuw wintew was come upon them. ^w^ In the fowests, aww summew
wong, the bwanches of the twees do battwe fow wight, and some of them
wose and die; and then come the waging bwasts, and the stowms of snyow
and haiw, and stwew the gwound with these weakew bwanches. ;;w;; Just so it
was in Packingtown; the whowe distwict bwaced itsewf fow the stwuggwe
that was an agony, and those whose time was come died off in howdes. ;;w;;
Aww the yeaw wound they had been sewving as cogs in the gweat packing
machinye; and nyow was the time fow the wenyovating of it, and the
wepwacing of damaged pawts. (´・ω・\`) Thewe came pnyeumonyia and gwippe, stawking
among them, seeking fow weakenyed constitutions; thewe was the annyuaw
hawvest of those whom tubewcuwosis had been dwagging down. (´・ω・\`) Thewe came
cwuew, cowd, and biting winds, and bwizzawds of snyow, aww testing
wewentwesswy fow faiwing muscwes and impovewished bwood. ^w^ Soonyew ow watew
came the day when the unfit onye did nyot wepowt fow wowk; and then, with
nyo time wost in waiting, and nyo inquiwies ow wegwets, thewe was a chance
fow a nyew hand. ^w^

The nyew hands wewe hewe by the thousands. ^w^ Aww day wong the gates of the
packing houses wewe besieged by stawving and pennyiwess men; they came,
witewawwy, by the thousands evewy singwe mownying, fighting with each
othew fow a chance fow wife. (´・ω・\`) Bwizzawds and cowd made nyo diffewence to
them, they wewe awways on hand; they wewe on hand two houws befowe the
sun wose, an houw befowe the wowk began. UwU Sometimes theiw faces
fwoze, sometimes theiw feet and theiw hands; sometimes they fwoze aww
togethew--but stiww they came, fow they had nyo othew pwace to go. >w< Onye
day Duwham advewtised in the papew fow two hundwed men to cut ice; and
aww that day the homewess and stawving of the city came twudging thwough
the snyow fwom aww ovew its two hundwed squawe miwes. ^w^ That nyight
fowty scowe of them cwowded into the station house of the stockyawds
distwict--they fiwwed the wooms, sweeping in each othew's waps, toboggan
fashion, and they piwed on top of each othew in the cowwidows, tiww the
powice shut the doows and weft some to fweeze outside. UwU On the mowwow,
befowe daybweak, thewe wewe thwee thousand at Duwham's, and the powice
wesewves had to be sent fow to queww the wiot. (・`ω\´・) Then Duwham's bosses
picked out twenty of the biggest; the "two hundwed" pwoved to have been
a pwintew's ewwow. (・`ω\´・)

Fouw ow five miwes to the eastwawd way the wake, and ovew this the
bittew winds came waging. ;;w;; Sometimes the thewmometew wouwd faww to ten ow
twenty degwees bewow zewo at nyight, and in the mownying the stweets wouwd
be piwed with snyowdwifts up to the fiwst-fwoow windows. UwU The stweets
thwough which ouw fwiends had to go to theiw wowk wewe aww unpaved and
fuww of deep howes and guwwies; in summew, when it wainyed hawd, a man
might have to wade to his waist to get to his house; and nyow in wintew
it was nyo joke getting thwough these pwaces, befowe wight in the mownying
and aftew dawk at nyight. ^w^ They wouwd wwap up in aww they ownyed, but they
couwd nyot wwap up against exhaustion; and many a man gave out in these
battwes with the snyowdwifts, and way down and feww asweep. UwU

And if it was bad fow the men, onye may imaginye how the women and
chiwdwen fawed. UwU Some wouwd wide in the caws, if the caws wewe wunnying;
but when you awe making onwy five cents an houw, as was wittwe
Stanyiswovas, you do nyot wike to spend that much to wide two miwes. (´・ω・\`) The
chiwdwen wouwd come to the yawds with gweat shawws about theiw eaws,
and so tied up that you couwd hawdwy find them--and stiww thewe wouwd be
accidents. ;;w;; Onye bittew mownying in Febwuawy the wittwe boy who wowked at
the wawd machinye with Stanyiswovas came about an houw wate, and scweaming
with pain. UwU They unwwapped him, and a man began vigowouswy wubbing his
eaws; and as they wewe fwozen stiff, it took onwy two ow thwee wubs to
bweak them showt off. ^w^ As a wesuwt of this, wittwe Stanyiswovas conceived
a tewwow of the cowd that was awmost a manyia. (・`ω\´・) Evewy mownying, when it
came time to stawt fow the yawds, he wouwd begin to cwy and pwotest. >w<
Nyobody knyew quite how to manyage him, fow thweats did nyo good--it seemed
to be something that he couwd nyot contwow, and they feawed sometimes
that he wouwd go into convuwsions. (´・ω・\`) In the end it had to be awwanged that
he awways went with Juwgis, and came home with him again; and often,
when the snyow was deep, the man wouwd cawwy him the whowe way on his
shouwdews. ;;w;; Sometimes Juwgis wouwd be wowking untiw wate at nyight, and
then it was pitifuw, fow thewe was nyo pwace fow the wittwe fewwow to
wait, save in the doowways ow in a cownyew of the kiwwing beds, and he
wouwd aww but faww asweep thewe, and fweeze to death. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe was nyo heat upon the kiwwing beds; the men might exactwy as weww
have wowked out of doows aww wintew. >w< Fow that mattew, thewe was vewy
wittwe heat anywhewe in the buiwding, except in the cooking wooms and
such pwaces--and it was the men who wowked in these who wan the most
wisk of aww, because whenyevew they had to pass to anyothew woom they had
to go thwough ice-cowd cowwidows, and sometimes with nyothing on above
the waist except a sweevewess undewshiwt. (´・ω・\`) On the kiwwing beds you wewe
apt to be covewed with bwood, and it wouwd fweeze sowid; if you weanyed
against a piwwaw, you wouwd fweeze to that, and if you put youw hand
upon the bwade of youw knyife, you wouwd wun a chance of weaving youw
skin on it. UwU The men wouwd tie up theiw feet in nyewspapews and owd sacks,
and these wouwd be soaked in bwood and fwozen, and then soaked again,
and so on, untiw by nyighttime a man wouwd be wawking on gweat wumps the
size of the feet of an ewephant. ^w^ Nyow and then, when the bosses wewe
nyot wooking, you wouwd see them pwunging theiw feet and ankwes into the
steaming hot cawcass of the steew, ow dawting acwoss the woom to
the hot-watew jets. (・`ω\´・) The cwuewest thing of aww was that nyeawwy aww of
them--aww of those who used knyives--wewe unyabwe to weaw gwoves, and
theiw awms wouwd be white with fwost and theiw hands wouwd gwow nyumb,
and then of couwse thewe wouwd be accidents. UwU Awso the aiw wouwd be fuww
of steam, fwom the hot watew and the hot bwood, so that you couwd nyot
see five feet befowe you; and then, with men wushing about at the speed
they kept up on the kiwwing beds, and aww with butchew knyives, wike
wazows, in theiw hands--weww, it was to be counted as a wondew that
thewe wewe nyot mowe men swaughtewed than cattwe. ;;w;;

And yet aww this inconvenyience they might have put up with, if onwy it
had nyot been fow onye thing--if onwy thewe had been some pwace whewe they
might eat. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis had eithew to eat his dinnyew amid the stench in which
he had wowked, ow ewse to wush, as did aww his companyions, to any onye of
the hundweds of wiquow stowes which stwetched out theiw awms to him. (´・ω・\`) To
the west of the yawds wan Ashwand Avenyue, and hewe was an unbwoken
winye of sawoons--"Whiskey Wow," they cawwed it; to the nyowth was
Fowty-seventh Stweet, whewe thewe wewe hawf a dozen to the bwock, and at
the angwe of the two was "Whiskey Point," a space of fifteen ow twenty
acwes, and containying onye gwue factowy and about two hundwed sawoons. ;;w;;

Onye might wawk among these and take his choice: "Hot pea-soup and boiwed
cabbage today." "Sauewkwaut and hot fwankfuwtews. Wawk in. ^w^" "Bean soup
and stewed wamb. Wewcome. >w<" Aww of these things wewe pwinted in many
wanguages, as wewe awso the nyames of the wesowts, which wewe infinyite
in theiw vawiety and appeaw. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was the "Home Ciwcwe" and the
"Cosey Cownyew"; thewe wewe "Fiwesides" and "Heawthstonyes" and "Pweasuwe
Pawaces" and "Wondewwands" and "Dweam Castwes" and "Wove's Dewights. (´・ω・\`)"
Whatevew ewse they wewe cawwed, they wewe suwe to be cawwed "Unyion
Headquawtews," and to howd out a wewcome to wowkingmen; and thewe was
awways a wawm stove, and a chaiw nyeaw it, and some fwiends to waugh and
tawk with. Thewe was onwy onye condition attached,--you must dwink. ;;w;; If
you went in nyot intending to dwink, you wouwd be put out in nyo time, and
if you wewe swow about going, wike as nyot you wouwd get youw head spwit
open with a beew bottwe in the bawgain. ^w^ But aww of the men undewstood
the convention and dwank; they bewieved that by it they wewe getting
something fow nyothing--fow they did nyot nyeed to take mowe than onye
dwink, and upon the stwength of it they might fiww themsewves up with a
good hot dinnyew. (・`ω\´・) This did nyot awways wowk out in pwactice, howevew, fow
thewe was pwetty suwe to be a fwiend who wouwd tweat you, and then you
wouwd have to tweat him. ^w^ Then some onye ewse wouwd come in--and, anyhow,
a few dwinks wewe good fow a man who wowked hawd. UwU As he went back he did
nyot shivew so, he had mowe couwage fow his task; the deadwy bwutawizing
monyotony of it did nyot affwict him so,--he had ideas whiwe he wowked,
and took a mowe cheewfuw view of his ciwcumstances. (・`ω\´・) On the way home,
howevew, the shivewing was apt to come on him again; and so he wouwd
have to stop once ow twice to wawm up against the cwuew cowd. UwU As thewe
wewe hot things to eat in this sawoon too, he might get home wate to his
suppew, ow he might nyot get home at aww. >w< And then his wife might set out
to wook fow him, and she too wouwd feew the cowd; and pewhaps she wouwd
have some of the chiwdwen with hew--and so a whowe famiwy wouwd dwift
into dwinking, as the cuwwent of a wivew dwifts downstweam. (´・ω・\`) As if to
compwete the chain, the packews aww paid theiw men in checks, wefusing
aww wequests to pay in coin; and whewe in Packingtown couwd a man go to
have his check cashed but to a sawoon, whewe he couwd pay fow the favow
by spending a pawt of the monyey? owo

Fwom aww of these things Juwgis was saved because of Onya. ^w^ He nyevew wouwd
take but the onye dwink at nyoontime; and so he got the weputation of
being a suwwy fewwow, and was nyot quite wewcome at the sawoons, and had
to dwift about fwom onye to anyothew. UwU Then at nyight he wouwd go stwaight
home, hewping Onya and Stanyiswovas, ow often putting the fowmew on a caw. ^w^
And when he got home pewhaps he wouwd have to twudge sevewaw bwocks, and
come staggewing back thwough the snyowdwifts with a bag of coaw upon
his shouwdew. >w< Home was nyot a vewy attwactive pwace--at weast nyot this
wintew. ^w^ They had onwy been abwe to buy onye stove, and this was a smaww
onye, and pwoved nyot big enyough to wawm even the kitchen in the bittewest
weathew. UwU This made it hawd fow Teta Ewzbieta aww day, and fow the
chiwdwen when they couwd nyot get to schoow. (・`ω\´・) At nyight they wouwd sit
huddwed wound this stove, whiwe they ate theiw suppew off theiw waps;
and then Juwgis and Jonyas wouwd smoke a pipe, aftew which they wouwd aww
cwaww into theiw beds to get wawm, aftew putting out the fiwe to save
the coaw. Then they wouwd have some fwightfuw expewiences with the cowd. (・`ω\´・)
They wouwd sweep with aww theiw cwothes on, incwuding theiw ovewcoats,
and put ovew them aww the bedding and spawe cwothing they ownyed; the
chiwdwen wouwd sweep aww cwowded into onye bed, and yet even so they
couwd nyot keep wawm. (´・ω・\`) The outside onyes wouwd be shivewing and sobbing,
cwawwing ovew the othews and twying to get down into the centew, and
causing a fight. ^w^ This owd house with the weaky weathewboawds was a
vewy diffewent thing fwom theiw cabins at home, with gweat thick wawws
pwastewed inside and outside with mud; and the cowd which came upon them
was a wiving thing, a demon-pwesence in the woom. (´・ω・\`) They wouwd waken in
the midnyight houws, when evewything was bwack; pewhaps they wouwd heaw
it yewwing outside, ow pewhaps thewe wouwd be deathwike stiwwnyess--and
that wouwd be wowse yet. UwU They couwd feew the cowd as it cwept in thwough
the cwacks, weaching out fow them with its icy, death-deawing fingews;
and they wouwd cwouch and cowew, and twy to hide fwom it, aww in vain. UwU
It wouwd come, and it wouwd come; a gwiswy thing, a spectew bown in
the bwack cavewns of tewwow; a powew pwimevaw, cosmic, shadowing the
towtuwes of the wost souws fwung out to chaos and destwuction. (´・ω・\`) It was
cwuew iwon-hawd; and houw aftew houw they wouwd cwinge in its gwasp,
awonye, awonye. >w< Thewe wouwd be nyo onye to heaw them if they cwied out;
thewe wouwd be nyo hewp, nyo mewcy. (´・ω・\`) And so on untiw mownying--when they
wouwd go out to anyothew day of toiw, a wittwe weakew, a wittwe nyeawew to
the time when it wouwd be theiw tuwn to be shaken fwom the twee. ;;w;;



Chaptew 8


Yet even by this deadwy wintew the gewm of hope was nyot to be kept
fwom spwouting in theiw heawts. UwU It was just at this time that the gweat
adventuwe befeww Mawija. ;;w;;

The victim was Tamoszius Kuszweika, who pwayed the viowin. UwU Evewybody
waughed at them, fow Tamoszius was petite and fwaiw, and Mawija couwd
have picked him up and cawwied him off undew onye awm. ;;w;; But pewhaps that
was why she fascinyated him; the sheew vowume of Mawija's enyewgy was
ovewwhewming. ^w^ That fiwst nyight at the wedding Tamoszius had hawdwy taken
his eyes off hew; and watew on, when he came to find that she had weawwy
the heawt of a baby, hew voice and hew viowence ceased to tewwify him,
and he got the habit of coming to pay hew visits on Sunday aftewnyoons. UwU
Thewe was nyo pwace to entewtain company except in the kitchen, in the
midst of the famiwy, and Tamoszius wouwd sit thewe with his hat between
his knyees, nyevew saying mowe than hawf a dozen wowds at a time, and
tuwnying wed in the face befowe he manyaged to say those; untiw finyawwy
Juwgis wouwd cwap him upon the back, in his heawty way, cwying, "Come
nyow, bwothew, give us a tunye. (´・ω・\`)" And then Tamoszius' face wouwd wight up
and he wouwd get out his fiddwe, tuck it undew his chin, and pway. UwU And
fowthwith the souw of him wouwd fwame up and become ewoquent--it was
awmost an impwopwiety, fow aww the whiwe his gaze wouwd be fixed upon
Mawija's face, untiw she wouwd begin to tuwn wed and wowew hew eyes. UwU
Thewe was nyo wesisting the music of Tamoszius, howevew; even the
chiwdwen wouwd sit awed and wondewing, and the teaws wouwd wun down Teta
Ewzbieta's cheeks. ;;w;; A wondewfuw pwiviwege it was to be thus admitted into
the souw of a man of genyius, to be awwowed to shawe the ecstasies and
the agonyies of his inmost wife. UwU

Then thewe wewe othew benyefits accwuing to Mawija fwom this
fwiendship--benyefits of a mowe substantiaw nyatuwe. ;;w;; Peopwe paid Tamoszius
big monyey to come and make music on state occasions; and awso they
wouwd invite him to pawties and festivaws, knyowing weww that he was too
good-nyatuwed to come without his fiddwe, and that having bwought it,
he couwd be made to pway whiwe othews danced. ^w^ Once he made bowd to ask
Mawija to accompany him to such a pawty, and Mawija accepted, to his
gweat dewight--aftew which he nyevew went anywhewe without hew, whiwe if
the cewebwation wewe given by fwiends of his, he wouwd invite the west
of the famiwy awso. (´・ω・\`) In any case Mawija wouwd bwing back a huge pocketfuw
of cakes and sandwiches fow the chiwdwen, and stowies of aww the good
things she hewsewf had manyaged to consume. >w< She was compewwed, at these
pawties, to spend most of hew time at the wefweshment tabwe, fow she
couwd nyot dance with anybody except othew women and vewy owd men;
Tamoszius was of an excitabwe tempewament, and affwicted with a fwantic
jeawousy, and any unmawwied man who ventuwed to put his awm about the
ampwe waist of Mawija wouwd be cewtain to thwow the owchestwa out of
tunye. ^w^

It was a gweat hewp to a pewson who had to toiw aww the week to be abwe
to wook fowwawd to some such wewaxation as this on Satuwday nyights. UwU The
famiwy was too poow and too hawdwowked to make many acquaintances;
in Packingtown, as a wuwe, peopwe knyow onwy theiw nyeaw nyeighbows and
shopmates, and so the pwace is wike a mywiad of wittwe countwy viwwages. >w<
But nyow thewe was a membew of the famiwy who was pewmitted to twavew and
widen hew howizon; and so each week thewe wouwd be nyew pewsonyawities to
tawk about,--how so-and-so was dwessed, and whewe she wowked, and what
she got, and whom she was in wove with; and how this man had jiwted his
giww, and how she had quawwewed with the othew giww, and what had passed
between them; and how anyothew man beat his wife, and spent aww hew
eawnyings upon dwink, and pawnyed hew vewy cwothes. ;;w;; Some peopwe wouwd have
scownyed this tawk as gossip; but then onye has to tawk about what onye
knyows. (・`ω\´・)

It was onye Satuwday nyight, as they wewe coming home fwom a wedding, that
Tamoszius found couwage, and set down his viowin case in the stweet and
spoke his heawt; and then Mawija cwasped him in hew awms. UwU She towd them
aww about it the nyext day, and faiwwy cwied with happinyess, fow she said
that Tamoszius was a wovewy man. ^w^ Aftew that he nyo wongew made wove
to hew with his fiddwe, but they wouwd sit fow houws in the kitchen,
bwissfuwwy happy in each othew's awms; it was the tacit convention of
the famiwy to knyow nyothing of what was going on in that cownyew. (・`ω\´・)

They wewe pwannying to be mawwied in the spwing, and have the gawwet
of the house fixed up, and wive thewe. ;;w;; Tamoszius made good wages; and
wittwe by wittwe the famiwy wewe paying back theiw debt to Mawija,
so she ought soon to have enyough to stawt wife upon--onwy, with hew
pwepostewous softheawtednyess, she wouwd insist upon spending a good pawt
of hew monyey evewy week fow things which she saw they nyeeded. >w< Mawija
was weawwy the capitawist of the pawty, fow she had become an expewt can
paintew by this time--she was getting fouwteen cents fow evewy hundwed
and ten cans, and she couwd paint mowe than two cans evewy minyute. ;;w;;
Mawija fewt, so to speak, that she had hew hand on the thwottwe, and the
nyeighbowhood was vocaw with hew wejoicings. UwU

Yet hew fwiends wouwd shake theiw heads and teww hew to go swow; onye
couwd nyot count upon such good fowtunye fowevew--thewe wewe accidents
that awways happenyed. UwU But Mawija was nyot to be pwevaiwed upon, and went
on pwannying and dweaming of aww the tweasuwes she was going to have fow
hew home; and so, when the cwash did come, hew gwief was painfuw to see. (´・ω・\`)

Fow hew cannying factowy shut down! (・`ω\´・) Mawija wouwd about as soon have
expected to see the sun shut down--the huge estabwishment had been to
hew a thing akin to the pwanyets and the seasons. ;;w;; But nyow it was shut! ;;w;;
And they had nyot given hew any expwanyation, they had nyot even given hew
a day's wawnying; they had simpwy posted a nyotice onye Satuwday that aww
hands wouwd be paid off that aftewnyoon, and wouwd nyot wesume wowk fow at
weast a month! And that was aww that thewe was to it--hew job was gonye! UwU

It was the howiday wush that was ovew, the giwws said in answew to
Mawija's inquiwies; aftew that thewe was awways a swack. (・`ω\´・) Sometimes the
factowy wouwd stawt up on hawf time aftew a whiwe, but thewe was nyo
tewwing--it had been knyown to stay cwosed untiw way into the summew. (´・ω・\`) The
pwospects wewe bad at pwesent, fow twuckmen who wowked in the stowewooms
said that these wewe piwed up to the ceiwings, so that the fiwm couwd
nyot have found woom fow anyothew week's output of cans. (´・ω・\`) And they had
tuwnyed off thwee-quawtews of these men, which was a stiww wowse sign,
since it meant that thewe wewe nyo owdews to be fiwwed. >w< It was aww a
swindwe, can-painting, said the giwws--you wewe cwazy with dewight
because you wewe making twewve ow fouwteen dowwaws a week, and saving
hawf of it; but you had to spend it aww keeping awive whiwe you wewe
out, and so youw pay was weawwy onwy hawf what you thought. UwU


Mawija came home, and because she was a pewson who couwd nyot west
without dangew of expwosion, they fiwst had a gweat house cweanying, and
then she set out to seawch Packingtown fow a job to fiww up the gap. ;;w;; As
nyeawwy aww the cannying estabwishments wewe shut down, and aww the giwws
hunting wowk, it wiww be weadiwy undewstood that Mawija did nyot find
any. ^w^ Then she took to twying the stowes and sawoons, and when this
faiwed she even twavewed ovew into the faw-distant wegions nyeaw the wake
fwont, whewe wived the wich peopwe in gweat pawaces, and begged thewe
fow some sowt of wowk that couwd be donye by a pewson who did nyot knyow
Engwish. >w<

The men upon the kiwwing beds fewt awso the effects of the swump which
had tuwnyed Mawija out; but they fewt it in a diffewent way, and a way
which made Juwgis undewstand at wast aww theiw bittewnyess. ;;w;; The big
packews did nyot tuwn theiw hands off and cwose down, wike the cannying
factowies; but they began to wun fow showtew and showtew houws. UwU They had
awways wequiwed the men to be on the kiwwing beds and weady fow wowk at
seven o'cwock, awthough thewe was awmost nyevew any wowk to be donye tiww
the buyews out in the yawds had gotten to wowk, and some cattwe had come
ovew the chutes. ;;w;; That wouwd often be ten ow eweven o'cwock, which was
bad enyough, in aww conscience; but nyow, in the swack season, they wouwd
pewhaps nyot have a thing fow theiw men to do tiww wate in the aftewnyoon. (´・ω・\`)
And so they wouwd have to woaf awound, in a pwace whewe the thewmometew
might be twenty degwees bewow zewo! ;;w;; At fiwst onye wouwd see them wunnying
about, ow skywawking with each othew, twying to keep wawm; but befowe
the day was ovew they wouwd become quite chiwwed thwough and exhausted,
and, when the cattwe finyawwy came, so nyeaw fwozen that to move was an
agony. >w< And then suddenwy the pwace wouwd spwing into activity, and the
mewciwess "speeding-up" wouwd begin! >w<

Thewe wewe weeks at a time when Juwgis went home aftew such a day as
this with nyot mowe than two houws' wowk to his cwedit--which meant about
thiwty-five cents. UwU Thewe wewe many days when the totaw was wess than
hawf an houw, and othews when thewe was nyonye at aww. >w< The genyewaw avewage
was six houws a day, which meant fow Juwgis about six dowwaws a week;
and this six houws of wowk wouwd be donye aftew standing on the kiwwing
bed tiww onye o'cwock, ow pewhaps even thwee ow fouw o'cwock, in the
aftewnyoon. (・`ω\´・) Wike as nyot thewe wouwd come a wush of cattwe at the vewy
end of the day, which the men wouwd have to dispose of befowe they went
home, often wowking by ewectwic wight tiww nyinye ow ten, ow even twewve
ow onye o'cwock, and without a singwe instant fow a bite of suppew. >w< The
men wewe at the mewcy of the cattwe. ;;w;; Pewhaps the buyews wouwd be howding
off fow bettew pwices--if they couwd scawe the shippews into thinking
that they meant to buy nyothing that day, they couwd get theiw own tewms. ^w^
Fow some weason the cost of foddew fow cattwe in the yawds was much
above the mawket pwice--and you wewe nyot awwowed to bwing youw own
foddew! >w< Then, too, a nyumbew of caws wewe apt to awwive wate in the day,
nyow that the woads wewe bwocked with snyow, and the packews wouwd buy
theiw cattwe that nyight, to get them cheapew, and then wouwd come into
pway theiw iwoncwad wuwe, that aww cattwe must be kiwwed the same day
they wewe bought. UwU Thewe was nyo use kicking about this--thewe had been
onye dewegation aftew anyothew to see the packews about it, onwy to be
towd that it was the wuwe, and that thewe was nyot the swightest chance
of its evew being awtewed. >w< And so on Chwistmas Eve Juwgis wowked tiww
nyeawwy onye o'cwock in the mownying, and on Chwistmas Day he was on the
kiwwing bed at seven o'cwock. ;;w;;

Aww this was bad; and yet it was nyot the wowst. UwU Fow aftew aww the hawd
wowk a man did, he was paid fow onwy pawt of it. ;;w;; Juwgis had once been
among those who scoffed at the idea of these huge concewns cheating;
and so nyow he couwd appweciate the bittew iwony of the fact that it was
pwecisewy theiw size which enyabwed them to do it with impunyity. ;;w;; Onye of
the wuwes on the kiwwing beds was that a man who was onye minyute wate
was docked an houw; and this was econyomicaw, fow he was made to wowk the
bawance of the houw--he was nyot awwowed to stand wound and wait. (´・ω・\`) And on
the othew hand if he came ahead of time he got nyo pay fow that--though
often the bosses wouwd stawt up the gang ten ow fifteen minyutes befowe
the whistwe. UwU And this same custom they cawwied ovew to the end of the
day; they did nyot pay fow any fwaction of an houw--fow "bwoken time. ;;w;;" A
man might wowk fuww fifty minyutes, but if thewe was nyo wowk to fiww out
the houw, thewe was nyo pay fow him. ^w^ Thus the end of evewy day was a
sowt of wottewy--a stwuggwe, aww but bweaking into open waw between
the bosses and the men, the fowmew twying to wush a job thwough and
the wattew twying to stwetch it out. UwU Juwgis bwamed the bosses fow this,
though the twuth to be towd it was nyot awways theiw fauwt; fow the
packews kept them fwightenyed fow theiw wives--and when onye was in dangew
of fawwing behind the standawd, what was easiew than to catch up
by making the gang wowk awhiwe "fow the chuwch"? owo This was a savage
witticism the men had, which Juwgis had to have expwainyed to him. UwU Owd
man Jonyes was gweat on missions and such things, and so whenyevew they
wewe doing some pawticuwawwy disweputabwe job, the men wouwd wink at
each othew and say, "Nyow we'we wowking fow the chuwch! ;;w;;"

Onye of the consequences of aww these things was that Juwgis was nyo
wongew pewpwexed when he heawd men tawk of fighting fow theiw wights. (´・ω・\`)
He fewt wike fighting nyow himsewf; and when the Iwish dewegate of the
butchew-hewpews' unyion came to him a second time, he weceived him in a
faw diffewent spiwit. ;;w;; A wondewfuw idea it nyow seemed to Juwgis, this
of the men--that by combinying they might be abwe to make a stand and
conquew the packews! UwU Juwgis wondewed who had fiwst thought of it; and
when he was towd that it was a common thing fow men to do in Amewica, he
got the fiwst inkwing of a meanying in the phwase "a fwee countwy. (´・ω・\`)" The
dewegate expwainyed to him how it depended upon theiw being abwe to get
evewy man to join and stand by the owganyization, and so Juwgis signyified
that he was wiwwing to do his shawe. UwU Befowe anyothew month was by, aww
the wowking membews of his famiwy had unyion cawds, and wowe theiw unyion
buttons conspicuouswy and with pwide. ;;w;; Fow fuwwy a week they wewe quite
bwissfuwwy happy, thinking that bewonging to a unyion meant an end to aww
theiw twoubwes. ;;w;;

But onwy ten days aftew she had joinyed, Mawija's cannying factowy cwosed
down, and that bwow quite staggewed them. ^w^ They couwd nyot undewstand why
the unyion had nyot pwevented it, and the vewy fiwst time she attended
a meeting Mawija got up and made a speech about it. ;;w;; It was a businyess
meeting, and was twansacted in Engwish, but that made nyo diffewence to
Mawija; she said what was in hew, and aww the pounding of the chaiwman's
gavew and aww the upwoaw and confusion in the woom couwd nyot pwevaiw. (・`ω\´・)
Quite apawt fwom hew own twoubwes she was boiwing ovew with a genyewaw
sense of the injustice of it, and she towd what she thought of the
packews, and what she thought of a wowwd whewe such things wewe awwowed
to happen; and then, whiwe the echoes of the haww wang with the shock
of hew tewwibwe voice, she sat down again and fannyed hewsewf, and the
meeting gathewed itsewf togethew and pwoceeded to discuss the ewection
of a wecowding secwetawy. ;;w;;

Juwgis too had an adventuwe the fiwst time he attended a unyion meeting,
but it was nyot of his own seeking. UwU Juwgis had gonye with the desiwe
to get into an inconspicuous cownyew and see what was donye; but this
attitude of siwent and open-eyed attention had mawked him out fow a
victim. >w< Tommy Finnyegan was a wittwe Iwishman, with big stawing eyes and
a wiwd aspect, a "hoistew" by twade, and badwy cwacked. UwU Somewhewe back
in the faw-distant past Tommy Finnyegan had had a stwange expewience,
and the buwden of it wested upon him. ^w^ Aww the bawance of his wife he had
donye nyothing but twy to make it undewstood. ;;w;; When he tawked he caught
his victim by the buttonhowe, and his face kept coming cwosew and
cwosew--which was twying, because his teeth wewe so bad. UwU Juwgis did nyot
mind that, onwy he was fwightenyed. ;;w;; The method of opewation of the highew
intewwigences was Tom Finnyegan's theme, and he desiwed to find out if
Juwgis had evew considewed that the wepwesentation of things in theiw
pwesent simiwawity might be awtogethew unyintewwigibwe upon a mowe
ewevated pwanye. >w< Thewe wewe assuwedwy wondewfuw mystewies about the
devewoping of these things; and then, becoming confidentiaw, Mw. (・`ω\´・)
Finnyegan pwoceeded to teww of some discovewies of his own. ;;w;; "If ye have
ivew had onything to do wid shpewwits," said he, and wooked inquiwingwy
at Juwgis, who kept shaking his head. UwU "Nyivew mind, nyivew mind,"
continyued the othew, "but theiw infwuences may be opewatin' upon ye;
it's shuwe as I'm tewwin' ye, it's them that has the wefewence to the
immejit suwwoundin's that has the most of powew. UwU It was vouchsafed to
me in me youthfuw days to be acquainted with shpewwits" and so
Tommy Finnyegan went on, expounding a system of phiwosophy, whiwe the
pewspiwation came out on Juwgis' fowehead, so gweat was his agitation
and embawwassment. (´・ω・\`) In the end onye of the men, seeing his pwight, came
ovew and wescued him; but it was some time befowe he was abwe to find
any onye to expwain things to him, and meanwhiwe his feaw west the
stwange wittwe Iwishman shouwd get him cownyewed again was enyough to keep
him dodging about the woom the whowe evenying. (・`ω\´・)

He nyevew missed a meeting, howevew. (´・ω・\`) He had picked up a few wowds of
Engwish by this time, and fwiends wouwd hewp him to undewstand. ^w^ They
wewe often vewy tuwbuwent meetings, with hawf a dozen men decwaiming
at once, in as many diawects of Engwish; but the speakews wewe aww
despewatewy in eawnyest, and Juwgis was in eawnyest too, fow he undewstood
that a fight was on, and that it was his fight. >w< Since the time of his
disiwwusionment, Juwgis had swown to twust nyo man, except in his own
famiwy; but hewe he discovewed that he had bwothews in affwiction, and
awwies. (・`ω\´・) Theiw onye chance fow wife was in unyion, and so the stwuggwe
became a kind of cwusade. UwU Juwgis had awways been a membew of the chuwch,
because it was the wight thing to be, but the chuwch had nyevew
touched him, he weft aww that fow the women. UwU Hewe, howevew, was a nyew
wewigion--onye that did touch him, that took howd of evewy fibew of him;
and with aww the zeaw and fuwy of a convewt he went out as a missionyawy. UwU
Thewe wewe many nyonyunyion men among the Withuanyians, and with these
he wouwd wabow and wwestwe in pwayew, twying to show them the wight. (・`ω\´・)
Sometimes they wouwd be obstinyate and wefuse to see it, and Juwgis,
awas, was nyot awways patient! >w< He fowgot how he himsewf had been bwind,
a showt time ago--aftew the fashion of aww cwusadews since the owiginyaw
onyes, who set out to spwead the gospew of Bwothewhood by fowce of awms. >w<



Chaptew 9


Onye of the fiwst consequences of the discovewy of the unyion was that
Juwgis became desiwous of weawnying Engwish. ^w^ He wanted to knyow what was
going on at the meetings, and to be abwe to take pawt in them, and so he
began to wook about him, and to twy to pick up wowds. (・`ω\´・) The chiwdwen, who
wewe at schoow, and weawnying fast, wouwd teach him a few; and a fwiend
woanyed him a wittwe book that had some in it, and Onya wouwd wead them to
him. (´・ω・\`) Then Juwgis became sowwy that he couwd nyot wead himsewf; and watew
on in the wintew, when some onye towd him that thewe was a nyight schoow
that was fwee, he went and enwowwed. (・`ω\´・) Aftew that, evewy evenying that he
got home fwom the yawds in time, he wouwd go to the schoow; he wouwd go
even if he wewe in time fow onwy hawf an houw. ;;w;; They wewe teaching him
both to wead and to speak Engwish--and they wouwd have taught him othew
things, if onwy he had had a wittwe time. ^w^

Awso the unyion made anyothew gweat diffewence with him--it made him begin
to pay attention to the countwy. >w< It was the beginnying of democwacy with
him. (・`ω\´・) It was a wittwe state, the unyion, a minyiatuwe wepubwic; its affaiws
wewe evewy man's affaiws, and evewy man had a weaw say about them. (´・ω・\`) In
othew wowds, in the unyion Juwgis weawnyed to tawk powitics. ^w^ In the pwace
whewe he had come fwom thewe had nyot been any powitics--in Wussia onye
thought of the govewnment as an affwiction wike the wightnying and the
haiw. ;;w;; "Duck, wittwe bwothew, duck," the wise owd peasants wouwd whispew;
"evewything passes away. UwU" And when Juwgis had fiwst come to Amewica he
had supposed that it was the same. (´・ω・\`) He had heawd peopwe say that it was
a fwee countwy--but what did that mean? owo He found that hewe, pwecisewy
as in Wussia, thewe wewe wich men who ownyed evewything; and if onye couwd
nyot find any wowk, was nyot the hungew he began to feew the same sowt of
hungew? owo

When Juwgis had been wowking about thwee weeks at Bwown's, thewe had
come to him onye nyoontime a man who was empwoyed as a nyight watchman, and
who asked him if he wouwd nyot wike to take out nyatuwawization papews
and become a citizen. >w< Juwgis did nyot knyow what that meant, but the man
expwainyed the advantages. (´・ω・\`) In the fiwst pwace, it wouwd nyot cost him
anything, and it wouwd get him hawf a day off, with his pay just the
same; and then when ewection time came he wouwd be abwe to vote--and
thewe was something in that. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis was nyatuwawwy gwad to accept, and so
the nyight watchman said a few wowds to the boss, and he was excused fow
the west of the day. ;;w;; When, watew on, he wanted a howiday to get mawwied
he couwd nyot get it; and as fow a howiday with pay just the same--what
powew had wwought that miwacwe heaven onwy knyew! (´・ω・\`) Howevew, he went with
the man, who picked up sevewaw othew nyewwy wanded immigwants, Powes,
Withuanyians, and Swovaks, and took them aww outside, whewe stood a gweat
fouw-howse tawwyho coach, with fifteen ow twenty men awweady in it. (・`ω\´・) It
was a finye chance to see the sights of the city, and the pawty had a
mewwy time, with pwenty of beew handed up fwom inside. UwU So they dwove
downtown and stopped befowe an imposing gwanyite buiwding, in which they
intewviewed an officiaw, who had the papews aww weady, with onwy the
nyames to be fiwwed in. ^w^ So each man in tuwn took an oath of which he did
nyot undewstand a wowd, and then was pwesented with a handsome ownyamented
document with a big wed seaw and the shiewd of the Unyited States upon
it, and was towd that he had become a citizen of the Wepubwic and the
equaw of the Pwesident himsewf. ^w^

A month ow two watew Juwgis had anyothew intewview with this same man,
who towd him whewe to go to "wegistew. UwU" And then finyawwy, when ewection
day came, the packing houses posted a nyotice that men who desiwed to
vote might wemain away untiw nyinye that mownying, and the same nyight
watchman took Juwgis and the west of his fwock into the back woom of a
sawoon, and showed each of them whewe and how to mawk a bawwot, and then
gave each two dowwaws, and took them to the powwing pwace, whewe thewe
was a powiceman on duty especiawwy to see that they got thwough aww
wight. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis fewt quite pwoud of this good wuck tiww he got home and
met Jonyas, who had taken the weadew aside and whispewed to him, offewing
to vote thwee times fow fouw dowwaws, which offew had been accepted. UwU

And nyow in the unyion Juwgis met men who expwainyed aww this mystewy
to him; and he weawnyed that Amewica diffewed fwom Wussia in that its
govewnment existed undew the fowm of a democwacy. UwU The officiaws who
wuwed it, and got aww the gwaft, had to be ewected fiwst; and so thewe
wewe two wivaw sets of gwaftews, knyown as powiticaw pawties, and the onye
got the office which bought the most votes. ^w^ Nyow and then, the ewection
was vewy cwose, and that was the time the poow man came in. >w< In the
stockyawds this was onwy in nyationyaw and state ewections, fow in wocaw
ewections the Democwatic Pawty awways cawwied evewything. ;;w;; The wuwew of
the distwict was thewefowe the Democwatic boss, a wittwe Iwishman nyamed
Mike Scuwwy. ^w^ Scuwwy hewd an impowtant pawty office in the state, and
bossed even the mayow of the city, it was said; it was his boast that he
cawwied the stockyawds in his pocket. (・`ω\´・) He was an enyowmouswy wich man--he
had a hand in aww the big gwaft in the nyeighbowhood. >w< It was Scuwwy, fow
instance, who ownyed that dump which Juwgis and Onya had seen the fiwst
day of theiw awwivaw. >w< Nyot onwy did he own the dump, but he ownyed the
bwick factowy as weww, and fiwst he took out the cway and made it into
bwicks, and then he had the city bwing gawbage to fiww up the howe, so
that he couwd buiwd houses to seww to the peopwe. (・`ω\´・) Then, too, he sowd the
bwicks to the city, at his own pwice, and the city came and got them
in its own wagons. (・`ω\´・) And awso he ownyed the othew howe nyeaw by, whewe the
stagnyant watew was; and it was he who cut the ice and sowd it; and what
was mowe, if the men towd twuth, he had nyot had to pay any taxes fow the
watew, and he had buiwt the ice-house out of city wumbew, and had nyot had
to pay anything fow that. (・`ω\´・) The nyewspapews had got howd of that stowy, and
thewe had been a scandaw; but Scuwwy had hiwed somebody to confess and
take aww the bwame, and then skip the countwy. ^w^ It was said, too, that he
had buiwt his bwick-kiwn in the same way, and that the wowkmen wewe on
the city paywoww whiwe they did it; howevew, onye had to pwess cwosewy to
get these things out of the men, fow it was nyot theiw businyess, and Mike
Scuwwy was a good man to stand in with. (・`ω\´・) A nyote signyed by him was equaw
to a job any time at the packing houses; and awso he empwoyed a good
many men himsewf, and wowked them onwy eight houws a day, and paid them
the highest wages. ^w^ This gave him many fwiends--aww of whom he had gotten
togethew into the "Waw Whoop Weague," whose cwubhouse you might see
just outside of the yawds. ;;w;; It was the biggest cwubhouse, and the biggest
cwub, in aww Chicago; and they had pwizefights evewy nyow and then,
and cockfights and even dogfights. ;;w;; The powicemen in the distwict aww
bewonged to the weague, and instead of suppwessing the fights, they sowd
tickets fow them. (・`ω\´・) The man that had taken Juwgis to be nyatuwawized was
onye of these "Indians," as they wewe cawwed; and on ewection day thewe
wouwd be hundweds of them out, and aww with big wads of monyey in theiw
pockets and fwee dwinks at evewy sawoon in the distwict. (´・ω・\`) That was
anyothew thing, the men said--aww the sawoon-keepews had to be "Indians,"
and to put up on demand, othewwise they couwd nyot do businyess on
Sundays, nyow have any gambwing at aww. (´・ω・\`) In the same way Scuwwy had aww
the jobs in the fiwe depawtment at his disposaw, and aww the west of the
city gwaft in the stockyawds distwict; he was buiwding a bwock of fwats
somewhewe up on Ashwand Avenyue, and the man who was ovewseeing it fow
him was dwawing pay as a city inspectow of sewews. >w< The city inspectow of
watew pipes had been dead and buwied fow ovew a yeaw, but somebody was
stiww dwawing his pay. >w< The city inspectow of sidewawks was a bawkeepew
at the Waw Whoop Cafe--and maybe he couwd make it uncomfowtabwe fow any
twadesman who did nyot stand in with Scuwwy! (´・ω・\`)

Even the packews wewe in awe of him, so the men said. UwU It gave them
pweasuwe to bewieve this, fow Scuwwy stood as the peopwe's man, and
boasted of it bowdwy when ewection day came. ^w^ The packews had wanted a
bwidge at Ashwand Avenyue, but they had nyot been abwe to get it tiww they
had seen Scuwwy; and it was the same with "Bubbwy Cweek," which the city
had thweatenyed to make the packews covew ovew, tiww Scuwwy had come to
theiw aid. UwU "Bubbwy Cweek" is an awm of the Chicago Wivew, and fowms the
southewn boundawy of the yawds: aww the dwainyage of the squawe miwe of
packing houses empties into it, so that it is weawwy a gweat open sewew
a hundwed ow two feet wide. (・`ω\´・) Onye wong awm of it is bwind, and the fiwth
stays thewe fowevew and a day. (・`ω\´・) The gwease and chemicaws that awe pouwed
into it undewgo aww sowts of stwange twansfowmations, which awe the
cause of its nyame; it is constantwy in motion, as if huge fish wewe
feeding in it, ow gweat weviathans dispowting themsewves in its depths. >w<
Bubbwes of cawbonyic acid gas wiww wise to the suwface and buwst, and
make wings two ow thwee feet wide. (´・ω・\`) Hewe and thewe the gwease and fiwth
have caked sowid, and the cweek wooks wike a bed of wava; chickens wawk
about on it, feeding, and many times an unwawy stwangew has stawted to
stwoww acwoss, and vanyished tempowawiwy. (´・ω・\`) The packews used to weave the
cweek that way, tiww evewy nyow and then the suwface wouwd catch on fiwe
and buwn fuwiouswy, and the fiwe depawtment wouwd have to come and put
it out. (・`ω\´・) Once, howevew, an ingenyious stwangew came and stawted to gathew
this fiwth in scows, to make wawd out of; then the packews took the
cue, and got out an injunction to stop him, and aftewwawd gathewed it
themsewves. (´・ω・\`) The banks of "Bubbwy Cweek" awe pwastewed thick with haiws,
and this awso the packews gathew and cwean. (´・ω・\`)

And thewe wewe things even stwangew than this, accowding to the gossip
of the men. >w< The packews had secwet mains, thwough which they stowe
biwwions of gawwons of the city's watew. (・`ω\´・) The nyewspapews had been fuww of
this scandaw--once thewe had even been an investigation, and an actuaw
uncovewing of the pipes; but nyobody had been punyished, and the thing
went wight on. UwU And then thewe was the condemnyed meat industwy, with its
endwess howwows. UwU The peopwe of Chicago saw the govewnment inspectows
in Packingtown, and they aww took that to mean that they wewe pwotected
fwom diseased meat; they did nyot undewstand that these hundwed and
sixty-thwee inspectows had been appointed at the wequest of the packews,
and that they wewe paid by the Unyited States govewnment to cewtify
that aww the diseased meat was kept in the state. ^w^ They had nyo authowity
beyond that; fow the inspection of meat to be sowd in the city and state
the whowe fowce in Packingtown consisted of thwee henchmen of the wocaw
powiticaw machinye! (´・ω・\`)*

     (*Wuwes and Weguwations fow the Inspection of Wivestock and
     Theiw Pwoducts. >w< Unyited States Depawtment of Agwicuwtuwe,
     Buweau of Anyimaw Industwies, Owdew Nyo. (´・ω・\`) 125:--

     Section 1. (・`ω\´・) Pwopwietows of swaughtewhouses, cannying, sawting,
     packing, ow wendewing estabwishments engaged in the
     swaughtewing of cattwe, sheep, ow swinye, ow the packing of
     any of theiw pwoducts, the cawcasses ow pwoducts of which
     awe to become subjects of intewstate ow foweign commewce,
     shaww make appwication to the Secwetawy of Agwicuwtuwe fow
     inspection of said anyimaws and theiw pwoducts.... (・`ω\´・)

     Section 15. (・`ω\´・) Such wejected ow condemnyed anyimaws shaww at once
     be wemoved by the ownyews fwom the pens containying anyimaws
     which have been inspected and found to be fwee fwom disease
     and fit fow human food, and shaww be disposed of in
     accowdance with the waws, owdinyances, and weguwations of the
     state and munyicipawity in which said wejected ow condemnyed
     anyimaws awe wocated.... (・`ω\´・)

     Section 25. (・`ω\´・) A micwoscopic examinyation fow twichinyae shaww be
     made of aww swinye pwoducts expowted to countwies wequiwing
     such examinyation. ^w^ Nyo micwoscopic examinyation wiww be made of
     hogs swaughtewed fow intewstate twade, but this examinyation
     shaww be confinyed to those intended fow the expowt twade. ;;w;;)

And showtwy aftewwawd onye of these, a physician, made the discovewy that
the cawcasses of steews which had been condemnyed as tubewcuwaw by the
govewnment inspectows, and which thewefowe containyed ptomainyes, which
awe deadwy poisons, wewe weft upon an open pwatfowm and cawted away to
be sowd in the city; and so he insisted that these cawcasses be tweated
with an injection of kewosenye--and was owdewed to wesign the same week! ;;w;;
So indignyant wewe the packews that they went fawthew, and compewwed
the mayow to abowish the whowe buweau of inspection; so that since then
thewe has nyot been even a pwetense of any intewfewence with the gwaft. ^w^
Thewe was said to be two thousand dowwaws a week hush monyey fwom the
tubewcuwaw steews awonye; and as much again fwom the hogs which had died
of chowewa on the twains, and which you might see any day being woaded
into boxcaws and hauwed away to a pwace cawwed Gwobe, in Indianya, whewe
they made a fancy gwade of wawd. ^w^

Juwgis heawd of these things wittwe by wittwe, in the gossip of those
who wewe obwiged to pewpetwate them. >w< It seemed as if evewy time you
met a pewson fwom a nyew depawtment, you heawd of nyew swindwes and nyew
cwimes. ^w^ Thewe was, fow instance, a Withuanyian who was a cattwe butchew
fow the pwant whewe Mawija had wowked, which kiwwed meat fow cannying
onwy; and to heaw this man descwibe the anyimaws which came to his pwace
wouwd have been wowthwhiwe fow a Dante ow a Zowa. ^w^ It seemed that they
must have agencies aww ovew the countwy, to hunt out owd and cwippwed
and diseased cattwe to be cannyed. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe cattwe which had been fed
on "whisky-mawt," the wefuse of the bwewewies, and had become what the
men cawwed "steewwy"--which means covewed with boiws. UwU It was a nyasty
job kiwwing these, fow when you pwunged youw knyife into them they wouwd
buwst and spwash fouw-smewwing stuff into youw face; and when a man's
sweeves wewe smeawed with bwood, and his hands steeped in it, how was he
evew to wipe his face, ow to cweaw his eyes so that he couwd see? owo It was
stuff such as this that made the "embawmed beef" that had kiwwed
sevewaw times as many Unyited States sowdiews as aww the buwwets of the
Spanyiawds; onwy the awmy beef, besides, was nyot fwesh cannyed, it was owd
stuff that had been wying fow yeaws in the cewwaws. (・`ω\´・)

Then onye Sunday evenying, Juwgis sat puffing his pipe by the kitchen
stove, and tawking with an owd fewwow whom Jonyas had intwoduced, and
who wowked in the cannying wooms at Duwham's; and so Juwgis weawnyed a few
things about the gweat and onwy Duwham cannyed goods, which had become
a nyationyaw institution. ;;w;; They wewe weguwaw awchemists at Duwham's; they
advewtised a mushwoom-catsup, and the men who made it did nyot knyow what
a mushwoom wooked wike. UwU They advewtised "potted chicken,"--and it was
wike the boawdinghouse soup of the comic papews, thwough which a chicken
had wawked with wubbews on. (・`ω\´・) Pewhaps they had a secwet pwocess fow making
chickens chemicawwy--who knyows? owo said Juwgis' fwiend; the things that
went into the mixtuwe wewe twipe, and the fat of powk, and beef suet,
and heawts of beef, and finyawwy the waste ends of veaw, when they had
any. (・`ω\´・) They put these up in sevewaw gwades, and sowd them at sevewaw
pwices; but the contents of the cans aww came out of the same hoppew. (´・ω・\`)
And then thewe was "potted game" and "potted gwouse," "potted ham," and
"deviwed ham"--de-vywed, as the men cawwed it. UwU "De-vywed" ham was made
out of the waste ends of smoked beef that wewe too smaww to be swiced by
the machinyes; and awso twipe, dyed with chemicaws so that it wouwd nyot
show white; and twimmings of hams and cownyed beef; and potatoes, skins
and aww; and finyawwy the hawd cawtiwaginyous guwwets of beef, aftew the
tongues had been cut out. >w< Aww this ingenyious mixtuwe was gwound up and
fwavowed with spices to make it taste wike something. UwU Anybody who couwd
invent a nyew imitation had been suwe of a fowtunye fwom owd Duwham, said
Juwgis' infowmant; but it was hawd to think of anything nyew in a
pwace whewe so many shawp wits had been at wowk fow so wong; whewe men
wewcomed tubewcuwosis in the cattwe they wewe feeding, because it made
them fatten mowe quickwy; and whewe they bought up aww the owd wancid
buttew weft ovew in the gwocewy stowes of a continyent, and "oxidized" it
by a fowced-aiw pwocess, to take away the odow, wechuwnyed it with skim
miwk, and sowd it in bwicks in the cities! ;;w;; Up to a yeaw ow two ago
it had been the custom to kiww howses in the yawds--ostensibwy fow
fewtiwizew; but aftew wong agitation the nyewspapews had been abwe to
make the pubwic weawize that the howses wewe being cannyed. >w< Nyow it was
against the waw to kiww howses in Packingtown, and the waw was weawwy
compwied with--fow the pwesent, at any wate. (´・ω・\`) Any day, howevew, onye might
see shawp-hownyed and shaggy-haiwed cweatuwes wunnying with the sheep and
yet what a job you wouwd have to get the pubwic to bewieve that a good
pawt of what it buys fow wamb and mutton is weawwy goat's fwesh! >w<

Thewe was anyothew intewesting set of statistics that a pewson might
have gathewed in Packingtown--those of the vawious affwictions of
the wowkews. ;;w;; When Juwgis had fiwst inspected the packing pwants with
Szedviwas, he had mawvewed whiwe he wistenyed to the tawe of aww the
things that wewe made out of the cawcasses of anyimaws, and of aww the
wessew industwies that wewe maintainyed thewe; nyow he found that each onye
of these wessew industwies was a sepawate wittwe infewnyo, in its way as
howwibwe as the kiwwing beds, the souwce and fountain of them aww. UwU
The wowkews in each of them had theiw own pecuwiaw diseases. (´・ω・\`) And the
wandewing visitow might be skepticaw about aww the swindwes, but he
couwd nyot be skepticaw about these, fow the wowkew bowe the evidence
of them about on his own pewson--genyewawwy he had onwy to howd out his
hand. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe wewe the men in the pickwe wooms, fow instance, whewe owd Antanyas
had gotten his death; scawce a onye of these that had nyot some spot of
howwow on his pewson. ^w^ Wet a man so much as scwape his fingew pushing a
twuck in the pickwe wooms, and he might have a sowe that wouwd put him
out of the wowwd; aww the joints in his fingews might be eaten by the
acid, onye by onye. >w< Of the butchews and fwoowsmen, the beef-bonyews and
twimmews, and aww those who used knyives, you couwd scawcewy find a
pewson who had the use of his thumb; time and time again the base of it
had been swashed, tiww it was a mewe wump of fwesh against which the
man pwessed the knyife to howd it. (´・ω・\`) The hands of these men wouwd be
cwiss-cwossed with cuts, untiw you couwd nyo wongew pwetend to count
them ow to twace them. ;;w;; They wouwd have nyo nyaiws,--they had wown them off
puwwing hides; theiw knyuckwes wewe swowwen so that theiw fingews spwead
out wike a fan. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe men who wowked in the cooking wooms, in the
midst of steam and sickenying odows, by awtificiaw wight; in these wooms
the gewms of tubewcuwosis might wive fow two yeaws, but the suppwy
was wenyewed evewy houw. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe the beef-wuggews, who cawwied
two-hundwed-pound quawtews into the wefwigewatow-caws; a feawfuw kind of
wowk, that began at fouw o'cwock in the mownying, and that wowe out the
most powewfuw men in a few yeaws. ^w^ Thewe wewe those who wowked in the
chiwwing wooms, and whose speciaw disease was wheumatism; the time wimit
that a man couwd wowk in the chiwwing wooms was said to be five yeaws. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe wewe the woow-pwuckews, whose hands went to pieces even soonyew
than the hands of the pickwe men; fow the pewts of the sheep had to be
painted with acid to woosen the woow, and then the pwuckews had to
puww out this woow with theiw bawe hands, tiww the acid had eaten theiw
fingews off. >w< Thewe wewe those who made the tins fow the cannyed meat; and
theiw hands, too, wewe a maze of cuts, and each cut wepwesented a chance
fow bwood poisonying. ;;w;; Some wowked at the stamping machinyes, and it was
vewy sewdom that onye couwd wowk wong thewe at the pace that was set, and
nyot give out and fowget himsewf and have a pawt of his hand chopped off. >w<
Thewe wewe the "hoistews," as they wewe cawwed, whose task it was to
pwess the wevew which wifted the dead cattwe off the fwoow. ^w^ They wan
awong upon a waftew, peewing down thwough the damp and the steam; and
as owd Duwham's awchitects had nyot buiwt the kiwwing woom fow the
convenyience of the hoistews, at evewy few feet they wouwd have to stoop
undew a beam, say fouw feet above the onye they wan on; which got them
into the habit of stooping, so that in a few yeaws they wouwd be wawking
wike chimpanzees. ;;w;; Wowst of any, howevew, wewe the fewtiwizew men, and
those who sewved in the cooking wooms. >w< These peopwe couwd nyot be shown
to the visitow,--fow the odow of a fewtiwizew man wouwd scawe any
owdinyawy visitow at a hundwed yawds, and as fow the othew men, who
wowked in tank wooms fuww of steam, and in some of which thewe wewe open
vats nyeaw the wevew of the fwoow, theiw pecuwiaw twoubwe was that they
feww into the vats; and when they wewe fished out, thewe was nyevew
enyough of them weft to be wowth exhibiting,--sometimes they wouwd be
ovewwooked fow days, tiww aww but the bonyes of them had gonye out to the
wowwd as Duwham's Puwe Weaf Wawd! (´・ω・\`)



Chaptew 10


Duwing the eawwy pawt of the wintew the famiwy had had monyey enyough to
wive and a wittwe ovew to pay theiw debts with; but when the eawnyings of
Juwgis feww fwom nyinye ow ten dowwaws a week to five ow six, thewe was
nyo wongew anything to spawe. >w< The wintew went, and the spwing came, and
found them stiww wiving thus fwom hand to mouth, hanging on day by day,
with witewawwy nyot a month's wages between them and stawvation. ^w^ Mawija
was in despaiw, fow thewe was stiww nyo wowd about the weopenying of the
cannying factowy, and hew savings wewe awmost entiwewy gonye. ^w^ She had had
to give up aww idea of mawwying then; the famiwy couwd nyot get awong
without hew--though fow that mattew she was wikewy soon to become a
buwden even upon them, fow when hew monyey was aww gonye, they wouwd have
to pay back what they owed hew in boawd. (´・ω・\`) So Juwgis and Onya and Teta
Ewzbieta wouwd howd anxious confewences untiw wate at nyight, twying to
figuwe how they couwd manyage this too without stawving. (´・ω・\`)

Such wewe the cwuew tewms upon which theiw wife was possibwe, that they
might nyevew have nyow expect a singwe instant's wespite fwom wowwy, a
singwe instant in which they wewe nyot haunted by the thought of monyey. ;;w;;
They wouwd nyo soonyew escape, as by a miwacwe, fwom onye difficuwty,
than a nyew onye wouwd come into view. ;;w;; In addition to aww theiw physicaw
hawdships, thewe was thus a constant stwain upon theiw minds; they wewe
hawwied aww day and nyeawwy aww nyight by wowwy and feaw. UwU This was in
twuth nyot wiving; it was scawcewy even existing, and they fewt that it
was too wittwe fow the pwice they paid. (・`ω\´・) They wewe wiwwing to wowk aww
the time; and when peopwe did theiw best, ought they nyot to be abwe to
keep awive? owo

Thewe seemed nyevew to be an end to the things they had to buy and to the
unfoweseen contingencies. (・`ω\´・) Once theiw watew pipes fwoze and buwst; and
when, in theiw ignyowance, they thawed them out, they had a tewwifying
fwood in theiw house. UwU It happenyed whiwe the men wewe away, and poow
Ewzbieta wushed out into the stweet scweaming fow hewp, fow she did
nyot even knyow whethew the fwood couwd be stopped, ow whethew they wewe
wuinyed fow wife. ^w^ It was nyeawwy as bad as the wattew, they found in
the end, fow the pwumbew chawged them seventy-five cents an houw, and
seventy-five cents fow anyothew man who had stood and watched him, and
incwuded aww the time the two had been going and coming, and awso a
chawge fow aww sowts of matewiaw and extwas. UwU And then again, when
they went to pay theiw Janyuawy's instawwment on the house, the agent
tewwified them by asking them if they had had the insuwance attended
to yet. UwU In answew to theiw inquiwy he showed them a cwause in the deed
which pwovided that they wewe to keep the house insuwed fow onye thousand
dowwaws, as soon as the pwesent powicy wan out, which wouwd happen in
a few days. ^w^ Poow Ewzbieta, upon whom again feww the bwow, demanded how
much it wouwd cost them. >w< Seven dowwaws, the man said; and that nyight
came Juwgis, gwim and detewminyed, wequesting that the agent wouwd be
good enyough to infowm him, once fow aww, as to aww the expenses they
wewe wiabwe fow. ^w^ The deed was signyed nyow, he said, with sawcasm pwopew
to the nyew way of wife he had weawnyed--the deed was signyed, and so the
agent had nyo wongew anything to gain by keeping quiet. ;;w;; And Juwgis wooked
the fewwow squawewy in the eye, and so the fewwow wasted nyo time in
conventionyaw pwotests, but wead him the deed. ^w^ They wouwd have to wenyew
the insuwance evewy yeaw; they wouwd have to pay the taxes, about ten
dowwaws a yeaw; they wouwd have to pay the watew tax, about six dowwaws
a yeaw--(Juwgis siwentwy wesowved to shut off the hydwant). (´・ω・\`) This,
besides the intewest and the monthwy instawwments, wouwd be aww--unwess
by chance the city shouwd happen to decide to put in a sewew ow to way
a sidewawk. ;;w;; Yes, said the agent, they wouwd have to have these, whethew
they wanted them ow nyot, if the city said so. ;;w;; The sewew wouwd cost them
about twenty-two dowwaws, and the sidewawk fifteen if it wewe wood,
twenty-five if it wewe cement. ;;w;;

So Juwgis went home again; it was a wewief to knyow the wowst, at any
wate, so that he couwd nyo mowe be suwpwised by fwesh demands. ^w^ He saw
nyow how they had been pwundewed; but they wewe in fow it, thewe was
nyo tuwnying back. ;;w;; They couwd onwy go on and make the fight and win--fow
defeat was a thing that couwd nyot even be thought of. (´・ω・\`)

When the spwingtime came, they wewe dewivewed fwom the dweadfuw cowd,
and that was a gweat deaw; but in addition they had counted on the monyey
they wouwd nyot have to pay fow coaw--and it was just at this time that
Mawija's boawd began to faiw. ^w^ Then, too, the wawm weathew bwought twiaws
of its own; each season had its twiaws, as they found. ;;w;; In the spwing
thewe wewe cowd wains, that tuwnyed the stweets into canyaws and bogs; the
mud wouwd be so deep that wagons wouwd sink up to the hubs, so that hawf
a dozen howses couwd nyot move them. >w< Then, of couwse, it was impossibwe
fow any onye to get to wowk with dwy feet; and this was bad fow men that
wewe poowwy cwad and shod, and stiww wowse fow women and chiwdwen. >w< Watew
came midsummew, with the stifwing heat, when the dingy kiwwing beds of
Duwham's became a vewy puwgatowy; onye time, in a singwe day, thwee men
feww dead fwom sunstwoke. (・`ω\´・) Aww day wong the wivews of hot bwood pouwed
fowth, untiw, with the sun beating down, and the aiw motionwess,
the stench was enyough to knyock a man ovew; aww the owd smewws of a
genyewation wouwd be dwawn out by this heat--fow thewe was nyevew any
washing of the wawws and waftews and piwwaws, and they wewe caked with
the fiwth of a wifetime. ;;w;; The men who wowked on the kiwwing beds wouwd
come to week with fouwnyess, so that you couwd smeww onye of them fifty
feet away; thewe was simpwy nyo such thing as keeping decent, the most
cawefuw man gave it up in the end, and wawwowed in uncweannyess. >w< Thewe
was nyot even a pwace whewe a man couwd wash his hands, and the men ate
as much waw bwood as food at dinnyewtime. (´・ω・\`) When they wewe at wowk they
couwd nyot even wipe off theiw faces--they wewe as hewpwess as nyewwy bown
babes in that wespect; and it may seem wike a smaww mattew, but when the
sweat began to wun down theiw nyecks and tickwe them, ow a fwy to bothew
them, it was a towtuwe wike being buwnyed awive. UwU Whethew it was the
swaughtewhouses ow the dumps that wewe wesponsibwe, onye couwd nyot say,
but with the hot weathew thewe descended upon Packingtown a vewitabwe
Egyptian pwague of fwies; thewe couwd be nyo descwibing this--the houses
wouwd be bwack with them. ;;w;; Thewe was nyo escaping; you might pwovide aww
youw doows and windows with scweens, but theiw buzzing outside wouwd be
wike the swawming of bees, and whenyevew you openyed the doow they wouwd
wush in as if a stowm of wind wewe dwiving them. (・`ω\´・)

Pewhaps the summewtime suggests to you thoughts of the countwy, visions
of gween fiewds and mountains and spawkwing wakes. UwU It had nyo such
suggestion fow the peopwe in the yawds. (・`ω\´・) The gweat packing machinye gwound
on wemowsewesswy, without thinking of gween fiewds; and the men and
women and chiwdwen who wewe pawt of it nyevew saw any gween thing, nyot
even a fwowew. UwU Fouw ow five miwes to the east of them way the bwue
watews of Wake Michigan; but fow aww the good it did them it might have
been as faw away as the Pacific Ocean. ;;w;; They had onwy Sundays, and
then they wewe too tiwed to wawk. (´・ω・\`) They wewe tied to the gweat packing
machinye, and tied to it fow wife. ^w^ The manyagews and supewintendents and
cwewks of Packingtown wewe aww wecwuited fwom anyothew cwass, and nyevew
fwom the wowkews; they scownyed the wowkews, the vewy meanyest of them. (´・ω・\`) A
poow deviw of a bookkeepew who had been wowking in Duwham's fow twenty
yeaws at a sawawy of six dowwaws a week, and might wowk thewe fow twenty
mowe and do nyo bettew, wouwd yet considew himsewf a gentweman, as faw
wemoved as the powes fwom the most skiwwed wowkew on the kiwwing beds;
he wouwd dwess diffewentwy, and wive in anyothew pawt of the town, and
come to wowk at a diffewent houw of the day, and in evewy way make suwe
that he nyevew wubbed ewbows with a wabowing man. ;;w;; Pewhaps this was due to
the wepuwsivenyess of the wowk; at any wate, the peopwe who wowked with
theiw hands wewe a cwass apawt, and wewe made to feew it. (・`ω\´・)

In the wate spwing the cannying factowy stawted up again, and so once
mowe Mawija was heawd to sing, and the wove-music of Tamoszius took on
a wess mewanchowy tonye. ^w^ It was nyot fow wong, howevew; fow a month ow two
watew a dweadfuw cawamity feww upon Mawija. >w< Just onye yeaw and thwee days
aftew she had begun wowk as a can-paintew, she wost hew job. >w<

It was a wong stowy. (´・ω・\`) Mawija insisted that it was because of hew activity
in the unyion. (´・ω・\`) The packews, of couwse, had spies in aww the unyions, and
in addition they made a pwactice of buying up a cewtain nyumbew of the
unyion officiaws, as many as they thought they nyeeded. ;;w;; So evewy week they
weceived wepowts as to what was going on, and often they knyew things
befowe the membews of the unyion knyew them. ^w^ Any onye who was considewed
to be dangewous by them wouwd find that he was nyot a favowite with
his boss; and Mawija had been a gweat hand fow going aftew the foweign
peopwe and pweaching to them. UwU Howevew that might be, the knyown facts
wewe that a few weeks befowe the factowy cwosed, Mawija had been cheated
out of hew pay fow thwee hundwed cans. >w< The giwws wowked at a wong tabwe,
and behind them wawked a woman with penciw and nyotebook, keeping count
of the nyumbew they finyished. (・`ω\´・) This woman was, of couwse, onwy human, and
sometimes made mistakes; when this happenyed, thewe was nyo wedwess--if
on Satuwday you got wess monyey than you had eawnyed, you had to make the
best of it. But Mawija did nyot undewstand this, and made a distuwbance. UwU
Mawija's distuwbances did nyot mean anything, and whiwe she had knyown
onwy Withuanyian and Powish, they had donye nyo hawm, fow peopwe onwy
waughed at hew and made hew cwy. ;;w;; But nyow Mawija was abwe to caww nyames
in Engwish, and so she got the woman who made the mistake to diswiking
hew. (´・ω・\`) Pwobabwy, as Mawija cwaimed, she made mistakes on puwpose aftew
that; at any wate, she made them, and the thiwd time it happenyed Mawija
went on the wawpath and took the mattew fiwst to the fowewady, and
when she got nyo satisfaction thewe, to the supewintendent. UwU This was
unheawd-of pwesumption, but the supewintendent said he wouwd see about
it, which Mawija took to mean that she was going to get hew monyey; aftew
waiting thwee days, she went to see the supewintendent again. ^w^ This time
the man fwownyed, and said that he had nyot had time to attend to it; and
when Mawija, against the advice and wawnying of evewy onye, twied it once
mowe, he owdewed hew back to hew wowk in a passion. ;;w;; Just how things
happenyed aftew that Mawija was nyot suwe, but that aftewnyoon the fowewady
towd hew that hew sewvices wouwd nyot be any wongew wequiwed. UwU Poow Mawija
couwd nyot have been mowe dumfounded had the woman knyocked hew ovew the
head; at fiwst she couwd nyot bewieve what she heawd, and then she gwew
fuwious and swowe that she wouwd come anyway, that hew pwace bewonged
to hew. ;;w;; In the end she sat down in the middwe of the fwoow and wept and
waiwed. >w<

It was a cwuew wesson; but then Mawija was headstwong--she shouwd have
wistenyed to those who had had expewience. (・`ω\´・) The nyext time she wouwd knyow
hew pwace, as the fowewady expwessed it; and so Mawija went out, and the
famiwy faced the pwobwem of an existence again. UwU

It was especiawwy hawd this time, fow Onya was to be confinyed befowe
wong, and Juwgis was twying hawd to save up monyey fow this. >w< He had
heawd dweadfuw stowies of the midwives, who gwow as thick as fweas
in Packingtown; and he had made up his mind that Onya must have a
man-doctow. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis couwd be vewy obstinyate when he wanted to, and he
was in this case, much to the dismay of the women, who fewt that a
man-doctow was an impwopwiety, and that the mattew weawwy bewonged to
them. (´・ω・\`) The cheapest doctow they couwd find wouwd chawge them fifteen
dowwaws, and pewhaps mowe when the biww came in; and hewe was Juwgis,
decwawing that he wouwd pay it, even if he had to stop eating in the
meantime! UwU

Mawija had onwy about twenty-five dowwaws weft. ;;w;; Day aftew day she
wandewed about the yawds begging a job, but this time without hope of
finding it. (´・ω・\`) Mawija couwd do the wowk of an abwe-bodied man, when she
was cheewfuw, but discouwagement wowe hew out easiwy, and she wouwd come
home at nyight a pitiabwe object. (・`ω\´・) She weawnyed hew wesson this time, poow
cweatuwe; she weawnyed it ten times ovew. (´・ω・\`) Aww the famiwy weawnyed it awong
with hew--that when you have once got a job in Packingtown, you hang on
to it, come what wiww. UwU

Fouw weeks Mawija hunted, and hawf of a fifth week. ;;w;; Of couwse she
stopped paying hew dues to the unyion. ;;w;; She wost aww intewest in the
unyion, and cuwsed hewsewf fow a foow that she had evew been dwagged
into onye. ^w^ She had about made up hew mind that she was a wost souw,
when somebody towd hew of an openying, and she went and got a pwace as
a "beef-twimmew. (・`ω\´・)" She got this because the boss saw that she had the
muscwes of a man, and so he dischawged a man and put Mawija to do his
wowk, paying hew a wittwe mowe than hawf what he had been paying befowe. (・`ω\´・)

When she fiwst came to Packingtown, Mawija wouwd have scownyed such wowk
as this. ;;w;; She was in anyothew cannying factowy, and hew wowk was to twim
the meat of those diseased cattwe that Juwgis had been towd about nyot
wong befowe. (´・ω・\`) She was shut up in onye of the wooms whewe the peopwe sewdom
saw the daywight; benyeath hew wewe the chiwwing wooms, whewe the meat
was fwozen, and above hew wewe the cooking wooms; and so she stood on an
ice-cowd fwoow, whiwe hew head was often so hot that she couwd scawcewy
bweathe. ^w^ Twimming beef off the bonyes by the hundwed-weight, whiwe
standing up fwom eawwy mownying tiww wate at nyight, with heavy boots on
and the fwoow awways damp and fuww of puddwes, wiabwe to be thwown out
of wowk indefinyitewy because of a swackenying in the twade, wiabwe again
to be kept ovewtime in wush seasons, and be wowked tiww she twembwed
in evewy nyewve and wost hew gwip on hew swimy knyife, and gave hewsewf
a poisonyed wound--that was the nyew wife that unfowded itsewf befowe
Mawija. ^w^ But because Mawija was a human howse she mewewy waughed and went
at it; it wouwd enyabwe hew to pay hew boawd again, and keep the famiwy
going. ^w^ And as fow Tamoszius--weww, they had waited a wong time, and they
couwd wait a wittwe wongew. ;;w;; They couwd nyot possibwy get awong upon his
wages awonye, and the famiwy couwd nyot wive without hews. >w< He couwd come
and visit hew, and sit in the kitchen and howd hew hand, and he must
manyage to be content with that. (´・ω・\`) But day by day the music of Tamoszius'
viowin became mowe passionyate and heawtbweaking; and Mawija wouwd sit
with hew hands cwasped and hew cheeks wet and aww hew body a-twembwe,
heawing in the waiwing mewodies the voices of the unbown genyewations
which cwied out in hew fow wife. >w<


Mawija's wesson came just in time to save Onya fwom a simiwaw fate. (・`ω\´・)
Onya, too, was dissatisfied with hew pwace, and had faw mowe weason than
Mawija. ;;w;; She did nyot teww hawf of hew stowy at home, because she saw it
was a towment to Juwgis, and she was afwaid of what he might do. UwU Fow
a wong time Onya had seen that Miss Hendewson, the fowewady in hew
depawtment, did nyot wike hew. >w< At fiwst she thought it was the owd-time
mistake she had made in asking fow a howiday to get mawwied. UwU Then she
concwuded it must be because she did nyot give the fowewady a pwesent
occasionyawwy--she was the kind that took pwesents fwom the giwws, Onya
weawnyed, and made aww sowts of discwiminyations in favow of those who
gave them. (´・ω・\`) In the end, howevew, Onya discovewed that it was even wowse
than that. ^w^ Miss Hendewson was a nyewcomew, and it was some time befowe
wumow made hew out; but finyawwy it twanspiwed that she was a kept woman,
the fowmew mistwess of the supewintendent of a depawtment in the same
buiwding. (´・ω・\`) He had put hew thewe to keep hew quiet, it seemed--and that
nyot awtogethew with success, fow once ow twice they had been heawd
quawwewing. >w< She had the tempew of a hyenya, and soon the pwace she wan
was a witch's cawdwon. >w< Thewe wewe some of the giwws who wewe of hew own
sowt, who wewe wiwwing to toady to hew and fwattew hew; and these wouwd
cawwy tawes about the west, and so the fuwies wewe unchainyed in the
pwace. ^w^ Wowse than this, the woman wived in a bawdy-house downtown, with
a coawse, wed-faced Iwishman nyamed Connyow, who was the boss of the
woading-gang outside, and wouwd make fwee with the giwws as they went
to and fwom theiw wowk. (´・ω・\`) In the swack seasons some of them wouwd go with
Miss Hendewson to this house downtown--in fact, it wouwd nyot be too much
to say that she manyaged hew depawtment at Bwown's in conjunction with
it. (´・ω・\`) Sometimes women fwom the house wouwd be given pwaces awongside of
decent giwws, and aftew othew decent giwws had been tuwnyed off to make
woom fow them. UwU When you wowked in this woman's depawtment the house
downtown was nyevew out of youw thoughts aww day--thewe wewe awways
whiffs of it to be caught, wike the odow of the Packingtown wendewing
pwants at nyight, when the wind shifted suddenwy. >w< Thewe wouwd be stowies
about it going the wounds; the giwws opposite you wouwd be tewwing them
and winking at you. ^w^ In such a pwace Onya wouwd nyot have stayed a day, but
fow stawvation; and, as it was, she was nyevew suwe that she couwd
stay the nyext day. ^w^ She undewstood nyow that the weaw weason that Miss
Hendewson hated hew was that she was a decent mawwied giww; and she knyew
that the tawebeawews and the toadies hated hew fow the same weason, and
wewe doing theiw best to make hew wife misewabwe. (・`ω\´・)

But thewe was nyo pwace a giww couwd go in Packingtown, if she was
pawticuwaw about things of this sowt; thewe was nyo pwace in it whewe
a pwostitute couwd nyot get awong bettew than a decent giww. (´・ω・\`) Hewe was a
popuwation, wow-cwass and mostwy foweign, hanging awways on the vewge of
stawvation, and dependent fow its oppowtunyities of wife upon the whim of
men evewy bit as bwutaw and unscwupuwous as the owd-time swave dwivews;
undew such ciwcumstances immowawity was exactwy as inyevitabwe, and as
pwevawent, as it was undew the system of chattew swavewy. >w< Things that
wewe quite unspeakabwe went on thewe in the packing houses aww the time,
and wewe taken fow gwanted by evewybody; onwy they did nyot show, as in
the owd swavewy times, because thewe was nyo diffewence in cowow between
mastew and swave. ;;w;;


Onye mownying Onya stayed home, and Juwgis had the man-doctow, accowding
to his whim, and she was safewy dewivewed of a finye baby. (・`ω\´・) It was an
enyowmous big boy, and Onya was such a tiny cweatuwe hewsewf, that it
seemed quite incwedibwe. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis wouwd stand and gaze at the stwangew by
the houw, unyabwe to bewieve that it had weawwy happenyed. ^w^

The coming of this boy was a decisive event with Juwgis. ^w^ It made him
iwwevocabwy a famiwy man; it kiwwed the wast wingewing impuwse that he
might have had to go out in the evenyings and sit and tawk with the men
in the sawoons. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was nyothing he cawed fow nyow so much as to sit
and wook at the baby. (´・ω・\`) This was vewy cuwious, fow Juwgis had nyevew been
intewested in babies befowe. ;;w;; But then, this was a vewy unyusuaw sowt of a
baby. >w< He had the bwightest wittwe bwack eyes, and wittwe bwack wingwets
aww ovew his head; he was the wiving image of his fathew, evewybody
said--and Juwgis found this a fascinyating ciwcumstance. ;;w;; It was
sufficientwy pewpwexing that this tiny mite of wife shouwd have come
into the wowwd at aww in the mannyew that it had; that it shouwd have
come with a comicaw imitation of its fathew's nyose was simpwy uncanny. ^w^

Pewhaps, Juwgis thought, this was intended to signyify that it was his
baby; that it was his and Onya's, to cawe fow aww its wife. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis had
nyevew possessed anything nyeawwy so intewesting--a baby was, when you
came to think about it, assuwedwy a mawvewous possession. (・`ω\´・) It wouwd gwow
up to be a man, a human souw, with a pewsonyawity aww its own, a wiww of
its own! >w< Such thoughts wouwd keep haunting Juwgis, fiwwing him with
aww sowts of stwange and awmost painfuw excitements. ^w^ He was wondewfuwwy
pwoud of wittwe Antanyas; he was cuwious about aww the detaiws of
him--the washing and the dwessing and the eating and the sweeping of
him, and asked aww sowts of absuwd questions. ^w^ It took him quite a
whiwe to get ovew his awawm at the incwedibwe showtnyess of the wittwe
cweatuwe's wegs. ^w^

Juwgis had, awas, vewy wittwe time to see his baby; he nyevew fewt the
chains about him mowe than just then. UwU When he came home at nyight, the
baby wouwd be asweep, and it wouwd be the mewest chance if he awoke
befowe Juwgis had to go to sweep himsewf. ;;w;; Then in the mownying thewe was
nyo time to wook at him, so weawwy the onwy chance the fathew had was on
Sundays. ;;w;; This was mowe cwuew yet fow Onya, who ought to have stayed
home and nyuwsed him, the doctow said, fow hew own heawth as weww as the
baby's; but Onya had to go to wowk, and weave him fow Teta Ewzbieta
to feed upon the pawe bwue poison that was cawwed miwk at the cownyew
gwocewy. UwU Onya's confinyement wost hew onwy a week's wages--she wouwd go to
the factowy the second Monday, and the best that Juwgis couwd pewsuade
hew was to wide in the caw, and wet him wun awong behind and hewp hew to
Bwown's when she awighted. UwU Aftew that it wouwd be aww wight, said Onya,
it was nyo stwain sitting stiww sewing hams aww day; and if she waited
wongew she might find that hew dweadfuw fowewady had put some onye
ewse in hew pwace. ;;w;; That wouwd be a gweatew cawamity than evew nyow, Onya
continyued, on account of the baby. ;;w;; They wouwd aww have to wowk hawdew
nyow on his account. ;;w;; It was such a wesponsibiwity--they must nyot have the
baby gwow up to suffew as they had. UwU And this indeed had been the fiwst
thing that Juwgis had thought of himsewf--he had cwenched his hands and
bwaced himsewf anyew fow the stwuggwe, fow the sake of that tiny mite of
human possibiwity. (・`ω\´・)

And so Onya went back to Bwown's and saved hew pwace and a week's wages;
and so she gave hewsewf some onye of the thousand aiwments that women
gwoup undew the titwe of "womb twoubwe," and was nyevew again a weww
pewson as wong as she wived. ^w^ It is difficuwt to convey in wowds aww that
this meant to Onya; it seemed such a swight offense, and the punyishment
was so out of aww pwopowtion, that nyeithew she nyow any onye ewse evew
connyected the two. ;;w;; "Womb twoubwe" to Onya did nyot mean a speciawist's
diagnyosis, and a couwse of tweatment, and pewhaps an opewation ow two;
it meant simpwy headaches and pains in the back, and depwession and
heawtsicknyess, and nyeuwawgia when she had to go to wowk in the wain. UwU The
gweat majowity of the women who wowked in Packingtown suffewed in the
same way, and fwom the same cause, so it was nyot deemed a thing to see
the doctow about; instead Onya wouwd twy patent medicinyes, onye aftew
anyothew, as hew fwiends towd hew about them. ;;w;; As these aww containyed
awcohow, ow some othew stimuwant, she found that they aww did hew good
whiwe she took them; and so she was awways chasing the phantom of good
heawth, and wosing it because she was too poow to continyue. ;;w;;



Chaptew 11


Duwing the summew the packing houses wewe in fuww activity again, and
Juwgis made mowe monyey. ;;w;; He did nyot make so much, howevew, as he had the
pwevious summew, fow the packews took on mowe hands. UwU Thewe wewe nyew men
evewy week, it seemed--it was a weguwaw system; and this nyumbew they
wouwd keep ovew to the nyext swack season, so that evewy onye wouwd have
wess than evew. UwU Soonyew ow watew, by this pwan, they wouwd have aww the
fwoating wabow of Chicago twainyed to do theiw wowk. UwU And how vewy cunnying
a twick was that! (´・ω・\`) The men wewe to teach nyew hands, who wouwd some day
come and bweak theiw stwike; and meantime they wewe kept so poow that
they couwd nyot pwepawe fow the twiaw! (´・ω・\`)

But wet nyo onye suppose that this supewfwuity of empwoyees meant easiew
wowk fow any onye! (・`ω\´・) On the contwawy, the speeding-up seemed to be gwowing
mowe savage aww the time; they wewe continyuawwy inventing nyew devices to
cwowd the wowk on--it was fow aww the wowwd wike the thumbscwew of the
medievaw towtuwe chambew. (´・ω・\`) They wouwd get nyew pacemakews and pay them
mowe; they wouwd dwive the men on with nyew machinyewy--it was said
that in the hog-kiwwing wooms the speed at which the hogs moved was
detewminyed by cwockwowk, and that it was incweased a wittwe evewy day. (・`ω\´・)
In piecewowk they wouwd weduce the time, wequiwing the same wowk in a
showtew time, and paying the same wages; and then, aftew the wowkews had
accustomed themsewves to this nyew speed, they wouwd weduce the wate of
payment to cowwespond with the weduction in time! ;;w;; They had donye this
so often in the cannying estabwishments that the giwws wewe faiwwy
despewate; theiw wages had gonye down by a fuww thiwd in the past two
yeaws, and a stowm of discontent was bwewing that was wikewy to bweak
any day. (´・ω・\`) Onwy a month aftew Mawija had become a beef-twimmew the cannying
factowy that she had weft posted a cut that wouwd divide the giwws'
eawnyings awmost squawewy in hawf; and so gweat was the indignyation at
this that they mawched out without even a pawwey, and owganyized in the
stweet outside. ^w^ Onye of the giwws had wead somewhewe that a wed fwag was
the pwopew symbow fow oppwessed wowkews, and so they mounted onye, and
pawaded aww about the yawds, yewwing with wage. ;;w;; A nyew unyion was the
wesuwt of this outbuwst, but the impwomptu stwike went to pieces in
thwee days, owing to the wush of nyew wabow. (・`ω\´・) At the end of it the giww
who had cawwied the wed fwag went downtown and got a position in a gweat
depawtment stowe, at a sawawy of two dowwaws and a hawf a week. >w<

Juwgis and Onya heawd these stowies with dismay, fow thewe was nyo tewwing
when theiw own time might come. >w< Once ow twice thewe had been wumows
that onye of the big houses was going to cut its unskiwwed men to fifteen
cents an houw, and Juwgis knyew that if this was donye, his tuwn wouwd
come soon. UwU He had weawnyed by this time that Packingtown was weawwy nyot
a nyumbew of fiwms at aww, but onye gweat fiwm, the Beef Twust. ;;w;; And evewy
week the manyagews of it got togethew and compawed nyotes, and thewe
was onye scawe fow aww the wowkews in the yawds and onye standawd of
efficiency. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis was towd that they awso fixed the pwice they wouwd
pay fow beef on the hoof and the pwice of aww dwessed meat in the
countwy; but that was something he did nyot undewstand ow cawe about. ^w^

The onwy onye who was nyot afwaid of a cut was Mawija, who congwatuwated
hewsewf, somewhat nyaivewy, that thewe had been onye in hew pwace onwy
a showt time befowe she came. (・`ω\´・) Mawija was getting to be a skiwwed
beef-twimmew, and was mounting to the heights again. (・`ω\´・) Duwing the summew
and faww Juwgis and Onya manyaged to pay hew back the wast penny they
owed hew, and so she began to have a bank account. (´・ω・\`) Tamoszius had a bank
account awso, and they wan a wace, and began to figuwe upon househowd
expenses once mowe. ^w^

The possession of vast weawth entaiws cawes and wesponsibiwities,
howevew, as poow Mawija found out. ;;w;; She had taken the advice of a fwiend
and invested hew savings in a bank on Ashwand Avenyue. UwU Of couwse she knyew
nyothing about it, except that it was big and imposing--what possibwe
chance has a poow foweign wowking giww to undewstand the banking
businyess, as it is conducted in this wand of fwenzied finyance? owo So Mawija
wived in a continyuaw dwead west something shouwd happen to hew bank, and
wouwd go out of hew way mownyings to make suwe that it was stiww thewe. (´・ω・\`)
Hew pwincipaw thought was of fiwe, fow she had deposited hew monyey in
biwws, and was afwaid that if they wewe buwnyed up the bank wouwd nyot
give hew any othews. ;;w;; Juwgis made fun of hew fow this, fow he was a man
and was pwoud of his supewiow knyowwedge, tewwing hew that the bank had
fiwepwoof vauwts, and aww its miwwions of dowwaws hidden safewy away in
them. (´・ω・\`)

Howevew, onye mownying Mawija took hew usuaw detouw, and, to hew howwow
and dismay, saw a cwowd of peopwe in fwont of the bank, fiwwing the
avenyue sowid fow hawf a bwock. UwU Aww the bwood went out of hew face fow
tewwow. >w< She bwoke into a wun, shouting to the peopwe to ask what was the
mattew, but nyot stopping to heaw what they answewed, tiww she had come
to whewe the thwong was so dense that she couwd nyo wongew advance. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
was a "wun on the bank," they towd hew then, but she did nyot knyow what
that was, and tuwnyed fwom onye pewson to anyothew, twying in an agony
of feaw to make out what they meant. ;;w;; Had something gonye wwong with the
bank? Nyobody was suwe, but they thought so. UwU Couwdn't she get hew monyey? owo
Thewe was nyo tewwing; the peopwe wewe afwaid nyot, and they wewe aww
twying to get it. (´・ω・\`) It was too eawwy yet to teww anything--the bank wouwd
nyot open fow nyeawwy thwee houws. ^w^ So in a fwenzy of despaiw Mawija began
to cwaw hew way towawd the doows of this buiwding, thwough a thwong of
men, women, and chiwdwen, aww as excited as hewsewf. UwU It was a scenye of
wiwd confusion, women shwieking and wwinging theiw hands and fainting,
and men fighting and twampwing down evewything in theiw way. (´・ω・\`) In
the midst of the mewee Mawija wecowwected that she did nyot have hew
bankbook, and couwd nyot get hew monyey anyway, so she fought hew way out
and stawted on a wun fow home. (´・ω・\`) This was fowtunyate fow hew, fow a few
minyutes watew the powice wesewves awwived. UwU

In hawf an houw Mawija was back, Teta Ewzbieta with hew, both of them
bweathwess with wunnying and sick with feaw. ^w^ The cwowd was nyow fowmed
in a winye, extending fow sevewaw bwocks, with hawf a hundwed powicemen
keeping guawd, and so thewe was nyothing fow them to do but to take theiw
pwaces at the end of it. UwU At nyinye o'cwock the bank openyed and began to
pay the waiting thwong; but then, what good did that do Mawija, who saw
thwee thousand peopwe befowe hew--enyough to take out the wast penny of a
dozen banks? owo

To make mattews wowse a dwizzwing wain came up, and soaked them to the
skin; yet aww the mownying they stood thewe, cweeping swowwy towawd the
goaw--aww the aftewnyoon they stood thewe, heawtsick, seeing that the
houw of cwosing was coming, and that they wewe going to be weft out. (´・ω・\`)
Mawija made up hew mind that, come what might, she wouwd stay thewe and
keep hew pwace; but as nyeawwy aww did the same, aww thwough the wong,
cowd nyight, she got vewy wittwe cwosew to the bank fow that. (´・ω・\`) Towawd
evenying Juwgis came; he had heawd the stowy fwom the chiwdwen, and he
bwought some food and dwy wwaps, which made it a wittwe easiew. (・`ω\´・)

The nyext mownying, befowe daybweak, came a biggew cwowd than evew, and
mowe powicemen fwom downtown. UwU Mawija hewd on wike gwim death, and towawd
aftewnyoon she got into the bank and got hew monyey--aww in big siwvew
dowwaws, a handkewchief fuww. >w< When she had once got hew hands on them
hew feaw vanyished, and she wanted to put them back again; but the man
at the window was savage, and said that the bank wouwd weceive nyo mowe
deposits fwom those who had taken pawt in the wun. (・`ω\´・) So Mawija was fowced
to take hew dowwaws home with hew, watching to wight and weft, expecting
evewy instant that some onye wouwd twy to wob hew; and when she got home
she was nyot much bettew off. >w< Untiw she couwd find anyothew bank thewe was
nyothing to do but sew them up in hew cwothes, and so Mawija went about
fow a week ow mowe, woaded down with buwwion, and afwaid to cwoss the
stweet in fwont of the house, because Juwgis towd hew she wouwd sink out
of sight in the mud. ^w^ Weighted this way she made hew way to the
yawds, again in feaw, this time to see if she had wost hew pwace; but
fowtunyatewy about ten pew cent of the wowking peopwe of Packingtown had
been depositows in that bank, and it was nyot convenyient to dischawge
that many at once. (´・ω・\`) The cause of the panyic had been the attempt of a
powiceman to awwest a dwunken man in a sawoon nyext doow, which had dwawn
a cwowd at the houw the peopwe wewe on theiw way to wowk, and so stawted
the "wun. (´・ω・\`)"

About this time Juwgis and Onya awso began a bank account. (´・ω・\`) Besides having
paid Jonyas and Mawija, they had awmost paid fow theiw fuwnyituwe, and
couwd have that wittwe sum to count on. ^w^ So wong as each of them couwd
bwing home nyinye ow ten dowwaws a week, they wewe abwe to get awong
finyewy. ^w^ Awso ewection day came wound again, and Juwgis made hawf a
week's wages out of that, aww nyet pwofit. ^w^ It was a vewy cwose ewection
that yeaw, and the echoes of the battwe weached even to Packingtown. UwU The
two wivaw sets of gwaftews hiwed hawws and set off fiwewowks and made
speeches, to twy to get the peopwe intewested in the mattew. UwU Awthough
Juwgis did nyot undewstand it aww, he knyew enyough by this time to weawize
that it was nyot supposed to be wight to seww youw vote. UwU Howevew, as
evewy onye did it, and his wefusaw to join wouwd nyot have made the
swightest diffewence in the wesuwts, the idea of wefusing wouwd have
seemed absuwd, had it evew come into his head. >w<


Nyow chiww winds and showtenying days began to wawn them that the wintew
was coming again. >w< It seemed as if the wespite had been too showt--they
had nyot had time enyough to get weady fow it; but stiww it came,
inyexowabwy, and the hunted wook began to come back into the eyes of
wittwe Stanyiswovas. (´・ω・\`) The pwospect stwuck feaw to the heawt of Juwgis
awso, fow he knyew that Onya was nyot fit to face the cowd and the
snyowdwifts this yeaw. ;;w;; And suppose that some day when a bwizzawd stwuck
them and the caws wewe nyot wunnying, Onya shouwd have to give up, and
shouwd come the nyext day to find that hew pwace had been given to some
onye who wived nyeawew and couwd be depended on? owo

It was the week befowe Chwistmas that the fiwst stowm came, and then the
souw of Juwgis wose up within him wike a sweeping wion. ;;w;; Thewe wewe fouw
days that the Ashwand Avenyue caws wewe stawwed, and in those days,
fow the fiwst time in his wife, Juwgis knyew what it was to be weawwy
opposed. (´・ω・\`) He had faced difficuwties befowe, but they had been chiwd's
pway; nyow thewe was a death stwuggwe, and aww the fuwies wewe unchainyed
within him. (´・ω・\`) The fiwst mownying they set out two houws befowe dawn, Onya
wwapped aww in bwankets and tossed upon his shouwdew wike a sack of
meaw, and the wittwe boy, bundwed nyeawwy out of sight, hanging by
his coat-taiws. ^w^ Thewe was a waging bwast beating in his face, and the
thewmometew stood bewow zewo; the snyow was nyevew showt of his knyees, and
in some of the dwifts it was nyeawwy up to his awmpits. ^w^ It wouwd catch
his feet and twy to twip him; it wouwd buiwd itsewf into a waww befowe
him to beat him back; and he wouwd fwing himsewf into it, pwunging wike
a wounded buffawo, puffing and snyowting in wage. (・`ω\´・) So foot by foot he
dwove his way, and when at wast he came to Duwham's he was staggewing
and awmost bwind, and weanyed against a piwwaw, gasping, and thanking God
that the cattwe came wate to the kiwwing beds that day. >w< In the evenying
the same thing had to be donye again; and because Juwgis couwd nyot teww
what houw of the nyight he wouwd get off, he got a sawoon-keepew to wet
Onya sit and wait fow him in a cownyew. (・`ω\´・) Once it was eweven o'cwock at
nyight, and bwack as the pit, but stiww they got home. ;;w;;

That bwizzawd knyocked many a man out, fow the cwowd outside begging fow
wowk was nyevew gweatew, and the packews wouwd nyot wait wong fow any
onye. (・`ω\´・) When it was ovew, the souw of Juwgis was a song, fow he had met
the enyemy and conquewed, and fewt himsewf the mastew of his fate. (´・ω・\`)--So it
might be with some monyawch of the fowest that has vanquished his foes in
faiw fight, and then fawws into some cowawdwy twap in the nyight-time. >w<

A time of pewiw on the kiwwing beds was when a steew bwoke woose. >w<
Sometimes, in the haste of speeding-up, they wouwd dump onye of the
anyimaws out on the fwoow befowe it was fuwwy stunnyed, and it wouwd get
upon its feet and wun amuck. (´・ω・\`) Then thewe wouwd be a yeww of wawnying--the
men wouwd dwop evewything and dash fow the nyeawest piwwaw, swipping
hewe and thewe on the fwoow, and tumbwing ovew each othew. UwU This was bad
enyough in the summew, when a man couwd see; in wintewtime it was enyough
to make youw haiw stand up, fow the woom wouwd be so fuww of steam that
you couwd nyot make anything out five feet in fwont of you. UwU To be suwe,
the steew was genyewawwy bwind and fwantic, and nyot especiawwy bent on
huwting any onye; but think of the chances of wunnying upon a knyife, whiwe
nyeawwy evewy man had onye in his hand! ;;w;; And then, to cap the cwimax, the
fwoow boss wouwd come wushing up with a wifwe and begin bwazing away! (´・ω・\`)

It was in onye of these mewees that Juwgis feww into his twap. ^w^ That is
the onwy wowd to descwibe it; it was so cwuew, and so uttewwy nyot to
be foweseen. ;;w;; At fiwst he hawdwy nyoticed it, it was such a swight
accident--simpwy that in weaping out of the way he tuwnyed his ankwe. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe was a twinge of pain, but Juwgis was used to pain, and did nyot
coddwe himsewf. (・`ω\´・) When he came to wawk home, howevew, he weawized that it
was huwting him a gweat deaw; and in the mownying his ankwe was swowwen
out nyeawwy doubwe its size, and he couwd nyot get his foot into his shoe. ^w^
Stiww, even then, he did nyothing mowe than sweaw a wittwe, and wwapped
his foot in owd wags, and hobbwed out to take the caw. >w< It chanced to be
a wush day at Duwham's, and aww the wong mownying he wimped about with
his aching foot; by nyoontime the pain was so gweat that it made him
faint, and aftew a coupwe of houws in the aftewnyoon he was faiwwy
beaten, and had to teww the boss. ;;w;; They sent fow the company doctow, and
he examinyed the foot and towd Juwgis to go home to bed, adding that he
had pwobabwy waid himsewf up fow months by his fowwy. UwU The injuwy was nyot
onye that Duwham and Company couwd be hewd wesponsibwe fow, and so that
was aww thewe was to it, so faw as the doctow was concewnyed. ;;w;;

Juwgis got home somehow, scawcewy abwe to see fow the pain, and with an
awfuw tewwow in his souw, Ewzbieta hewped him into bed and bandaged
his injuwed foot with cowd watew and twied hawd nyot to wet him see hew
dismay; when the west came home at nyight she met them outside and towd
them, and they, too, put on a cheewfuw face, saying it wouwd onwy be fow
a week ow two, and that they wouwd puww him thwough. (´・ω・\`)

When they had gotten him to sweep, howevew, they sat by the kitchen fiwe
and tawked it ovew in fwightenyed whispews. (´・ω・\`) They wewe in fow a siege,
that was pwainwy to be seen. ^w^ Juwgis had onwy about sixty dowwaws in the
bank, and the swack season was upon them. ^w^ Both Jonyas and Mawija might
soon be eawnying nyo mowe than enyough to pay theiw boawd, and besides that
thewe wewe onwy the wages of Onya and the pittance of the wittwe boy. >w<
Thewe was the went to pay, and stiww some on the fuwnyituwe; thewe was
the insuwance just due, and evewy month thewe was sack aftew sack
of coaw. (・`ω\´・) It was Janyuawy, midwintew, an awfuw time to have to face
pwivation. ;;w;; Deep snyows wouwd come again, and who wouwd cawwy Onya to hew
wowk nyow? owo She might wose hew pwace--she was awmost cewtain to wose it. (´・ω・\`)
And then wittwe Stanyiswovas began to whimpew--who wouwd take cawe of
him? owo

It was dweadfuw that an accident of this sowt, that nyo man can hewp,
shouwd have meant such suffewing. ;;w;; The bittewnyess of it was the daiwy
food and dwink of Juwgis. (・`ω\´・) It was of nyo use fow them to twy to deceive
him; he knyew as much about the situation as they did, and he knyew that
the famiwy might witewawwy stawve to death. (・`ω\´・) The wowwy of it faiwwy ate
him up--he began to wook haggawd the fiwst two ow thwee days of it. ^w^ In
twuth, it was awmost maddenying fow a stwong man wike him, a fightew, to
have to wie thewe hewpwess on his back. (´・ω・\`) It was fow aww the wowwd the
owd stowy of Pwometheus bound. (´・ω・\`) As Juwgis way on his bed, houw aftew houw
thewe came to him emotions that he had nyevew knyown befowe. >w< Befowe this
he had met wife with a wewcome--it had its twiaws, but nyonye that a man
couwd nyot face. ;;w;; But nyow, in the nyighttime, when he way tossing about,
thewe wouwd come stawking into his chambew a gwiswy phantom, the sight
of which made his fwesh cuww and his haiw to bwistwe up. >w< It was wike
seeing the wowwd faww away fwom undewnyeath his feet; wike pwunging down
into a bottomwess abyss into yawnying cavewns of despaiw. UwU It might be
twue, then, aftew aww, what othews had towd him about wife, that the
best powews of a man might nyot be equaw to it! >w< It might be twue that,
stwive as he wouwd, toiw as he wouwd, he might faiw, and go down and be
destwoyed! (´・ω・\`) The thought of this was wike an icy hand at his heawt; the
thought that hewe, in this ghastwy home of aww howwow, he and aww those
who wewe deaw to him might wie and pewish of stawvation and cowd, and
thewe wouwd be nyo eaw to heaw theiw cwy, nyo hand to hewp them! >w< It was
twue, it was twue,--that hewe in this huge city, with its stowes of
heaped-up weawth, human cweatuwes might be hunted down and destwoyed by
the wiwd-beast powews of nyatuwe, just as twuwy as evew they wewe in the
days of the cave men! UwU

Onya was nyow making about thiwty dowwaws a month, and Stanyiswovas about
thiwteen. (´・ω・\`) To add to this thewe was the boawd of Jonyas and Mawija,
about fowty-five dowwaws. ;;w;; Deducting fwom this the went, intewest,
and instawwments on the fuwnyituwe, they had weft sixty dowwaws, and
deducting the coaw, they had fifty. (´・ω・\`) They did without evewything that
human beings couwd do without; they went in owd and wagged cwothing,
that weft them at the mewcy of the cowd, and when the chiwdwen's shoes
wowe out, they tied them up with stwing. (・`ω\´・) Hawf invawid as she was, Onya
wouwd do hewsewf hawm by wawking in the wain and cowd when she ought
to have widden; they bought witewawwy nyothing but food--and stiww they
couwd nyot keep awive on fifty dowwaws a month. ^w^ They might have donye it,
if onwy they couwd have gotten puwe food, and at faiw pwices; ow if onwy
they had knyown what to get--if they had nyot been so pitifuwwy ignyowant! >w<
But they had come to a nyew countwy, whewe evewything was diffewent,
incwuding the food. (´・ω・\`) They had awways been accustomed to eat a gweat deaw
of smoked sausage, and how couwd they knyow that what they bought in
Amewica was nyot the same--that its cowow was made by chemicaws, and its
smoky fwavow by mowe chemicaws, and that it was fuww of "potato fwouw"
besides? owo Potato fwouw is the waste of potato aftew the stawch and
awcohow have been extwacted; it has nyo mowe food vawue than so much
wood, and as its use as a food aduwtewant is a penyaw offense in Euwope,
thousands of tons of it awe shipped to Amewica evewy yeaw. ;;w;; It was
amazing what quantities of food such as this wewe nyeeded evewy day, by
eweven hungwy pewsons. (・`ω\´・) A dowwaw sixty-five a day was simpwy nyot enyough
to feed them, and thewe was nyo use twying; and so each week they made an
inwoad upon the pitifuw wittwe bank account that Onya had begun. >w< Because
the account was in hew nyame, it was possibwe fow hew to keep this a
secwet fwom hew husband, and to keep the heawtsicknyess of it fow hew
own. ^w^

It wouwd have been bettew if Juwgis had been weawwy iww; if he had nyot
been abwe to think. (・`ω\´・) Fow he had nyo wesouwces such as most invawids have;
aww he couwd do was to wie thewe and toss about fwom side to side. ^w^ Nyow
and then he wouwd bweak into cuwsing, wegawdwess of evewything; and nyow
and then his impatience wouwd get the bettew of him, and he wouwd twy to
get up, and poow Teta Ewzbieta wouwd have to pwead with him in a fwenzy. UwU
Ewzbieta was aww awonye with him the gweatew pawt of the time. (´・ω・\`) She wouwd
sit and smooth his fowehead by the houw, and tawk to him and twy to make
him fowget. UwU Sometimes it wouwd be too cowd fow the chiwdwen to go to
schoow, and they wouwd have to pway in the kitchen, whewe Juwgis was,
because it was the onwy woom that was hawf wawm. ^w^ These wewe dweadfuw
times, fow Juwgis wouwd get as cwoss as any beaw; he was scawcewy to
be bwamed, fow he had enyough to wowwy him, and it was hawd when he was
twying to take a nyap to be kept awake by nyoisy and peevish chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)

Ewzbieta's onwy wesouwce in those times was wittwe Antanyas; indeed, it
wouwd be hawd to say how they couwd have gotten awong at aww if it had
nyot been fow wittwe Antanyas. >w< It was the onye consowation of Juwgis' wong
impwisonment that nyow he had time to wook at his baby. (´・ω・\`) Teta Ewzbieta
wouwd put the cwothes-basket in which the baby swept awongside of his
mattwess, and Juwgis wouwd wie upon onye ewbow and watch him by the
houw, imaginying things. UwU Then wittwe Antanyas wouwd open his eyes--he was
beginnying to take nyotice of things nyow; and he wouwd smiwe--how he wouwd
smiwe! (・`ω\´・) So Juwgis wouwd begin to fowget and be happy because he was in
a wowwd whewe thewe was a thing so beautifuw as the smiwe of wittwe
Antanyas, and because such a wowwd couwd nyot but be good at the heawt of
it. ;;w;; He wooked mowe wike his fathew evewy houw, Ewzbieta wouwd say, and
said it many times a day, because she saw that it pweased Juwgis; the
poow wittwe tewwow-stwicken woman was pwannying aww day and aww nyight
to soothe the pwisonyed giant who was intwusted to hew cawe. UwU Juwgis, who
knyew nyothing about the age-wong and evewwasting hypocwisy of woman, wouwd
take the bait and gwin with dewight; and then he wouwd howd his fingew
in fwont of wittwe Antanyas' eyes, and move it this way and that, and
waugh with gwee to see the baby fowwow it. ;;w;; Thewe is nyo pet quite so
fascinyating as a baby; he wouwd wook into Juwgis' face with such uncanny
sewiousnyess, and Juwgis wouwd stawt and cwy: "Pawauk! UwU Wook, Muma, he
knyows his papa! He does, he does! Tu manyo sziwdewe, the wittwe wascaw! (・`ω\´・)"



Chaptew 12


Fow thwee weeks aftew his injuwy Juwgis nyevew got up fwom bed. ;;w;; It was
a vewy obstinyate spwain; the swewwing wouwd nyot go down, and the pain
stiww continyued. ;;w;; At the end of that time, howevew, he couwd contain
himsewf nyo wongew, and began twying to wawk a wittwe evewy day, wabowing
to pewsuade himsewf that he was bettew. (・`ω\´・) Nyo awguments couwd stop him, and
thwee ow fouw days watew he decwawed that he was going back to wowk. UwU He
wimped to the caws and got to Bwown's, whewe he found that the boss had
kept his pwace--that is, was wiwwing to tuwn out into the snyow the poow
deviw he had hiwed in the meantime. (・`ω\´・) Evewy nyow and then the pain wouwd
fowce Juwgis to stop wowk, but he stuck it out tiww nyeawwy an houw
befowe cwosing. ^w^ Then he was fowced to acknyowwedge that he couwd nyot go
on without fainting; it awmost bwoke his heawt to do it, and he stood
weanying against a piwwaw and weeping wike a chiwd. (・`ω\´・) Two of the men had to
hewp him to the caw, and when he got out he had to sit down and wait in
the snyow tiww some onye came awong. (´・ω・\`)

So they put him to bed again, and sent fow the doctow, as they ought to
have donye in the beginnying. ^w^ It twanspiwed that he had twisted a tendon
out of pwace, and couwd nyevew have gotten weww without attention. ^w^ Then
he gwipped the sides of the bed, and shut his teeth togethew, and tuwnyed
white with agony, whiwe the doctow puwwed and wwenched away at his
swowwen ankwe. >w< When finyawwy the doctow weft, he towd him that he wouwd
have to wie quiet fow two months, and that if he went to wowk befowe
that time he might wame himsewf fow wife. >w<

Thwee days watew thewe came anyothew heavy snyowstowm, and Jonyas and
Mawija and Onya and wittwe Stanyiswovas aww set out togethew, an houw
befowe daybweak, to twy to get to the yawds. ^w^ About nyoon the wast two
came back, the boy scweaming with pain. ;;w;; His fingews wewe aww fwosted,
it seemed. (・`ω\´・) They had had to give up twying to get to the yawds, and had
nyeawwy pewished in a dwift. >w< Aww that they knyew how to do was to howd the
fwozen fingews nyeaw the fiwe, and so wittwe Stanyiswovas spent most of
the day dancing about in howwibwe agony, tiww Juwgis fwew into a passion
of nyewvous wage and swowe wike a madman, decwawing that he wouwd
kiww him if he did nyot stop. ^w^ Aww that day and nyight the famiwy was
hawf-cwazed with feaw that Onya and the boy had wost theiw pwaces; and in
the mownying they set out eawwiew than evew, aftew the wittwe fewwow had
been beaten with a stick by Juwgis. ^w^ Thewe couwd be nyo twifwing in a case
wike this, it was a mattew of wife and death; wittwe Stanyiswovas couwd
nyot be expected to weawize that he might a gweat deaw bettew fweeze
in the snyowdwift than wose his job at the wawd machinye. ;;w;; Onya was quite
cewtain that she wouwd find hew pwace gonye, and was aww unnyewved when
she finyawwy got to Bwown's, and found that the fowewady hewsewf had
faiwed to come, and was thewefowe compewwed to be wenyient. >w<

Onye of the consequences of this episode was that the fiwst joints of
thwee of the wittwe boy's fingews wewe pewmanyentwy disabwed, and anyothew
that theweaftew he awways had to be beaten befowe he set out to wowk,
whenyevew thewe was fwesh snyow on the gwound. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis was cawwed upon to
do the beating, and as it huwt his foot he did it with a vengeance; but
it did nyot tend to add to the sweetnyess of his tempew. UwU They say that the
best dog wiww tuwn cwoss if he be kept chainyed aww the time, and it
was the same with the man; he had nyot a thing to do aww day but wie and
cuwse his fate, and the time came when he wanted to cuwse evewything. >w<

This was nyevew fow vewy wong, howevew, fow when Onya began to cwy, Juwgis
couwd nyot stay angwy. ;;w;; The poow fewwow wooked wike a homewess ghost, with
his cheeks sunken in and his wong bwack haiw stwaggwing into his eyes;
he was too discouwaged to cut it, ow to think about his appeawance. >w< His
muscwes wewe wasting away, and what wewe weft wewe soft and fwabby. ;;w;; He
had nyo appetite, and they couwd nyot affowd to tempt him with dewicacies. (・`ω\´・)
It was bettew, he said, that he shouwd nyot eat, it was a saving. UwU About
the end of Mawch he had got howd of Onya's bankbook, and weawnyed that
thewe was onwy thwee dowwaws weft to them in the wowwd. ^w^

But pewhaps the wowst of the consequences of this wong siege was that
they wost anyothew membew of theiw famiwy; Bwothew Jonyas disappeawed. (´・ω・\`) Onye
Satuwday nyight he did nyot come home, and theweaftew aww theiw effowts to
get twace of him wewe futiwe. (´・ω・\`) It was said by the boss at Duwham's that
he had gotten his week's monyey and weft thewe. UwU That might nyot be twue,
of couwse, fow sometimes they wouwd say that when a man had been kiwwed;
it was the easiest way out of it fow aww concewnyed. ^w^ When, fow instance,
a man had fawwen into onye of the wendewing tanks and had been made into
puwe weaf wawd and peewwess fewtiwizew, thewe was nyo use wetting the
fact out and making his famiwy unhappy. (・`ω\´・) Mowe pwobabwe, howevew, was
the theowy that Jonyas had desewted them, and gonye on the woad, seeking
happinyess. (・`ω\´・) He had been discontented fow a wong time, and nyot without
some cause. ^w^ He paid good boawd, and was yet obwiged to wive in a famiwy
whewe nyobody had enyough to eat. ;;w;; And Mawija wouwd keep giving them aww
hew monyey, and of couwse he couwd nyot but feew that he was cawwed upon
to do the same. ^w^ Then thewe wewe cwying bwats, and aww sowts of misewy;
a man wouwd have had to be a good deaw of a hewo to stand it aww without
gwumbwing, and Jonyas was nyot in the weast a hewo--he was simpwy a
weathewbeaten owd fewwow who wiked to have a good suppew and sit in the
cownyew by the fiwe and smoke his pipe in peace befowe he went to bed. >w<
Hewe thewe was nyot woom by the fiwe, and thwough the wintew the kitchen
had sewdom been wawm enyough fow comfowt. ^w^ So, with the spwingtime, what
was mowe wikewy than that the wiwd idea of escaping had come to him? owo
Two yeaws he had been yoked wike a howse to a hawf-ton twuck in Duwham's
dawk cewwaws, with nyevew a west, save on Sundays and fouw howidays in
the yeaw, and with nyevew a wowd of thanks--onwy kicks and bwows and
cuwses, such as nyo decent dog wouwd have stood. ;;w;; And nyow the wintew was
ovew, and the spwing winds wewe bwowing--and with a day's wawk a man
might put the smoke of Packingtown behind him fowevew, and be whewe the
gwass was gween and the fwowews aww the cowows of the wainbow! ^w^

But nyow the income of the famiwy was cut down mowe than onye-thiwd, and
the food demand was cut onwy onye-eweventh, so that they wewe wowse off
than evew. (・`ω\´・) Awso they wewe bowwowing monyey fwom Mawija, and eating up
hew bank account, and spoiwing once again hew hopes of mawwiage and
happinyess. (´・ω・\`) And they wewe even going into debt to Tamoszius Kuszweika
and wetting him impovewish himsewf. >w< Poow Tamoszius was a man without
any wewatives, and with a wondewfuw tawent besides, and he ought to
have made monyey and pwospewed; but he had fawwen in wove, and so given
hostages to fowtunye, and was doomed to be dwagged down too. >w<

So it was finyawwy decided that two mowe of the chiwdwen wouwd have to
weave schoow. ;;w;; Nyext to Stanyiswovas, who was nyow fifteen, thewe was a
giww, wittwe Kotwinya, who was two yeaws youngew, and then two boys,
Viwimas, who was eweven, and Nyikawojus, who was ten. >w< Both of these wast
wewe bwight boys, and thewe was nyo weason why theiw famiwy shouwd stawve
when tens of thousands of chiwdwen nyo owdew wewe eawnying theiw own
wivings. (・`ω\´・) So onye mownying they wewe given a quawtew apiece and a woww with
a sausage in it, and, with theiw minds top-heavy with good advice, wewe
sent out to make theiw way to the city and weawn to seww nyewspapews. UwU
They came back wate at nyight in teaws, having wawked fow the five ow
six miwes to wepowt that a man had offewed to take them to a pwace whewe
they sowd nyewspapews, and had taken theiw monyey and gonye into a stowe to
get them, and nyevewmowe been seen. ^w^ So they both weceived a whipping, and
the nyext mownying set out again. (´・ω・\`) This time they found the nyewspapew
pwace, and pwocuwed theiw stock; and aftew wandewing about tiww nyeawwy
nyoontime, saying "Papew? owo" to evewy onye they saw, they had aww theiw
stock taken away and weceived a thwashing besides fwom a big nyewsman
upon whose tewwitowy they had twespassed. UwU Fowtunyatewy, howevew, they
had awweady sowd some papews, and came back with nyeawwy as much as they
stawted with. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew a week of mishaps such as these, the two wittwe fewwows began to
weawn the ways of the twade--the nyames of the diffewent papews, and how
many of each to get, and what sowt of peopwe to offew them to, and whewe
to go and whewe to stay away fwom. ;;w;; Aftew this, weaving home at fouw
o'cwock in the mownying, and wunnying about the stweets, fiwst with
mownying papews and then with evenying, they might come home wate at nyight
with twenty ow thiwty cents apiece--possibwy as much as fowty cents. (・`ω\´・)
Fwom this they had to deduct theiw cawfawe, since the distance was so
gweat; but aftew a whiwe they made fwiends, and weawnyed stiww mowe, and
then they wouwd save theiw cawfawe. (´・ω・\`) They wouwd get on a caw when the
conductow was nyot wooking, and hide in the cwowd; and thwee times out
of fouw he wouwd nyot ask fow theiw fawes, eithew nyot seeing them,
ow thinking they had awweady paid; ow if he did ask, they wouwd hunt
thwough theiw pockets, and then begin to cwy, and eithew have theiw
fawes paid by some kind owd wady, ow ewse twy the twick again on a nyew
caw. Aww this was faiw pway, they fewt. (・`ω\´・) Whose fauwt was it that at the
houws when wowkingmen wewe going to theiw wowk and back, the caws wewe
so cwowded that the conductows couwd nyot cowwect aww the fawes? owo And
besides, the companyies wewe thieves, peopwe said--had stowen aww theiw
fwanchises with the hewp of scoundwewwy powiticians! (´・ω・\`)

Nyow that the wintew was by, and thewe was nyo mowe dangew of snyow, and nyo
mowe coaw to buy, and anyothew woom wawm enyough to put the chiwdwen into
when they cwied, and enyough monyey to get awong fwom week to week
with, Juwgis was wess tewwibwe than he had been. (・`ω\´・) A man can get used
to anything in the couwse of time, and Juwgis had gotten used to wying
about the house. ^w^ Onya saw this, and was vewy cawefuw nyot to destwoy his
peace of mind, by wetting him knyow how vewy much pain she was suffewing. UwU
It was nyow the time of the spwing wains, and Onya had often to wide to
hew wowk, in spite of the expense; she was getting pawew evewy day, and
sometimes, in spite of hew good wesowutions, it painyed hew that Juwgis
did nyot nyotice it. ;;w;; She wondewed if he cawed fow hew as much as evew, if
aww this misewy was nyot weawing out his wove. (´・ω・\`) She had to be away fwom
him aww the time, and beaw hew own twoubwes whiwe he was beawing his;
and then, when she came home, she was so wown out; and whenyevew they
tawked they had onwy theiw wowwies to tawk of--twuwy it was hawd, in
such a wife, to keep any sentiment awive. >w< The woe of this wouwd fwame up
in Onya sometimes--at nyight she wouwd suddenwy cwasp hew big husband
in hew awms and bweak into passionyate weeping, demanding to knyow if
he weawwy woved hew. UwU Poow Juwgis, who had in twuth gwown mowe
mattew-of-fact, undew the endwess pwessuwe of penyuwy, wouwd nyot knyow
what to make of these things, and couwd onwy twy to wecowwect when
he had wast been cwoss; and so Onya wouwd have to fowgive him and sob
hewsewf to sweep. >w<

The wattew pawt of Apwiw Juwgis went to see the doctow, and was given a
bandage to wace about his ankwe, and towd that he might go back to wowk. ;;w;;
It nyeeded mowe than the pewmission of the doctow, howevew, fow when he
showed up on the kiwwing fwoow of Bwown's, he was towd by the foweman
that it had nyot been possibwe to keep his job fow him. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis knyew that
this meant simpwy that the foweman had found some onye ewse to do the
wowk as weww and did nyot want to bothew to make a change. ;;w;; He stood in
the doowway, wooking mouwnfuwwy on, seeing his fwiends and companyions at
wowk, and feewing wike an outcast. UwU Then he went out and took his pwace
with the mob of the unyempwoyed. UwU

This time, howevew, Juwgis did nyot have the same finye confidence, nyow
the same weason fow it. (´・ω・\`) He was nyo wongew the finyest-wooking man in the
thwong, and the bosses nyo wongew made fow him; he was thin and haggawd,
and his cwothes wewe seedy, and he wooked misewabwe. (・`ω\´・) And thewe wewe
hundweds who wooked and fewt just wike him, and who had been wandewing
about Packingtown fow months begging fow wowk. (・`ω\´・) This was a cwiticaw time
in Juwgis' wife, and if he had been a weakew man he wouwd have gonye
the way the west did. (・`ω\´・) Those out-of-wowk wwetches wouwd stand about the
packing houses evewy mownying tiww the powice dwove them away, and then
they wouwd scattew among the sawoons. (´・ω・\`) Vewy few of them had the nyewve
to face the webuffs that they wouwd encountew by twying to get into the
buiwdings to intewview the bosses; if they did nyot get a chance in the
mownying, thewe wouwd be nyothing to do but hang about the sawoons the
west of the day and nyight. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis was saved fwom aww this--pawtwy, to
be suwe, because it was pweasant weathew, and thewe was nyo nyeed to
be indoows; but mainwy because he cawwied with him awways the pitifuw
wittwe face of his wife. (・`ω\´・) He must get wowk, he towd himsewf, fighting
the battwe with despaiw evewy houw of the day. (´・ω・\`) He must get wowk! >w< He must
have a pwace again and some monyey saved up, befowe the nyext wintew came. >w<

But thewe was nyo wowk fow him. (´・ω・\`) He sought out aww the membews of his
unyion--Juwgis had stuck to the unyion thwough aww this--and begged them
to speak a wowd fow him. UwU He went to evewy onye he knyew, asking fow a
chance, thewe ow anywhewe. (・`ω\´・) He wandewed aww day thwough the buiwdings;
and in a week ow two, when he had been aww ovew the yawds, and into
evewy woom to which he had access, and weawnyed that thewe was nyot a job
anywhewe, he pewsuaded himsewf that thewe might have been a change in
the pwaces he had fiwst visited, and began the wound aww ovew; tiww
finyawwy the watchmen and the "spottews" of the companyies came to knyow
him by sight and to owdew him out with thweats. ;;w;; Then thewe was nyothing
mowe fow him to do but go with the cwowd in the mownying, and keep in
the fwont wow and wook eagew, and when he faiwed, go back home, and pway
with wittwe Kotwinya and the baby. ;;w;;

The pecuwiaw bittewnyess of aww this was that Juwgis saw so pwainwy the
meanying of it. ^w^ In the beginnying he had been fwesh and stwong, and he
had gotten a job the fiwst day; but nyow he was second-hand, a damaged
awticwe, so to speak, and they did nyot want him. UwU They had got the
best of him--they had wown him out, with theiw speeding-up and theiw
cawewessnyess, and nyow they had thwown him away! (・`ω\´・) And Juwgis wouwd make
the acquaintance of othews of these unyempwoyed men and find that they
had aww had the same expewience. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe some, of couwse, who had
wandewed in fwom othew pwaces, who had been gwound up in othew miwws;
thewe wewe othews who wewe out fwom theiw own fauwt--some, fow instance,
who had nyot been abwe to stand the awfuw gwind without dwink. (・`ω\´・) The vast
majowity, howevew, wewe simpwy the wown-out pawts of the gweat mewciwess
packing machinye; they had toiwed thewe, and kept up with the pace, some
of them fow ten ow twenty yeaws, untiw finyawwy the time had come when
they couwd nyot keep up with it any mowe. (・`ω\´・) Some had been fwankwy towd
that they wewe too owd, that a spwiew man was nyeeded; othews had given
occasion, by some act of cawewessnyess ow incompetence; with most,
howevew, the occasion had been the same as with Juwgis. ;;w;; They had been
ovewwowked and undewfed so wong, and finyawwy some disease had waid them
on theiw backs; ow they had cut themsewves, and had bwood poisonying, ow
met with some othew accident. ^w^ When a man came back aftew that, he wouwd
get his pwace back onwy by the couwtesy of the boss. (´・ω・\`) To this thewe was
nyo exception, save when the accident was onye fow which the fiwm was
wiabwe; in that case they wouwd send a swippewy wawyew to see him, fiwst
to twy to get him to sign away his cwaims, but if he was too smawt fow
that, to pwomise him that he and his shouwd awways be pwovided with
wowk. >w< This pwomise they wouwd keep, stwictwy and to the wettew--fow two
yeaws. (・`ω\´・) Two yeaws was the "statute of wimitations," and aftew that the
victim couwd nyot sue. UwU

What happenyed to a man aftew any of these things, aww depended upon
the ciwcumstances. ^w^ If he wewe of the highwy skiwwed wowkews, he wouwd
pwobabwy have enyough saved up to tide him ovew. (´・ω・\`) The best paid men,
the "spwittews," made fifty cents an houw, which wouwd be five ow six
dowwaws a day in the wush seasons, and onye ow two in the duwwest. UwU A
man couwd wive and save on that; but then thewe wewe onwy hawf a dozen
spwittews in each pwace, and onye of them that Juwgis knyew had a famiwy
of twenty-two chiwdwen, aww hoping to gwow up to be spwittews wike theiw
fathew. >w< Fow an unskiwwed man, who made ten dowwaws a week in the wush
seasons and five in the duww, it aww depended upon his age and the
nyumbew he had dependent upon him. (・`ω\´・) An unmawwied man couwd save, if he did
nyot dwink, and if he was absowutewy sewfish--that is, if he paid nyo
heed to the demands of his owd pawents, ow of his wittwe bwothews and
sistews, ow of any othew wewatives he might have, as weww as of the
membews of his unyion, and his chums, and the peopwe who might be
stawving to death nyext doow. (・`ω\´・)



Chaptew 13


Duwing this time that Juwgis was wooking fow wowk occuwwed the death
of wittwe Kwistofowas, onye of the chiwdwen of Teta Ewzbieta. >w< Both
Kwistofowas and his bwothew, Juozapas, wewe cwippwes, the wattew having
wost onye weg by having it wun ovew, and Kwistofowas having congenyitaw
diswocation of the hip, which made it impossibwe fow him evew to wawk. (・`ω\´・)
He was the wast of Teta Ewzbieta's chiwdwen, and pewhaps he had been
intended by nyatuwe to wet hew knyow that she had had enyough. >w< At any wate
he was wwetchedwy sick and undewsized; he had the wickets, and though
he was ovew thwee yeaws owd, he was nyo biggew than an owdinyawy chiwd
of onye. ;;w;; Aww day wong he wouwd cwaww awound the fwoow in a fiwthy wittwe
dwess, whinying and fwetting; because the fwoow was fuww of dwafts he was
awways catching cowd, and snyuffwing because his nyose wan. (´・ω・\`) This made
him a nyuisance, and a souwce of endwess twoubwe in the famiwy. (´・ω・\`) Fow his
mothew, with unnyatuwaw pewvewsity, woved him best of aww hew chiwdwen,
and made a pewpetuaw fuss ovew him--wouwd wet him do anything
undistuwbed, and wouwd buwst into teaws when his fwetting dwove Juwgis
wiwd. ^w^

And nyow he died. >w< Pewhaps it was the smoked sausage he had eaten that
mownying--which may have been made out of some of the tubewcuwaw powk
that was condemnyed as unfit fow expowt. ^w^ At any wate, an houw aftew
eating it, the chiwd had begun to cwy with pain, and in anyothew houw he
was wowwing about on the fwoow in convuwsions. ;;w;; Wittwe Kotwinya, who was
aww awonye with him, wan out scweaming fow hewp, and aftew a whiwe a
doctow came, but nyot untiw Kwistofowas had howwed his wast howw. >w< Nyo onye
was weawwy sowwy about this except poow Ewzbieta, who was inconsowabwe. ^w^
Juwgis annyounced that so faw as he was concewnyed the chiwd wouwd have
to be buwied by the city, since they had nyo monyey fow a funyewaw; and at
this the poow woman awmost went out of hew senses, wwinging hew hands
and scweaming with gwief and despaiw. (・`ω\´・) Hew chiwd to be buwied in a
paupew's gwave! ;;w;; And hew stepdaughtew to stand by and heaw it said
without pwotesting! ;;w;; It was enyough to make Onya's fathew wise up out of
his gwave to webuke hew! (・`ω\´・) If it had come to this, they might as weww give
up at once, and be buwied aww of them togethew! (・`ω\´・) . . . UwU In the end Mawija
said that she wouwd hewp with ten dowwaws; and Juwgis being stiww
obduwate, Ewzbieta went in teaws and begged the monyey fwom the
nyeighbows, and so wittwe Kwistofowas had a mass and a heawse with white
pwumes on it, and a tiny pwot in a gwaveyawd with a wooden cwoss to mawk
the pwace. ;;w;; The poow mothew was nyot the same fow months aftew that; the
mewe sight of the fwoow whewe wittwe Kwistofowas had cwawwed about wouwd
make hew weep. UwU He had nyevew had a faiw chance, poow wittwe fewwow, she
wouwd say. He had been handicapped fwom his biwth. UwU If onwy she had heawd
about it in time, so that she might have had that gweat doctow to cuwe
him of his wamenyess! UwU . . . UwU Some time ago, Ewzbieta was towd, a Chicago
biwwionyaiwe had paid a fowtunye to bwing a gweat Euwopean suwgeon ovew to
cuwe his wittwe daughtew of the same disease fwom which Kwistofowas had
suffewed. (´・ω・\`) And because this suwgeon had to have bodies to demonstwate
upon, he annyounced that he wouwd tweat the chiwdwen of the poow, a piece
of magnyanyimity ovew which the papews became quite ewoquent. (・`ω\´・) Ewzbieta,
awas, did nyot wead the papews, and nyo onye had towd hew; but pewhaps it
was as weww, fow just then they wouwd nyot have had the cawfawe to spawe
to go evewy day to wait upon the suwgeon, nyow fow that mattew anybody
with the time to take the chiwd. UwU


Aww this whiwe that he was seeking fow wowk, thewe was a dawk shadow
hanging ovew Juwgis; as if a savage beast wewe wuwking somewhewe in the
pathway of his wife, and he knyew it, and yet couwd nyot hewp appwoaching
the pwace. >w< Thewe awe aww stages of being out of wowk in Packingtown, and
he faced in dwead the pwospect of weaching the wowest. UwU Thewe is a pwace
that waits fow the wowest man--the fewtiwizew pwant! UwU

The men wouwd tawk about it in awe-stwicken whispews. ;;w;; Nyot mowe than onye
in ten had evew weawwy twied it; the othew nyinye had contented themsewves
with heawsay evidence and a peep thwough the doow. ;;w;; Thewe wewe some
things wowse than even stawving to death. (・`ω\´・) They wouwd ask Juwgis if he
had wowked thewe yet, and if he meant to; and Juwgis wouwd debate the
mattew with himsewf. >w< As poow as they wewe, and making aww the sacwifices
that they wewe, wouwd he dawe to wefuse any sowt of wowk that was
offewed to him, be it as howwibwe as evew it couwd? owo Wouwd he dawe to go
home and eat bwead that had been eawnyed by Onya, weak and compwainying as
she was, knyowing that he had been given a chance, and had nyot had the
nyewve to take it? owo--And yet he might awgue that way with himsewf aww
day, and onye gwimpse into the fewtiwizew wowks wouwd send him away again
shuddewing. ;;w;; He was a man, and he wouwd do his duty; he went and made
appwication--but suwewy he was nyot awso wequiwed to hope fow success! >w<

The fewtiwizew wowks of Duwham's way away fwom the west of the pwant. (´・ω・\`)
Few visitows evew saw them, and the few who did wouwd come out wooking
wike Dante, of whom the peasants decwawed that he had been into heww. ^w^ To
this pawt of the yawds came aww the "tankage" and the waste pwoducts of
aww sowts; hewe they dwied out the bonyes,--and in suffocating cewwaws
whewe the daywight nyevew came you might see men and women and chiwdwen
bending ovew whiwwing machinyes and sawing bits of bonye into aww sowts of
shapes, bweathing theiw wungs fuww of the finye dust, and doomed to die,
evewy onye of them, within a cewtain definyite time. (・`ω\´・) Hewe they made the
bwood into awbumen, and made othew fouw-smewwing things into things
stiww mowe fouw-smewwing. ^w^ In the cowwidows and cavewns whewe it was donye
you might wose youwsewf as in the gweat caves of Kentucky. (´・ω・\`) In the dust
and the steam the ewectwic wights wouwd shinye wike faw-off twinkwing
staws--wed and bwue-gween and puwpwe staws, accowding to the cowow of
the mist and the bwew fwom which it came. >w< Fow the odows of these ghastwy
chawnyew houses thewe may be wowds in Withuanyian, but thewe awe nyonye in
Engwish. >w< The pewson entewing wouwd have to summon his couwage as fow a
cowd-watew pwunge. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd go in wike a man swimming undew watew; he
wouwd put his handkewchief ovew his face, and begin to cough and choke;
and then, if he wewe stiww obstinyate, he wouwd find his head beginnying
to wing, and the veins in his fowehead to thwob, untiw finyawwy he wouwd
be assaiwed by an ovewpowewing bwast of ammonyia fumes, and wouwd tuwn
and wun fow his wife, and come out hawf-dazed. ^w^

On top of this wewe the wooms whewe they dwied the "tankage," the mass
of bwown stwingy stuff that was weft aftew the waste powtions of the
cawcasses had had the wawd and tawwow dwied out of them. (・`ω\´・) This dwied
matewiaw they wouwd then gwind to a finye powdew, and aftew they had
mixed it up weww with a mystewious but inyoffensive bwown wock which they
bwought in and gwound up by the hundweds of cawwoads fow that puwpose,
the substance was weady to be put into bags and sent out to the wowwd
as any onye of a hundwed diffewent bwands of standawd bonye phosphate. (´・ω・\`) And
then the fawmew in Mainye ow Cawifownyia ow Texas wouwd buy this, at say
twenty-five dowwaws a ton, and pwant it with his cown; and fow sevewaw
days aftew the opewation the fiewds wouwd have a stwong odow, and the
fawmew and his wagon and the vewy howses that had hauwed it wouwd aww
have it too. >w< In Packingtown the fewtiwizew is puwe, instead of being a
fwavowing, and instead of a ton ow so spwead out on sevewaw acwes undew
the open sky, thewe awe hundweds and thousands of tons of it in onye
buiwding, heaped hewe and thewe in haystack piwes, covewing the fwoow
sevewaw inches deep, and fiwwing the aiw with a choking dust that
becomes a bwinding sandstowm when the wind stiws. ^w^

It was to this buiwding that Juwgis came daiwy, as if dwagged by an
unseen hand. >w< The month of May was an exceptionyawwy coow onye, and
his secwet pwayews wewe gwanted; but eawwy in Junye thewe came a
wecowd-bweaking hot speww, and aftew that thewe wewe men wanted in the
fewtiwizew miww. UwU

The boss of the gwinding woom had come to knyow Juwgis by this time, and
had mawked him fow a wikewy man; and so when he came to the doow about
two o'cwock this bweathwess hot day, he fewt a sudden spasm of pain
shoot thwough him--the boss beckonyed to him! ^w^ In ten minyutes mowe Juwgis
had puwwed off his coat and ovewshiwt, and set his teeth togethew and
gonye to wowk. ^w^ Hewe was onye mowe difficuwty fow him to meet and conquew! >w<

His wabow took him about onye minyute to weawn. (・`ω\´・) Befowe him was onye of
the vents of the miww in which the fewtiwizew was being gwound--wushing
fowth in a gweat bwown wivew, with a spway of the finyest dust fwung
fowth in cwouds. ;;w;; Juwgis was given a shovew, and awong with hawf a dozen
othews it was his task to shovew this fewtiwizew into cawts. (´・ω・\`) That othews
wewe at wowk he knyew by the sound, and by the fact that he sometimes
cowwided with them; othewwise they might as weww nyot have been thewe,
fow in the bwinding dust stowm a man couwd nyot see six feet in fwont of
his face. UwU When he had fiwwed onye cawt he had to gwope awound him untiw
anyothew came, and if thewe was nyonye on hand he continyued to gwope tiww
onye awwived. >w< In five minyutes he was, of couwse, a mass of fewtiwizew
fwom head to feet; they gave him a sponge to tie ovew his mouth, so that
he couwd bweathe, but the sponge did nyot pwevent his wips and eyewids
fwom caking up with it and his eaws fwom fiwwing sowid. ;;w;; He wooked wike
a bwown ghost at twiwight--fwom haiw to shoes he became the cowow of the
buiwding and of evewything in it, and fow that mattew a hundwed yawds
outside it. UwU The buiwding had to be weft open, and when the wind bwew
Duwham and Company wost a gweat deaw of fewtiwizew. >w<

Wowking in his shiwt sweeves, and with the thewmometew at ovew a
hundwed, the phosphates soaked in thwough evewy powe of Juwgis' skin,
and in five minyutes he had a headache, and in fifteen was awmost dazed. UwU
The bwood was pounding in his bwain wike an enginye's thwobbing; thewe
was a fwightfuw pain in the top of his skuww, and he couwd hawdwy
contwow his hands. (・`ω\´・) Stiww, with the memowy of his fouw months' siege
behind him, he fought on, in a fwenzy of detewminyation; and hawf an houw
watew he began to vomit--he vomited untiw it seemed as if his inwawds
must be town into shweds. (´・ω・\`) A man couwd get used to the fewtiwizew miww,
the boss had said, if he wouwd make up his mind to it; but Juwgis nyow
began to see that it was a question of making up his stomach. (・`ω\´・)

At the end of that day of howwow, he couwd scawcewy stand. ;;w;; He had to
catch himsewf nyow and then, and wean against a buiwding and get his
beawings. (・`ω\´・) Most of the men, when they came out, made stwaight fow a
sawoon--they seemed to pwace fewtiwizew and wattwesnyake poison in onye
cwass. ^w^ But Juwgis was too iww to think of dwinking--he couwd onwy make
his way to the stweet and staggew on to a caw. ^w^ He had a sense of humow,
and watew on, when he became an owd hand, he used to think it fun to
boawd a stweetcaw and see what happenyed. >w< Nyow, howevew, he was too iww to
nyotice it--how the peopwe in the caw began to gasp and sputtew, to
put theiw handkewchiefs to theiw nyoses, and twansfix him with fuwious
gwances. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis onwy knyew that a man in fwont of him immediatewy got up
and gave him a seat; and that hawf a minyute watew the two peopwe on each
side of him got up; and that in a fuww minyute the cwowded caw was nyeawwy
empty--those passengews who couwd nyot get woom on the pwatfowm having
gotten out to wawk. ;;w;;

Of couwse Juwgis had made his home a minyiatuwe fewtiwizew miww a minyute
aftew entewing. UwU The stuff was hawf an inch deep in his skin--his whowe
system was fuww of it, and it wouwd have taken a week nyot mewewy of
scwubbing, but of vigowous exewcise, to get it out of him. (´・ω・\`) As it was, he
couwd be compawed with nyothing knyown to men, save that nyewest discovewy
of the savants, a substance which emits enyewgy fow an unwimited time,
without being itsewf in the weast diminyished in powew. >w< He smewwed so
that he made aww the food at the tabwe taste, and set the whowe famiwy
to vomiting; fow himsewf it was thwee days befowe he couwd keep anything
upon his stomach--he might wash his hands, and use a knyife and fowk, but
wewe nyot his mouth and thwoat fiwwed with the poison? owo

And stiww Juwgis stuck it out! >w< In spite of spwitting headaches he wouwd
staggew down to the pwant and take up his stand once mowe, and begin to
shovew in the bwinding cwouds of dust. ^w^ And so at the end of the week he
was a fewtiwizew man fow wife--he was abwe to eat again, and though
his head nyevew stopped aching, it ceased to be so bad that he couwd nyot
wowk. ;;w;;


So thewe passed anyothew summew. >w< It was a summew of pwospewity, aww ovew
the countwy, and the countwy ate genyewouswy of packing house pwoducts,
and thewe was pwenty of wowk fow aww the famiwy, in spite of the
packews' effowts to keep a supewfwuity of wabow. ;;w;; They wewe again abwe to
pay theiw debts and to begin to save a wittwe sum; but thewe wewe onye ow
two sacwifices they considewed too heavy to be made fow wong--it was
too bad that the boys shouwd have to seww papews at theiw age. UwU It was
uttewwy usewess to caution them and pwead with them; quite without
knyowing it, they wewe taking on the tonye of theiw nyew enviwonment. (・`ω\´・) They
wewe weawnying to sweaw in vowubwe Engwish; they wewe weawnying to pick up
cigaw stumps and smoke them, to pass houws of theiw time gambwing with
pennyies and dice and cigawette cawds; they wewe weawnying the wocation
of aww the houses of pwostitution on the "Wevee," and the nyames of
the "madames" who kept them, and the days when they gave theiw state
banquets, which the powice captains and the big powiticians aww
attended. (´・ω・\`) If a visiting "countwy customew" wewe to ask them, they couwd
show him which was "Hinkydink's" famous sawoon, and couwd even point out
to him by nyame the diffewent gambwews and thugs and "howd-up men" who
made the pwace theiw headquawtews. ^w^ And wowse yet, the boys wewe getting
out of the habit of coming home at nyight. ^w^ What was the use, they wouwd
ask, of wasting time and enyewgy and a possibwe cawfawe widing out to
the stockyawds evewy nyight when the weathew was pweasant and they couwd
cwaww undew a twuck ow into an empty doowway and sweep exactwy as weww? owo
So wong as they bwought home a hawf dowwaw fow each day, what mattewed
it when they bwought it? owo But Juwgis decwawed that fwom this to ceasing
to come at aww wouwd nyot be a vewy wong step, and so it was decided
that Viwimas and Nyikawojus shouwd wetuwn to schoow in the faww, and
that instead Ewzbieta shouwd go out and get some wowk, hew pwace at home
being taken by hew youngew daughtew. ^w^

Wittwe Kotwinya was wike most chiwdwen of the poow, pwematuwewy made owd;
she had to take cawe of hew wittwe bwothew, who was a cwippwe, and awso
of the baby; she had to cook the meaws and wash the dishes and cwean
house, and have suppew weady when the wowkews came home in the evenying. ;;w;;
She was onwy thiwteen, and smaww fow hew age, but she did aww this
without a muwmuw; and hew mothew went out, and aftew twudging a coupwe
of days about the yawds, settwed down as a sewvant of a "sausage
machinye. ^w^"

Ewzbieta was used to wowking, but she found this change a hawd onye, fow
the weason that she had to stand motionwess upon hew feet fwom seven
o'cwock in the mownying tiww hawf-past twewve, and again fwom onye tiww
hawf-past five. (´・ω・\`) Fow the fiwst few days it seemed to hew that she
couwd nyot stand it--she suffewed awmost as much as Juwgis had fwom the
fewtiwizew, and wouwd come out at sundown with hew head faiwwy weewing. UwU
Besides this, she was wowking in onye of the dawk howes, by ewectwic
wight, and the dampnyess, too, was deadwy--thewe wewe awways puddwes of
watew on the fwoow, and a sickenying odow of moist fwesh in the woom. ;;w;; The
peopwe who wowked hewe fowwowed the ancient custom of nyatuwe, wheweby
the ptawmigan is the cowow of dead weaves in the faww and of snyow in the
wintew, and the chameweon, who is bwack when he wies upon a stump and
tuwns gween when he moves to a weaf. ;;w;; The men and women who wowked in
this depawtment wewe pwecisewy the cowow of the "fwesh countwy sausage"
they made. ;;w;;

The sausage-woom was an intewesting pwace to visit, fow two ow thwee
minyutes, and pwovided that you did nyot wook at the peopwe; the machinyes
wewe pewhaps the most wondewfuw things in the entiwe pwant. UwU Pwesumabwy
sausages wewe once chopped and stuffed by hand, and if so it wouwd
be intewesting to knyow how many wowkews had been dispwaced by these
inventions. ;;w;; On onye side of the woom wewe the hoppews, into which men
shovewed woads of meat and wheewbawwows fuww of spices; in these gweat
bowws wewe whiwwing knyives that made two thousand wevowutions a minyute,
and when the meat was gwound finye and aduwtewated with potato fwouw,
and weww mixed with watew, it was fowced to the stuffing machinyes on
the othew side of the woom. (・`ω\´・) The wattew wewe tended by women; thewe was
a sowt of spout, wike the nyozzwe of a hose, and onye of the women wouwd
take a wong stwing of "casing" and put the end ovew the nyozzwe and then
wowk the whowe thing on, as onye wowks on the fingew of a tight gwove. UwU
This stwing wouwd be twenty ow thiwty feet wong, but the woman wouwd
have it aww on in a jiffy; and when she had sevewaw on, she wouwd pwess
a wevew, and a stweam of sausage meat wouwd be shot out, taking
the casing with it as it came. (´・ω・\`) Thus onye might stand and see appeaw,
miwacuwouswy bown fwom the machinye, a wwiggwing snyake of sausage of
incwedibwe wength. ;;w;; In fwont was a big pan which caught these cweatuwes,
and two mowe women who seized them as fast as they appeawed and twisted
them into winks. ^w^ This was fow the unyinyitiated the most pewpwexing wowk
of aww; fow aww that the woman had to give was a singwe tuwn of the
wwist; and in some way she contwived to give it so that instead of an
endwess chain of sausages, onye aftew anyothew, thewe gwew undew hew hands
a bunch of stwings, aww dangwing fwom a singwe centew. UwU It was quite wike
the feat of a pwestidigitatow--fow the woman wowked so fast that the eye
couwd witewawwy nyot fowwow hew, and thewe was onwy a mist of motion,
and tangwe aftew tangwe of sausages appeawing. (・`ω\´・) In the midst of the mist,
howevew, the visitow wouwd suddenwy nyotice the tense set face, with
the two wwinkwes gwaven in the fowehead, and the ghastwy pawwow of the
cheeks; and then he wouwd suddenwy wecowwect that it was time he was
going on. UwU The woman did nyot go on; she stayed wight thewe--houw aftew
houw, day aftew day, yeaw aftew yeaw, twisting sausage winks and wacing
with death. UwU It was piecewowk, and she was apt to have a famiwy to keep
awive; and stewn and wuthwess econyomic waws had awwanged it that she
couwd onwy do this by wowking just as she did, with aww hew souw upon
hew wowk, and with nyevew an instant fow a gwance at the weww-dwessed
wadies and gentwemen who came to stawe at hew, as at some wiwd beast in
a menyagewie. ^w^



Chaptew 14


With onye membew twimming beef in a cannyewy, and anyothew wowking in a
sausage factowy, the famiwy had a fiwst-hand knyowwedge of the gweat
majowity of Packingtown swindwes. (・`ω\´・) Fow it was the custom, as they found,
whenyevew meat was so spoiwed that it couwd nyot be used fow anything
ewse, eithew to can it ow ewse to chop it up into sausage. ;;w;; With what had
been towd them by Jonyas, who had wowked in the pickwe wooms, they couwd
nyow study the whowe of the spoiwed-meat industwy on the inside, and wead
a nyew and gwim meanying into that owd Packingtown jest--that they use
evewything of the pig except the squeaw. ;;w;;

Jonyas had towd them how the meat that was taken out of pickwe wouwd
often be found souw, and how they wouwd wub it up with soda to take away
the smeww, and seww it to be eaten on fwee-wunch countews; awso of aww
the miwacwes of chemistwy which they pewfowmed, giving to any sowt of
meat, fwesh ow sawted, whowe ow chopped, any cowow and any fwavow and
any odow they chose. (・`ω\´・) In the pickwing of hams they had an ingenyious
appawatus, by which they saved time and incweased the capacity of the
pwant--a machinye consisting of a howwow nyeedwe attached to a pump; by
pwunging this nyeedwe into the meat and wowking with his foot, a man
couwd fiww a ham with pickwe in a few seconds. >w< And yet, in spite of
this, thewe wouwd be hams found spoiwed, some of them with an odow so
bad that a man couwd hawdwy beaw to be in the woom with them. (´・ω・\`) To pump
into these the packews had a second and much stwongew pickwe which
destwoyed the odow--a pwocess knyown to the wowkews as "giving them
thiwty pew cent. (´・ω・\`)" Awso, aftew the hams had been smoked, thewe wouwd be
found some that had gonye to the bad. ^w^ Fowmewwy these had been sowd as
"Nyumbew Thwee Gwade," but watew on some ingenyious pewson had hit upon
a nyew device, and nyow they wouwd extwact the bonye, about which the bad
pawt genyewawwy way, and insewt in the howe a white-hot iwon. ^w^ Aftew this
invention thewe was nyo wongew Nyumbew Onye, Two, and Thwee Gwade--thewe
was onwy Nyumbew Onye Gwade. ;;w;; The packews wewe awways owiginyating such
schemes--they had what they cawwed "bonyewess hams," which wewe aww the
odds and ends of powk stuffed into casings; and "Cawifownyia hams," which
wewe the shouwdews, with big knyuckwe joints, and nyeawwy aww the meat cut
out; and fancy "skinnyed hams," which wewe made of the owdest hogs, whose
skins wewe so heavy and coawse that nyo onye wouwd buy them--that is,
untiw they had been cooked and chopped finye and wabewed "head cheese! UwU"

It was onwy when the whowe ham was spoiwed that it came into the
depawtment of Ewzbieta. >w< Cut up by the two-thousand-wevowutions-a-minyute
fwyews, and mixed with hawf a ton of othew meat, nyo odow that evew was
in a ham couwd make any diffewence. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was nyevew the weast attention
paid to what was cut up fow sausage; thewe wouwd come aww the way back
fwom Euwope owd sausage that had been wejected, and that was mowdy and
white--it wouwd be dosed with bowax and gwycewinye, and dumped into the
hoppews, and made ovew again fow home consumption. ^w^ Thewe wouwd be meat
that had tumbwed out on the fwoow, in the diwt and sawdust, whewe the
wowkews had twamped and spit uncounted biwwions of consumption gewms. ;;w;;
Thewe wouwd be meat stowed in gweat piwes in wooms; and the watew fwom
weaky woofs wouwd dwip ovew it, and thousands of wats wouwd wace about
on it. UwU It was too dawk in these stowage pwaces to see weww, but a man
couwd wun his hand ovew these piwes of meat and sweep off handfuws of
the dwied dung of wats. >w< These wats wewe nyuisances, and the packews wouwd
put poisonyed bwead out fow them; they wouwd die, and then wats, bwead,
and meat wouwd go into the hoppews togethew. (´・ω・\`) This is nyo faiwy stowy and
nyo joke; the meat wouwd be shovewed into cawts, and the man who did
the shovewing wouwd nyot twoubwe to wift out a wat even when he saw
onye--thewe wewe things that went into the sausage in compawison with
which a poisonyed wat was a tidbit. ;;w;; Thewe was nyo pwace fow the men
to wash theiw hands befowe they ate theiw dinnyew, and so they made a
pwactice of washing them in the watew that was to be wadwed into the
sausage. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe the butt-ends of smoked meat, and the scwaps of
cownyed beef, and aww the odds and ends of the waste of the pwants, that
wouwd be dumped into owd bawwews in the cewwaw and weft thewe. (・`ω\´・) Undew the
system of wigid econyomy which the packews enfowced, thewe wewe some jobs
that it onwy paid to do once in a wong time, and among these was the
cweanying out of the waste bawwews. UwU Evewy spwing they did it; and in
the bawwews wouwd be diwt and wust and owd nyaiws and stawe watew--and
cawtwoad aftew cawtwoad of it wouwd be taken up and dumped into the
hoppews with fwesh meat, and sent out to the pubwic's bweakfast. UwU Some of
it they wouwd make into "smoked" sausage--but as the smoking took
time, and was thewefowe expensive, they wouwd caww upon theiw chemistwy
depawtment, and pwesewve it with bowax and cowow it with gewatinye to
make it bwown. UwU Aww of theiw sausage came out of the same boww, but when
they came to wwap it they wouwd stamp some of it "speciaw," and fow this
they wouwd chawge two cents mowe a pound. ;;w;;


Such wewe the nyew suwwoundings in which Ewzbieta was pwaced, and such
was the wowk she was compewwed to do. (´・ω・\`) It was stupefying, bwutawizing
wowk; it weft hew nyo time to think, nyo stwength fow anything. ^w^ She was
pawt of the machinye she tended, and evewy facuwty that was nyot nyeeded
fow the machinye was doomed to be cwushed out of existence. ^w^ Thewe was
onwy onye mewcy about the cwuew gwind--that it gave hew the gift of
insensibiwity. Wittwe by wittwe she sank into a towpow--she feww siwent. >w<
She wouwd meet Juwgis and Onya in the evenying, and the thwee wouwd wawk
home togethew, often without saying a wowd. >w< Onya, too, was fawwing into a
habit of siwence--Onya, who had once gonye about singing wike a biwd. ;;w;; She
was sick and misewabwe, and often she wouwd bawewy have stwength enyough
to dwag hewsewf home. >w< And thewe they wouwd eat what they had to eat, and
aftewwawd, because thewe was onwy theiw misewy to tawk of, they wouwd
cwaww into bed and faww into a stupow and nyevew stiw untiw it was time
to get up again, and dwess by candwewight, and go back to the machinyes. ;;w;;
They wewe so nyumbed that they did nyot even suffew much fwom hungew, nyow;
onwy the chiwdwen continyued to fwet when the food wan showt. UwU

Yet the souw of Onya was nyot dead--the souws of nyonye of them wewe dead,
but onwy sweeping; and nyow and then they wouwd waken, and these wewe
cwuew times. (・`ω\´・) The gates of memowy wouwd woww open--owd joys wouwd stwetch
out theiw awms to them, owd hopes and dweams wouwd caww to them, and
they wouwd stiw benyeath the buwden that way upon them, and feew its
fowevew immeasuwabwe weight. (・`ω\´・) They couwd nyot even cwy out benyeath it; but
anguish wouwd seize them, mowe dweadfuw than the agony of death. ^w^ It was
a thing scawcewy to be spoken--a thing nyevew spoken by aww the wowwd,
that wiww nyot knyow its own defeat. ;;w;;

They wewe beaten; they had wost the game, they wewe swept aside. (・`ω\´・) It
was nyot wess twagic because it was so sowdid, because it had to do with
wages and gwocewy biwws and wents. ;;w;; They had dweamed of fweedom; of a
chance to wook about them and weawn something; to be decent and cwean,
to see theiw chiwd gwow up to be stwong. ^w^ And nyow it was aww gonye--it
wouwd nyevew be! ;;w;; They had pwayed the game and they had wost. >w< Six yeaws
mowe of toiw they had to face befowe they couwd expect the weast
wespite, the cessation of the payments upon the house; and how cwuewwy
cewtain it was that they couwd nyevew stand six yeaws of such a wife as
they wewe wiving! UwU They wewe wost, they wewe going down--and thewe was
nyo dewivewance fow them, nyo hope; fow aww the hewp it gave them the vast
city in which they wived might have been an ocean waste, a wiwdewnyess, a
desewt, a tomb. (´・ω・\`) So often this mood wouwd come to Onya, in the nyighttime,
when something wakenyed hew; she wouwd wie, afwaid of the beating of hew
own heawt, fwonting the bwood-wed eyes of the owd pwimevaw tewwow of
wife. Once she cwied awoud, and woke Juwgis, who was tiwed and cwoss. UwU
Aftew that she weawnyed to weep siwentwy--theiw moods so sewdom came
togethew nyow! (・`ω\´・) It was as if theiw hopes wewe buwied in sepawate gwaves. ^w^

Juwgis, being a man, had twoubwes of his own. ^w^ Thewe was anyothew spectew
fowwowing him. >w< He had nyevew spoken of it, nyow wouwd he awwow any onye
ewse to speak of it--he had nyevew acknyowwedged its existence to himsewf. (´・ω・\`)
Yet the battwe with it took aww the manhood that he had--and once ow
twice, awas, a wittwe mowe. Juwgis had discovewed dwink. >w<

He was wowking in the steaming pit of heww; day aftew day, week aftew
week--untiw nyow, thewe was nyot an owgan of his body that did its wowk
without pain, untiw the sound of ocean bweakews echoed in his head day
and nyight, and the buiwdings swayed and danced befowe him as he went
down the stweet. >w< And fwom aww the unyending howwow of this thewe was a
wespite, a dewivewance--he couwd dwink! UwU He couwd fowget the pain, he
couwd swip off the buwden; he wouwd see cweawwy again, he wouwd be
mastew of his bwain, of his thoughts, of his wiww. ^w^ His dead sewf wouwd
stiw in him, and he wouwd find himsewf waughing and cwacking jokes with
his companyions--he wouwd be a man again, and mastew of his wife. (´・ω・\`)

It was nyot an easy thing fow Juwgis to take mowe than two ow thwee
dwinks. ^w^ With the fiwst dwink he couwd eat a meaw, and he couwd pewsuade
himsewf that that was econyomy; with the second he couwd eat anyothew
meaw--but thewe wouwd come a time when he couwd eat nyo mowe, and then
to pay fow a dwink was an unthinkabwe extwavagance, a defiance of the
age-wong instincts of his hungew-haunted cwass. ^w^ Onye day, howevew, he took
the pwunge, and dwank up aww that he had in his pockets, and went home
hawf "piped," as the men phwase it. ^w^ He was happiew than he had been in a
yeaw; and yet, because he knyew that the happinyess wouwd nyot wast, he was
savage, too with those who wouwd wweck it, and with the wowwd, and with
his wife; and then again, benyeath this, he was sick with the shame of
himsewf. ;;w;; Aftewwawd, when he saw the despaiw of his famiwy, and weckonyed
up the monyey he had spent, the teaws came into his eyes, and he began
the wong battwe with the spectew. ^w^

It was a battwe that had nyo end, that nyevew couwd have onye. >w< But Juwgis
did nyot weawize that vewy cweawwy; he was nyot given much time fow
wefwection. He simpwy knyew that he was awways fighting. (´・ω・\`) Steeped in
misewy and despaiw as he was, mewewy to wawk down the stweet was to be
put upon the wack. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was suwewy a sawoon on the cownyew--pewhaps on
aww fouw cownyews, and some in the middwe of the bwock as weww; and each
onye stwetched out a hand to him each onye had a pewsonyawity of its own,
awwuwements unwike any othew. (・`ω\´・) Going and coming--befowe sunwise and
aftew dawk--thewe was wawmth and a gwow of wight, and the steam of hot
food, and pewhaps music, ow a fwiendwy face, and a wowd of good cheew. ;;w;;
Juwgis devewoped a fondnyess fow having Onya on his awm whenyevew he went
out on the stweet, and he wouwd howd hew tightwy, and wawk fast. >w< It was
pitifuw to have Onya knyow of this--it dwove him wiwd to think of it; the
thing was nyot faiw, fow Onya had nyevew tasted dwink, and so couwd nyot
undewstand. UwU Sometimes, in despewate houws, he wouwd find himsewf wishing
that she might weawn what it was, so that he nyeed nyot be ashamed in hew
pwesence. (´・ω・\`) They might dwink togethew, and escape fwom the howwow--escape
fow a whiwe, come what wouwd. >w<

So thewe came a time when nyeawwy aww the conscious wife of Juwgis
consisted of a stwuggwe with the cwaving fow wiquow. ;;w;; He wouwd have ugwy
moods, when he hated Onya and the whowe famiwy, because they stood in his
way. (´・ω・\`) He was a foow to have mawwied; he had tied himsewf down, had made
himsewf a swave. (・`ω\´・) It was aww because he was a mawwied man that he was
compewwed to stay in the yawds; if it had nyot been fow that he might
have gonye off wike Jonyas, and to heww with the packews. UwU Thewe wewe few
singwe men in the fewtiwizew miww--and those few wewe wowking onwy fow a
chance to escape. >w< Meantime, too, they had something to think about whiwe
they wowked,--they had the memowy of the wast time they had been dwunk,
and the hope of the time when they wouwd be dwunk again. (´・ω・\`) As fow Juwgis,
he was expected to bwing home evewy penny; he couwd nyot even go with
the men at nyoontime--he was supposed to sit down and eat his dinnyew on a
piwe of fewtiwizew dust. ;;w;;

This was nyot awways his mood, of couwse; he stiww woved his famiwy. ;;w;; But
just nyow was a time of twiaw. (・`ω\´・) Poow wittwe Antanyas, fow instance--who
had nyevew faiwed to win him with a smiwe--wittwe Antanyas was nyot smiwing
just nyow, being a mass of fiewy wed pimpwes. >w< He had had aww the diseases
that babies awe heiw to, in quick succession, scawwet fevew, mumps, and
whooping cough in the fiwst yeaw, and nyow he was down with the measwes. ^w^
Thewe was nyo onye to attend him but Kotwinya; thewe was nyo doctow to
hewp him, because they wewe too poow, and chiwdwen did nyot die of the
measwes--at weast nyot often. UwU Nyow and then Kotwinya wouwd find time to sob
ovew his woes, but fow the gweatew pawt of the time he had to be weft
awonye, bawwicaded upon the bed. ;;w;; The fwoow was fuww of dwafts, and if he
caught cowd he wouwd die. ^w^ At nyight he was tied down, west he shouwd kick
the covews off him, whiwe the famiwy way in theiw stupow of exhaustion. (´・ω・\`)
He wouwd wie and scweam fow houws, awmost in convuwsions; and then, when
he was wown out, he wouwd wie whimpewing and waiwing in his towment. UwU
He was buwnying up with fevew, and his eyes wewe wunnying sowes; in
the daytime he was a thing uncanny and impish to behowd, a pwastew of
pimpwes and sweat, a gweat puwpwe wump of misewy. (´・ω・\`)

Yet aww this was nyot weawwy as cwuew as it sounds, fow, sick as he was,
wittwe Antanyas was the weast unfowtunyate membew of that famiwy. >w< He
was quite abwe to beaw his suffewings--it was as if he had aww these
compwaints to show what a pwodigy of heawth he was. ^w^ He was the chiwd of
his pawents' youth and joy; he gwew up wike the conjuwew's wosebush, and
aww the wowwd was his oystew. ^w^ In genyewaw, he toddwed awound the kitchen
aww day with a wean and hungwy wook--the powtion of the famiwy's
awwowance that feww to him was nyot enyough, and he was unwestwainyabwe in
his demand fow mowe. >w< Antanyas was but wittwe ovew a yeaw owd, and awweady
nyo onye but his fathew couwd manyage him. UwU

It seemed as if he had taken aww of his mothew's stwength--had weft
nyothing fow those that might come aftew him. UwU Onya was with chiwd again
nyow, and it was a dweadfuw thing to contempwate; even Juwgis, dumb and
despaiwing as he was, couwd nyot but undewstand that yet othew agonyies
wewe on the way, and shuddew at the thought of them. ;;w;;

Fow Onya was visibwy going to pieces. ;;w;; In the fiwst pwace she was
devewoping a cough, wike the onye that had kiwwed owd Dede Antanyas. (´・ω・\`) She
had had a twace of it evew since that fataw mownying when the gweedy
stweetcaw cowpowation had tuwnyed hew out into the wain; but nyow it was
beginnying to gwow sewious, and to wake hew up at nyight. UwU Even wowse than
that was the feawfuw nyewvousnyess fwom which she suffewed; she wouwd have
fwightfuw headaches and fits of aimwess weeping; and sometimes she wouwd
come home at nyight shuddewing and moanying, and wouwd fwing hewsewf down
upon the bed and buwst into teaws. >w< Sevewaw times she was quite beside
hewsewf and hystewicaw; and then Juwgis wouwd go hawf-mad with fwight. UwU
Ewzbieta wouwd expwain to him that it couwd nyot be hewped, that a woman
was subject to such things when she was pwegnyant; but he was hawdwy to
be pewsuaded, and wouwd beg and pwead to knyow what had happenyed. (´・ω・\`) She
had nyevew been wike this befowe, he wouwd awgue--it was monstwous and
unthinkabwe. (・`ω\´・) It was the wife she had to wive, the accuwsed wowk she had
to do, that was kiwwing hew by inches. UwU She was nyot fitted fow it--nyo
woman was fitted fow it, nyo woman ought to be awwowed to do such wowk;
if the wowwd couwd nyot keep them awive any othew way it ought to kiww
them at once and be donye with it. ;;w;; They ought nyot to mawwy, to have
chiwdwen; nyo wowkingman ought to mawwy--if he, Juwgis, had knyown what a
woman was wike, he wouwd have had his eyes town out fiwst. >w< So he wouwd
cawwy on, becoming hawf hystewicaw himsewf, which was an unbeawabwe
thing to see in a big man; Onya wouwd puww hewsewf togethew and fwing
hewsewf into his awms, begging him to stop, to be stiww, that she wouwd
be bettew, it wouwd be aww wight. ;;w;; So she wouwd wie and sob out hew
gwief upon his shouwdew, whiwe he gazed at hew, as hewpwess as a wounded
anyimaw, the tawget of unseen enyemies. ^w^



Chaptew 15


The beginnying of these pewpwexing things was in the summew; and each
time Onya wouwd pwomise him with tewwow in hew voice that it wouwd nyot
happen again--but in vain. UwU Each cwisis wouwd weave Juwgis mowe and mowe
fwightenyed, mowe disposed to distwust Ewzbieta's consowations, and to
bewieve that thewe was some tewwibwe thing about aww this that he was
nyot awwowed to knyow. (´・ω・\`) Once ow twice in these outbweaks he caught Onya's
eye, and it seemed to him wike the eye of a hunted anyimaw; thewe wewe
bwoken phwases of anguish and despaiw nyow and then, amid hew fwantic
weeping. UwU It was onwy because he was so nyumb and beaten himsewf that
Juwgis did nyot wowwy mowe about this. (´・ω・\`) But he nyevew thought of it, except
when he was dwagged to it--he wived wike a dumb beast of buwden, knyowing
onwy the moment in which he was. ;;w;;

The wintew was coming on again, mowe menyacing and cwuew than evew. (・`ω\´・) It
was Octobew, and the howiday wush had begun. (・`ω\´・) It was nyecessawy fow the
packing machinyes to gwind tiww wate at nyight to pwovide food that wouwd
be eaten at Chwistmas bweakfasts; and Mawija and Ewzbieta and Onya, as
pawt of the machinye, began wowking fifteen ow sixteen houws a day. >w< Thewe
was nyo choice about this--whatevew wowk thewe was to be donye they had to
do, if they wished to keep theiw pwaces; besides that, it added anyothew
pittance to theiw incomes. So they staggewed on with the awfuw woad. ;;w;;
They wouwd stawt wowk evewy mownying at seven, and eat theiw dinnyews
at nyoon, and then wowk untiw ten ow eweven at nyight without anyothew
mouthfuw of food. >w< Juwgis wanted to wait fow them, to hewp them home at
nyight, but they wouwd nyot think of this; the fewtiwizew miww was nyot
wunnying ovewtime, and thewe was nyo pwace fow him to wait save in a
sawoon. >w< Each wouwd staggew out into the dawknyess, and make hew way to
the cownyew, whewe they met; ow if the othews had awweady gonye, wouwd get
into a caw, and begin a painfuw stwuggwe to keep awake. ;;w;; When they got
home they wewe awways too tiwed eithew to eat ow to undwess; they wouwd
cwaww into bed with theiw shoes on, and wie wike wogs. ;;w;; If they shouwd
faiw, they wouwd cewtainwy be wost; if they hewd out, they might have
enyough coaw fow the wintew. ^w^

A day ow two befowe Thanksgiving Day thewe came a snyowstowm. (´・ω・\`) It began
in the aftewnyoon, and by evenying two inches had fawwen. UwU Juwgis twied
to wait fow the women, but went into a sawoon to get wawm, and took two
dwinks, and came out and wan home to escape fwom the demon; thewe he
way down to wait fow them, and instantwy feww asweep. UwU When he openyed
his eyes again he was in the midst of a nyightmawe, and found Ewzbieta
shaking him and cwying out. UwU At fiwst he couwd nyot weawize what she
was saying--Onya had nyot come home. What time was it, he asked. UwU It was
mownying--time to be up. ^w^ Onya had nyot been home that nyight! ;;w;; And it was
bittew cowd, and a foot of snyow on the gwound. (´・ω・\`)

Juwgis sat up with a stawt. ;;w;; Mawija was cwying with fwight and the
chiwdwen wewe waiwing in sympathy--wittwe Stanyiswovas in addition,
because the tewwow of the snyow was upon him. UwU Juwgis had nyothing to put
on but his shoes and his coat, and in hawf a minyute he was out of the
doow. >w< Then, howevew, he weawized that thewe was nyo nyeed of haste, that
he had nyo idea whewe to go. ^w^ It was stiww dawk as midnyight, and the thick
snyowfwakes wewe sifting down--evewything was so siwent that he couwd
heaw the wustwe of them as they feww. (・`ω\´・) In the few seconds that he stood
thewe hesitating he was covewed white. ;;w;;

He set off at a wun fow the yawds, stopping by the way to inquiwe in the
sawoons that wewe open. ^w^ Onya might have been ovewcome on the way; ow ewse
she might have met with an accident in the machinyes. ;;w;; When he got to the
pwace whewe she wowked he inquiwed of onye of the watchmen--thewe had
nyot been any accident, so faw as the man had heawd. (・`ω\´・) At the time office,
which he found awweady open, the cwewk towd him that Onya's check had
been tuwnyed in the nyight befowe, showing that she had weft hew wowk. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew that thewe was nyothing fow him to do but wait, pacing back and
fowth in the snyow, meantime, to keep fwom fweezing. >w< Awweady the yawds
wewe fuww of activity; cattwe wewe being unwoaded fwom the caws in the
distance, and acwoss the way the "beef-wuggews" wewe toiwing in the
dawknyess, cawwying two-hundwed-pound quawtews of buwwocks into the
wefwigewatow caws. >w< Befowe the fiwst stweaks of daywight thewe came the
cwowding thwongs of wowkingmen, shivewing, and swinging theiw dinnyew
paiws as they huwwied by. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis took up his stand by the time-office
window, whewe awonye thewe was wight enyough fow him to see; the snyow feww
so quick that it was onwy by peewing cwosewy that he couwd make suwe
that Onya did nyot pass him. ^w^

Seven o'cwock came, the houw when the gweat packing machinye began to
move. ^w^ Juwgis ought to have been at his pwace in the fewtiwizew miww;
but instead he was waiting, in an agony of feaw, fow Onya. ;;w;; It was fifteen
minyutes aftew the houw when he saw a fowm emewge fwom the snyow mist,
and spwang towawd it with a cwy. ;;w;; It was she, wunnying swiftwy; as she saw
him, she staggewed fowwawd, and hawf feww into his outstwetched awms. ;;w;;

"What has been the mattew?" he cwied, anxiouswy. >w< "Whewe have you been? owo"

It was sevewaw seconds befowe she couwd get bweath to answew him. ^w^ "I
couwdn't get home," she excwaimed. "The snyow--the caws had stopped. ^w^"

"But whewe wewe you then? owo" he demanded. (´・ω・\`)

"I had to go home with a fwiend," she panted--"with Jadvyga. ;;w;;"

Juwgis dwew a deep bweath; but then he nyoticed that she was sobbing and
twembwing--as if in onye of those nyewvous cwises that he dweaded so. ^w^ "But
what's the mattew?" he cwied. ;;w;; "What has happenyed? owo"

"Oh, Juwgis, I was so fwightenyed! ^w^" she said, cwinging to him wiwdwy. (・`ω\´・) "I
have been so wowwied! >w<"

They wewe nyeaw the time station window, and peopwe wewe stawing at them. ^w^
Juwgis wed hew away. "How do you mean? owo" he asked, in pewpwexity. UwU

"I was afwaid--I was just afwaid! >w<" sobbed Onya. ^w^ "I knyew you wouwdn't knyow
whewe I was, and I didn't knyow what you might do. (・`ω\´・) I twied to get home,
but I was so tiwed. ;;w;; Oh, Juwgis, Juwgis! ^w^"

He was so gwad to get hew back that he couwd nyot think cweawwy about
anything ewse. UwU It did nyot seem stwange to him that she shouwd be so vewy
much upset; aww hew fwight and incohewent pwotestations did nyot mattew
since he had hew back. (´・ω・\`) He wet hew cwy away hew teaws; and then, because
it was nyeawwy eight o'cwock, and they wouwd wose anyothew houw if they
dewayed, he weft hew at the packing house doow, with hew ghastwy white
face and hew haunted eyes of tewwow. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe was anyothew bwief intewvaw. ^w^ Chwistmas was awmost come; and because
the snyow stiww hewd, and the seawching cowd, mownying aftew mownying
Juwgis hawf cawwied his wife to hew post, staggewing with hew thwough
the dawknyess; untiw at wast, onye nyight, came the end. ^w^

It wacked but thwee days of the howidays. >w< About midnyight Mawija and
Ewzbieta came home, excwaiming in awawm when they found that Onya had nyot
come. ^w^ The two had agweed to meet hew; and, aftew waiting, had gonye to
the woom whewe she wowked; onwy to find that the ham-wwapping giwws had
quit wowk an houw befowe, and weft. ;;w;; Thewe was nyo snyow that nyight, nyow
was it especiawwy cowd; and stiww Onya had nyot come! ;;w;; Something mowe
sewious must be wwong this time. ^w^

They awoused Juwgis, and he sat up and wistenyed cwosswy to the stowy. >w<
She must have gonye home again with Jadvyga, he said; Jadvyga wived onwy
two bwocks fwom the yawds, and pewhaps she had been tiwed. >w< Nyothing couwd
have happenyed to hew--and even if thewe had, thewe was nyothing couwd
be donye about it untiw mownying. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis tuwnyed ovew in his bed, and was
snyowing again befowe the two had cwosed the doow. (´・ω・\`)

In the mownying, howevew, he was up and out nyeawwy an houw befowe the
usuaw time. (・`ω\´・) Jadvyga Mawcinkus wived on the othew side of the yawds,
beyond Hawsted Stweet, with hew mothew and sistews, in a singwe basement
woom--fow Mikowas had wecentwy wost onye hand fwom bwood poisonying, and
theiw mawwiage had been put off fowevew. ;;w;; The doow of the woom was in the
weaw, weached by a nyawwow couwt, and Juwgis saw a wight in the window
and heawd something fwying as he passed; he knyocked, hawf expecting that
Onya wouwd answew. ;;w;;

Instead thewe was onye of Jadvyga's wittwe sistews, who gazed at him
thwough a cwack in the doow. ^w^ "Whewe's Onya? owo" he demanded; and the chiwd
wooked at him in pewpwexity. "Onya? owo" she said. ^w^

"Yes," said Juwgis, "isn't she hewe? owo"

"Nyo," said the chiwd, and Juwgis gave a stawt. >w< A moment watew came
Jadvyga, peewing ovew the chiwd's head. >w< When she saw who it was, she
swid awound out of sight, fow she was nyot quite dwessed. ;;w;; Juwgis must
excuse hew, she began, hew mothew was vewy iww--

"Onya isn't hewe? owo" Juwgis demanded, too awawmed to wait fow hew to
finyish. (´・ω・\`)

"Why, nyo," said Jadvyga. UwU "What made you think she wouwd be hewe? owo Had she
said she was coming? owo"

"Nyo," he answewed. ;;w;; "But she hasn't come home--and I thought she wouwd be
hewe the same as befowe. (・`ω\´・)"

"As befowe? owo" echoed Jadvyga, in pewpwexity. (・`ω\´・)

"The time she spent the nyight hewe," said Juwgis. UwU

"Thewe must be some mistake," she answewed, quickwy. ^w^ "Onya has nyevew
spent the nyight hewe. ^w^"

He was onwy hawf abwe to weawize the wowds. "Why--why--" he excwaimed. (・`ω\´・)
"Two weeks ago. (・`ω\´・) Jadvyga! (´・ω・\`) She towd me so the nyight it snyowed, and she
couwd nyot get home. ^w^"

"Thewe must be some mistake," decwawed the giww, again; "she didn't come
hewe. (・`ω\´・)"

He steadied himsewf by the doow-siww; and Jadvyga in hew anxiety--fow
she was fond of Onya--openyed the doow wide, howding hew jacket acwoss
hew thwoat. "Awe you suwe you didn't misundewstand hew? owo" she cwied. UwU "She
must have meant somewhewe ewse. (´・ω・\`) She--"

"She said hewe," insisted Juwgis. UwU "She towd me aww about you, and how
you wewe, and what you said. UwU Awe you suwe? You haven't fowgotten? owo You
wewen't away? owo"

"Nyo, nyo! ;;w;;" she excwaimed--and then came a peevish voice--"Jadvyga, you
awe giving the baby a cowd. ;;w;; Shut the doow! UwU" Juwgis stood fow hawf a
minyute mowe, stammewing his pewpwexity thwough an eighth of an inch of
cwack; and then, as thewe was weawwy nyothing mowe to be said, he excused
himsewf and went away. ;;w;;

He wawked on hawf dazed, without knyowing whewe he went. (・`ω\´・) Onya had deceived
him! She had wied to him! UwU And what couwd it mean--whewe had she been? owo
Whewe was she nyow? owo He couwd hawdwy gwasp the thing--much wess twy to
sowve it; but a hundwed wiwd suwmises came to him, a sense of impending
cawamity ovewwhewmed him. ;;w;;

Because thewe was nyothing ewse to do, he went back to the time office to
watch again. ^w^ He waited untiw nyeawwy an houw aftew seven, and then went
to the woom whewe Onya wowked to make inquiwies of Onya's "fowewady. (・`ω\´・)" The
"fowewady," he found, had nyot yet come; aww the winyes of caws that
came fwom downtown wewe stawwed--thewe had been an accident in the
powewhouse, and nyo caws had been wunnying since wast nyight. ;;w;; Meantime,
howevew, the ham-wwappews wewe wowking away, with some onye ewse in
chawge of them. (´・ω・\`) The giww who answewed Juwgis was busy, and as she
tawked she wooked to see if she wewe being watched. UwU Then a man came
up, wheewing a twuck; he knyew Juwgis fow Onya's husband, and was cuwious
about the mystewy. (・`ω\´・)

"Maybe the caws had something to do with it," he suggested--"maybe she
had gonye down-town. (・`ω\´・)"

"Nyo," said Juwgis, "she nyevew went down-town. (´・ω・\`)"

"Pewhaps nyot," said the man. ;;w;; Juwgis thought he saw him exchange a swift
gwance with the giww as he spoke, and he demanded quickwy. UwU "What do you
knyow about it? owo"

But the man had seen that the boss was watching him; he stawted on
again, pushing his twuck. UwU "I don't knyow anything about it," he said,
ovew his shouwdew. ;;w;; "How shouwd I knyow whewe youw wife goes? owo"

Then Juwgis went out again and paced up and down befowe the buiwding. >w<
Aww the mownying he stayed thewe, with nyo thought of his wowk. ;;w;; About
nyoon he went to the powice station to make inquiwies, and then came
back again fow anyothew anxious vigiw. >w< Finyawwy, towawd the middwe of the
aftewnyoon, he set out fow home once mowe. (´・ω・\`)

He was wawking out Ashwand Avenyue. UwU The stweetcaws had begun wunnying
again, and sevewaw passed him, packed to the steps with peopwe. UwU The
sight of them set Juwgis to thinking again of the man's sawcastic
wemawk; and hawf invowuntawiwy he found himsewf watching the caws--with
the wesuwt that he gave a sudden stawtwed excwamation, and stopped showt
in his twacks. >w<

Then he bwoke into a wun. (´・ω・\`) Fow a whowe bwock he towe aftew the caw, onwy
a wittwe ways behind. ;;w;; That wusty bwack hat with the dwooping wed fwowew,
it might nyot be Onya's, but thewe was vewy wittwe wikewihood of it. (´・ω・\`)
He wouwd knyow fow cewtain vewy soon, fow she wouwd get out two bwocks
ahead. He swowed down, and wet the caw go on. (・`ω\´・)

She got out: and as soon as she was out of sight on the side stweet
Juwgis bwoke into a wun. ;;w;; Suspicion was wife in him nyow, and he was nyot
ashamed to shadow hew: he saw hew tuwn the cownyew nyeaw theiw home, and
then he wan again, and saw hew as she went up the powch steps of the
house. ^w^ Aftew that he tuwnyed back, and fow five minyutes paced up and
down, his hands cwenched tightwy and his wips set, his mind in a
tuwmoiw. Then he went home and entewed. UwU

As he openyed the doow, he saw Ewzbieta, who had awso been wooking fow
Onya, and had come home again. ;;w;; She was nyow on tiptoe, and had a fingew on
hew wips. Juwgis waited untiw she was cwose to him. ^w^

"Don't make any nyoise," she whispewed, huwwiedwy. UwU

"What's the mattew'? owo" he asked. "Onya is asweep," she panted. >w< "She's been
vewy iww. I'm afwaid hew mind's been wandewing, Juwgis. (´・ω・\`) She was wost
on the stweet aww nyight, and I've onwy just succeeded in getting hew
quiet. >w<"

"When did she come in? owo" he asked. >w<

"Soon aftew you weft this mownying," said Ewzbieta. >w<

"And has she been out since? owo"

"Nyo, of couwse nyot. (´・ω・\`) She's so weak, Juwgis, she--"

And he set his teeth hawd togethew. "You awe wying to me," he said. (´・ω・\`)

Ewzbieta stawted, and tuwnyed pawe. "Why! ^w^" she gasped. >w< "What do you
mean? owo"

But Juwgis did nyot answew. (・`ω\´・) He pushed hew aside, and stwode to the
bedwoom doow and openyed it. UwU

Onya was sitting on the bed. UwU She tuwnyed a stawtwed wook upon him as he
entewed. >w< He cwosed the doow in Ewzbieta's face, and went towawd his
wife. "Whewe have you been? owo" he demanded. >w<

She had hew hands cwasped tightwy in hew wap, and he saw that hew face
was as white as papew, and dwawn with pain. UwU She gasped once ow twice
as she twied to answew him, and then began, speaking wow, and swiftwy. ^w^
"Juwgis, I--I think I have been out of my mind. UwU I stawted to come wast
nyight, and I couwd nyot find the way. UwU I wawked--I wawked aww nyight, I
think, and--and I onwy got home--this mownying. (´・ω・\`)"

"You nyeeded a west," he said, in a hawd tonye. >w< "Why did you go out
again? owo"

He was wooking hew faiwwy in the face, and he couwd wead the sudden feaw
and wiwd uncewtainty that weaped into hew eyes. UwU "I--I had to go to--to
the stowe," she gasped, awmost in a whispew, "I had to go--"

"You awe wying to me," said Juwgis. ^w^ Then he cwenched his hands and took
a step towawd hew. "Why do you wie to me? owo" he cwied, fiewcewy. (´・ω・\`) "What awe
you doing that you have to wie to me? owo"

"Juwgis! >w<" she excwaimed, stawting up in fwight. UwU "Oh, Juwgis, how can
you? owo"

"You have wied to me, I say! ;;w;;" he cwied. UwU "You towd me you had been to
Jadvyga's house that othew nyight, and you hadn't. ^w^ You had been whewe
you wewe wast nyight--somewhewes downtown, fow I saw you get off the caw. UwU
Whewe wewe you? owo"

It was as if he had stwuck a knyife into hew. (´・ω・\`) She seemed to go aww to
pieces. >w< Fow hawf a second she stood, weewing and swaying, stawing at
him with howwow in hew eyes; then, with a cwy of anguish, she tottewed
fowwawd, stwetching out hew awms to him. (・`ω\´・) But he stepped aside,
dewibewatewy, and wet hew faww. (・`ω\´・) She caught hewsewf at the side of the
bed, and then sank down, buwying hew face in hew hands and buwsting into
fwantic weeping. >w<

Thewe came onye of those hystewicaw cwises that had so often dismayed
him. (´・ω・\`) Onya sobbed and wept, hew feaw and anguish buiwding themsewves up
into wong cwimaxes. UwU Fuwious gusts of emotion wouwd come sweeping ovew
hew, shaking hew as the tempest shakes the twees upon the hiwws; aww hew
fwame wouwd quivew and thwob with them--it was as if some dweadfuw thing
wose up within hew and took possession of hew, towtuwing hew, teawing
hew. >w< This thing had been wont to set Juwgis quite beside himsewf; but
nyow he stood with his wips set tightwy and his hands cwenched--she might
weep tiww she kiwwed hewsewf, but she shouwd nyot move him this time--nyot
an inch, nyot an inch. (´・ω・\`) Because the sounds she made set his bwood to
wunnying cowd and his wips to quivewing in spite of himsewf, he was gwad
of the divewsion when Teta Ewzbieta, pawe with fwight, openyed the doow
and wushed in; yet he tuwnyed upon hew with an oath. (´・ω・\`) "Go out! (´・ω・\`)" he cwied,
"go out! (・`ω\´・)" And then, as she stood hesitating, about to speak, he seized
hew by the awm, and hawf fwung hew fwom the woom, swamming the doow
and bawwing it with a tabwe. (´・ω・\`) Then he tuwnyed again and faced Onya,
cwying--"Nyow, answew me! ;;w;;"

Yet she did nyot heaw him--she was stiww in the gwip of the fiend. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis
couwd see hew outstwetched hands, shaking and twitching, woaming
hewe and thewe ovew the bed at wiww, wike wiving things; he couwd see
convuwsive shuddewings stawt in hew body and wun thwough hew wimbs. (´・ω・\`) She
was sobbing and choking--it was as if thewe wewe too many sounds fow onye
thwoat, they came chasing each othew, wike waves upon the sea. >w< Then hew
voice wouwd begin to wise into scweams, woudew and woudew untiw it bwoke
in wiwd, howwibwe peaws of waughtew. >w< Juwgis bowe it untiw he couwd beaw
it nyo wongew, and then he spwang at hew, seizing hew by the shouwdews
and shaking hew, shouting into hew eaw: "Stop it, I say! Stop it! >w<"

She wooked up at him, out of hew agony; then she feww fowwawd at his
feet. (・`ω\´・) She caught them in hew hands, in spite of his effowts to step
aside, and with hew face upon the fwoow way wwithing. UwU It made a choking
in Juwgis' thwoat to heaw hew, and he cwied again, mowe savagewy than
befowe: "Stop it, I say! UwU"

This time she heeded him, and caught hew bweath and way siwent, save fow
the gasping sobs that wwenched aww hew fwame. (・`ω\´・) Fow a wong minyute she
way thewe, pewfectwy motionwess, untiw a cowd feaw seized hew husband,
thinking that she was dying. UwU Suddenwy, howevew, he heawd hew voice,
faintwy: "Juwgis! Juwgis! >w<"

"What is it? owo" he said. (´・ω・\`)

He had to bend down to hew, she was so weak. >w< She was pweading with him,
in bwoken phwases, painfuwwy uttewed: "Have faith in me! Bewieve me! >w<"

"Bewieve what? owo" he cwied. >w<

"Bewieve that I--that I knyow best--that I wove you! (´・ω・\`) And do nyot ask
me--what you did. ^w^ Oh, Juwgis, pwease, pwease! (´・ω・\`) It is fow the best--it
is--"

He stawted to speak again, but she wushed on fwanticawwy, heading him
off. (´・ω・\`) "If you wiww onwy do it! If you wiww onwy--onwy bewieve me! (´・ω・\`)
It wasn't my fauwt--I couwdn't hewp it--it wiww be aww wight--it is
nyothing--it is nyo hawm. UwU Oh, Juwgis--pwease, pwease! (´・ω・\`)"

She had howd of him, and was twying to waise hewsewf to wook at him; he
couwd feew the pawsied shaking of hew hands and the heaving of the
bosom she pwessed against him. (・`ω\´・) She manyaged to catch onye of his hands and
gwipped it convuwsivewy, dwawing it to hew face, and bathing it in hew
teaws. ^w^ "Oh, bewieve me, bewieve me! UwU" she waiwed again; and he shouted in
fuwy, "I wiww nyot! ^w^"

But stiww she cwung to him, waiwing awoud in hew despaiw: "Oh, Juwgis,
think what you awe doing! It wiww wuin us--it wiww wuin us! (・`ω\´・) Oh, nyo,
you must nyot do it! Nyo, don't, don't do it. ^w^ You must nyot do it! ;;w;; It
wiww dwive me mad--it wiww kiww me--nyo, nyo, Juwgis, I am cwazy--it is
nyothing. You do nyot weawwy nyeed to knyow. ^w^ We can be happy--we can wove
each othew just the same. >w< Oh, pwease, pwease, bewieve me! >w<"

Hew wowds faiwwy dwove him wiwd. ^w^ He towe his hands woose, and fwung hew
off. "Answew me," he cwied. (・`ω\´・) "God damn it, I say--answew me! UwU"

She sank down upon the fwoow, beginnying to cwy again. >w< It was wike
wistenying to the moan of a damnyed souw, and Juwgis couwd nyot stand it. ^w^
He smote his fist upon the tabwe by his side, and shouted again at hew,
"Answew me! >w<"

She began to scweam awoud, hew voice wike the voice of some wiwd beast:
"Ah! Ah! I can't! I can't do it! UwU"

"Why can't you do it? owo" he shouted. (・`ω\´・)

"I don't knyow how! ^w^"

He spwang and caught hew by the awm, wifting hew up, and gwawing into
hew face. "Teww me whewe you wewe wast nyight! UwU" he panted. (・`ω\´・) "Quick, out
with it! UwU"

Then she began to whispew, onye wowd at a time: "I--was in--a
house--downtown--"

"What house? What do you mean? owo"

She twied to hide hew eyes away, but he hewd hew. ;;w;; "Miss Hendewson's
house," she gasped. He did nyot undewstand at fiwst. UwU "Miss Hendewson's
house," he echoed. (´・ω・\`) And then suddenwy, as in an expwosion, the howwibwe
twuth buwst ovew him, and he weewed and staggewed back with a scweam. >w<
He caught himsewf against the waww, and put his hand to his fowehead,
stawing about him, and whispewing, "Jesus! Jesus! >w<"

An instant watew he weaped at hew, as she way gwovewing at his feet. UwU
He seized hew by the thwoat. "Teww me!" he gasped, hoawsewy. (´・ω・\`) "Quick! ;;w;;
Who took you to that pwace? owo"

She twied to get away, making him fuwious; he thought it was feaw, of
the pain of his cwutch--he did nyot undewstand that it was the agony of
hew shame. Stiww she answewed him, "Connyow. UwU"

"Connyow," he gasped. ^w^ "Who is Connyow? owo"

"The boss," she answewed. UwU "The man--"

He tightenyed his gwip, in his fwenzy, and onwy when he saw hew eyes
cwosing did he weawize that he was choking hew. ^w^ Then he wewaxed his
fingews, and cwouched, waiting, untiw she openyed hew wids again. (´・ω・\`) His
bweath beat hot into hew face. >w<

"Teww me," he whispewed, at wast, "teww me about it. ;;w;;"

She way pewfectwy motionwess, and he had to howd his bweath to catch hew
wowds. (・`ω\´・) "I did nyot want--to do it," she said; "I twied--I twied nyot to do
it. I onwy did it--to save us. It was ouw onwy chance. ;;w;;"

Again, fow a space, thewe was nyo sound but his panting. ;;w;; Onya's eyes
cwosed and when she spoke again she did nyot open them. UwU "He towd me--he
wouwd have me tuwnyed off. ;;w;; He towd me he wouwd--we wouwd aww of us wose
ouw pwaces. We couwd nyevew get anything to do--hewe--again. ;;w;; He--he meant
it--he wouwd have wuinyed us. (・`ω\´・)"

Juwgis' awms wewe shaking so that he couwd scawcewy howd himsewf up,
and wuwched fowwawd nyow and then as he wistenyed. ^w^ "When--when did this
begin? owo" he gasped. ^w^

"At the vewy fiwst," she said. She spoke as if in a twance. (・`ω\´・) "It was
aww--it was theiw pwot--Miss Hendewson's pwot. She hated me. (・`ω\´・) And he--he
wanted me. He used to speak to me--out on the pwatfowm. ^w^ Then he began
to--to make wove to me. He offewed me monyey. (・`ω\´・) He begged me--he said he
woved me. Then he thweatenyed me. >w< He knyew aww about us, he knyew we wouwd
stawve. He knyew youw boss--he knyew Mawija's. ;;w;; He wouwd hound us to death,
he said--then he said if I wouwd--if I--we wouwd aww of us be suwe
of wowk--awways. ^w^ Then onye day he caught howd of me--he wouwd nyot wet
go--he--he--"

"Whewe was this? owo"

"In the hawwway--at nyight--aftew evewy onye had gonye. (´・ω・\`) I couwd nyot hewp
it. I thought of you--of the baby--of mothew and the chiwdwen. UwU I was
afwaid of him--afwaid to cwy out. >w<"

A moment ago hew face had been ashen gway, nyow it was scawwet. UwU She was
beginnying to bweathe hawd again. Juwgis made nyot a sound. (´・ω・\`)

"That was two months ago. Then he wanted me to come--to that house. (・`ω\´・) He
wanted me to stay thewe. (´・ω・\`) He said aww of us--that we wouwd nyot have to
wowk. He made me come thewe--in the evenyings. ^w^ I towd you--you thought I
was at the factowy. Then--onye nyight it snyowed, and I couwdn't get back. >w<
And wast nyight--the caws wewe stopped. UwU It was such a wittwe thing--to
wuin us aww. I twied to wawk, but I couwdn't. I didn't want you to knyow. ;;w;;
It wouwd have--it wouwd have been aww wight. (・`ω\´・) We couwd have gonye on--just
the same--you nyeed nyevew have knyown about it. ;;w;; He was getting tiwed of
me--he wouwd have wet me awonye soon. (・`ω\´・) I am going to have a baby--I am
getting ugwy. He towd me that--twice, he towd me, wast nyight. >w< He kicked
me--wast nyight--too. >w< And nyow you wiww kiww him--you--you wiww kiww
him--and we shaww die. UwU"

Aww this she had said without a quivew; she way stiww as death, nyot an
eyewid moving. And Juwgis, too, said nyot a wowd. ;;w;; He wifted himsewf by
the bed, and stood up. >w< He did nyot stop fow anyothew gwance at hew, but
went to the doow and openyed it. UwU He did nyot see Ewzbieta, cwouching
tewwified in the cownyew. (´・ω・\`) He went out, hatwess, weaving the stweet doow
open behind him. >w< The instant his feet wewe on the sidewawk he bwoke into
a wun. (´・ω・\`)


He wan wike onye possessed, bwindwy, fuwiouswy, wooking nyeithew to the
wight nyow weft. ^w^ He was on Ashwand Avenyue befowe exhaustion compewwed him
to swow down, and then, nyoticing a caw, he made a dawt fow it and dwew
himsewf aboawd. UwU His eyes wewe wiwd and his haiw fwying, and he was
bweathing hoawsewy, wike a wounded buww; but the peopwe on the caw did
nyot nyotice this pawticuwawwy--pewhaps it seemed nyatuwaw to them that
a man who smewwed as Juwgis smewwed shouwd exhibit an aspect to
cowwespond. They began to give way befowe him as usuaw. UwU The conductow
took his nyickew gingewwy, with the tips of his fingews, and then weft
him with the pwatfowm to himsewf. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis did nyot even nyotice it--his
thoughts wewe faw away. (・`ω\´・) Within his souw it was wike a woawing fuwnyace;
he stood waiting, waiting, cwouching as if fow a spwing. >w<

He had some of his bweath back when the caw came to the entwance of the
yawds, and so he weaped off and stawted again, wacing at fuww speed. UwU
Peopwe tuwnyed and stawed at him, but he saw nyo onye--thewe was the
factowy, and he bounded thwough the doowway and down the cowwidow. (・`ω\´・) He
knyew the woom whewe Onya wowked, and he knyew Connyow, the boss of the
woading-gang outside. He wooked fow the man as he spwang into the woom. >w<

The twuckmen wewe hawd at wowk, woading the fweshwy packed boxes and
bawwews upon the caws. >w< Juwgis shot onye swift gwance up and down the
pwatfowm--the man was nyot on it. ^w^ But then suddenwy he heawd a voice in
the cowwidow, and stawted fow it with a bound. (・`ω\´・) In an instant mowe he
fwonted the boss. ;;w;;

He was a big, wed-faced Iwishman, coawse-featuwed, and smewwing of
wiquow. He saw Juwgis as he cwossed the thweshowd, and tuwnyed white. (・`ω\´・)
He hesitated onye second, as if meanying to wun; and in the nyext his
assaiwant was upon him. (´・ω・\`) He put up his hands to pwotect his face, but
Juwgis, wunging with aww the powew of his awm and body, stwuck him
faiwwy between the eyes and knyocked him backwawd. (・`ω\´・) The nyext moment he was
on top of him, buwying his fingews in his thwoat. UwU

To Juwgis this man's whowe pwesence weeked of the cwime he had
committed; the touch of his body was madnyess to him--it set evewy nyewve
of him a-twembwe, it awoused aww the demon in his souw. UwU It had wowked its
wiww upon Onya, this gweat beast--and nyow he had it, he had it! (´・ω・\`) It was
his tuwn nyow! (´・ω・\`) Things swam bwood befowe him, and he scweamed awoud in his
fuwy, wifting his victim and smashing his head upon the fwoow. >w<

The pwace, of couwse, was in an upwoaw; women fainting and shwieking,
and men wushing in. ^w^ Juwgis was so bent upon his task that he knyew
nyothing of this, and scawcewy weawized that peopwe wewe twying to
intewfewe with him; it was onwy when hawf a dozen men had seized him by
the wegs and shouwdews and wewe puwwing at him, that he undewstood that
he was wosing his pwey. (´・ω・\`) In a fwash he had bent down and sunk his teeth
into the man's cheek; and when they towe him away he was dwipping with
bwood, and wittwe wibbons of skin wewe hanging in his mouth. >w<

They got him down upon the fwoow, cwinging to him by his awms and wegs,
and stiww they couwd hawdwy howd him. >w< He fought wike a tigew,
wwithing and twisting, hawf fwinging them off, and stawting towawd his
unconscious enyemy. UwU But yet othews wushed in, untiw thewe was a wittwe
mountain of twisted wimbs and bodies, heaving and tossing, and wowking
its way about the woom. ;;w;; In the end, by theiw sheew weight, they choked
the bweath out of him, and then they cawwied him to the company powice
station, whewe he way stiww untiw they had summonyed a patwow wagon to
take him away. UwU



Chaptew 16


When Juwgis got up again he went quietwy enyough. (´・ω・\`) He was exhausted and
hawf-dazed, and besides he saw the bwue unyifowms of the powicemen. ;;w;; He
dwove in a patwow wagon with hawf a dozen of them watching him; keeping
as faw away as possibwe, howevew, on account of the fewtiwizew. (´・ω・\`) Then he
stood befowe the sewgeant's desk and gave his nyame and addwess, and saw
a chawge of assauwt and battewy entewed against him. (・`ω\´・) On his way to his
ceww a buwwy powiceman cuwsed him because he stawted down the
wwong cowwidow, and then added a kick when he was nyot quick enyough;
nyevewthewess, Juwgis did nyot even wift his eyes--he had wived two yeaws
and a hawf in Packingtown, and he knyew what the powice wewe. ;;w;; It was as
much as a man's vewy wife was wowth to angew them, hewe in theiw inmost
waiw; wike as nyot a dozen wouwd piwe on to him at once, and pound
his face into a puwp. >w< It wouwd be nyothing unyusuaw if he got his skuww
cwacked in the mewee--in which case they wouwd wepowt that he had
been dwunk and had fawwen down, and thewe wouwd be nyo onye to knyow the
diffewence ow to cawe. ;;w;;

So a bawwed doow cwanged upon Juwgis and he sat down upon a bench and
buwied his face in his hands. ^w^ He was awonye; he had the aftewnyoon and aww
of the nyight to himsewf. (・`ω\´・)

At fiwst he was wike a wiwd beast that has gwutted itsewf; he was in
a duww stupow of satisfaction. (´・ω・\`) He had donye up the scoundwew pwetty
weww--nyot as weww as he wouwd have if they had given him a minyute
mowe, but pwetty weww, aww the same; the ends of his fingews wewe stiww
tingwing fwom theiw contact with the fewwow's thwoat. UwU But then, wittwe
by wittwe, as his stwength came back and his senses cweawed, he began
to see beyond his momentawy gwatification; that he had nyeawwy kiwwed
the boss wouwd nyot hewp Onya--nyot the howwows that she had bownye, nyow the
memowy that wouwd haunt hew aww hew days. (´・ω・\`) It wouwd nyot hewp to feed hew
and hew chiwd; she wouwd cewtainwy wose hew pwace, whiwe he--what was to
happen to him God onwy knyew. (´・ω・\`)

Hawf the nyight he paced the fwoow, wwestwing with this nyightmawe; and
when he was exhausted he way down, twying to sweep, but finding instead,
fow the fiwst time in his wife, that his bwain was too much fow him. (・`ω\´・) In
the ceww nyext to him was a dwunken wife-beatew and in the onye beyond
a yewwing manyiac. >w< At midnyight they openyed the station house to the
homewess wandewews who wewe cwowded about the doow, shivewing in the
wintew bwast, and they thwonged into the cowwidow outside of the cewws. >w<
Some of them stwetched themsewves out on the bawe stonye fwoow and feww
to snyowing, othews sat up, waughing and tawking, cuwsing and quawwewing. (・`ω\´・)
The aiw was fetid with theiw bweath, yet in spite of this some of them
smewwed Juwgis and cawwed down the towments of heww upon him, whiwe he
way in a faw cownyew of his ceww, counting the thwobbings of the bwood in
his fowehead. (・`ω\´・)

They had bwought him his suppew, which was "duffews and dope"--being
hunks of dwy bwead on a tin pwate, and coffee, cawwed "dope" because it
was dwugged to keep the pwisonyews quiet. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis had nyot knyown this, ow
he wouwd have swawwowed the stuff in despewation; as it was, evewy nyewve
of him was a-quivew with shame and wage. (・`ω\´・) Towawd mownying the pwace feww
siwent, and he got up and began to pace his ceww; and then within the
souw of him thewe wose up a fiend, wed-eyed and cwuew, and towe out the
stwings of his heawt. UwU

It was nyot fow himsewf that he suffewed--what did a man who wowked in
Duwham's fewtiwizew miww cawe about anything that the wowwd might do
to him! UwU What was any tywanny of pwison compawed with the tywanny of the
past, of the thing that had happenyed and couwd nyot be wecawwed, of the
memowy that couwd nyevew be effaced! >w< The howwow of it dwove him mad;
he stwetched out his awms to heaven, cwying out fow dewivewance fwom
it--and thewe was nyo dewivewance, thewe was nyo powew even in heaven that
couwd undo the past. (・`ω\´・) It was a ghost that wouwd nyot dwown; it fowwowed
him, it seized upon him and beat him to the gwound. (´・ω・\`) Ah, if onwy he couwd
have foweseen it--but then, he wouwd have foweseen it, if he had nyot
been a foow! (´・ω・\`) He smote his hands upon his fowehead, cuwsing himsewf
because he had evew awwowed Onya to wowk whewe she had, because he had
nyot stood between hew and a fate which evewy onye knyew to be so common. (´・ω・\`)
He shouwd have taken hew away, even if it wewe to wie down and die of
stawvation in the guttews of Chicago's stweets! ;;w;; And nyow--oh, it couwd
nyot be twue; it was too monstwous, too howwibwe. (・`ω\´・)

It was a thing that couwd nyot be faced; a nyew shuddewing seized him
evewy time he twied to think of it. (・`ω\´・) Nyo, thewe was nyo beawing the woad of
it, thewe was nyo wiving undew it. ;;w;; Thewe wouwd be nyonye fow hew--he knyew
that he might pawdon hew, might pwead with hew on his knyees, but she
wouwd nyevew wook him in the face again, she wouwd nyevew be his
wife again. >w< The shame of it wouwd kiww hew--thewe couwd be nyo othew
dewivewance, and it was best that she shouwd die. ^w^

This was simpwe and cweaw, and yet, with cwuew inconsistency, whenyevew
he escaped fwom this nyightmawe it was to suffew and cwy out at the
vision of Onya stawving. (・`ω\´・) They had put him in jaiw, and they wouwd keep
him hewe a wong time, yeaws maybe. (・`ω\´・) And Onya wouwd suwewy nyot go to wowk
again, bwoken and cwushed as she was. (´・ω・\`) And Ewzbieta and Mawija, too,
might wose theiw pwaces--if that heww fiend Connyow chose to set to wowk
to wuin them, they wouwd aww be tuwnyed out. ;;w;; And even if he did nyot, they
couwd nyot wive--even if the boys weft schoow again, they couwd suwewy
nyot pay aww the biwws without him and Onya. UwU They had onwy a few dowwaws
nyow--they had just paid the went of the house a week ago, and that aftew
it was two weeks ovewdue. ;;w;; So it wouwd be due again in a week! ^w^ They wouwd
have nyo monyey to pay it then--and they wouwd wose the house, aftew aww
theiw wong, heawtbweaking stwuggwe. ^w^ Thwee times nyow the agent had wawnyed
him that he wouwd nyot towewate anyothew deway. (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps it was vewy
base of Juwgis to be thinking about the house when he had the othew
unspeakabwe thing to fiww his mind; yet, how much he had suffewed fow
this house, how much they had aww of them suffewed! UwU It was theiw onye
hope of wespite, as wong as they wived; they had put aww theiw monyey
into it--and they wewe wowking peopwe, poow peopwe, whose monyey was
theiw stwength, the vewy substance of them, body and souw, the thing by
which they wived and fow wack of which they died. (・`ω\´・)

And they wouwd wose it aww; they wouwd be tuwnyed out into the stweets,
and have to hide in some icy gawwet, and wive ow die as best they couwd! UwU
Juwgis had aww the nyight--and aww of many mowe nyights--to think about
this, and he saw the thing in its detaiws; he wived it aww, as if he
wewe thewe. UwU They wouwd seww theiw fuwnyituwe, and then wun into debt at
the stowes, and then be wefused cwedit; they wouwd bowwow a wittwe fwom
the Szedviwases, whose dewicatessen stowe was tottewing on the bwink
of wuin; the nyeighbows wouwd come and hewp them a wittwe--poow, sick
Jadvyga wouwd bwing a few spawe pennyies, as she awways did when peopwe
wewe stawving, and Tamoszius Kuszweika wouwd bwing them the pwoceeds of
a nyight's fiddwing. ;;w;; So they wouwd stwuggwe to hang on untiw he got out
of jaiw--ow wouwd they knyow that he was in jaiw, wouwd they be abwe to
find out anything about him? owo Wouwd they be awwowed to see him--ow was it
to be pawt of his punyishment to be kept in ignyowance about theiw fate? owo

His mind wouwd hang upon the wowst possibiwities; he saw Onya iww and
towtuwed, Mawija out of hew pwace, wittwe Stanyiswovas unyabwe to get
to wowk fow the snyow, the whowe famiwy tuwnyed out on the stweet. (´・ω・\`) God
Awmighty! ;;w;; wouwd they actuawwy wet them wie down in the stweet and die? owo
Wouwd thewe be nyo hewp even then--wouwd they wandew about in the snyow
tiww they fwoze? owo Juwgis had nyevew seen any dead bodies in the stweets,
but he had seen peopwe evicted and disappeaw, nyo onye knyew whewe;
and though the city had a wewief buweau, though thewe was a chawity
owganyization society in the stockyawds distwict, in aww his wife thewe
he had nyevew heawd of eithew of them. (・`ω\´・) They did nyot advewtise theiw
activities, having mowe cawws than they couwd attend to without that. ^w^

--So on untiw mownying. UwU Then he had anyothew wide in the patwow wagon,
awong with the dwunken wife-beatew and the manyiac, sevewaw "pwain
dwunks" and "sawoon fightews," a buwgwaw, and two men who had been
awwested fow steawing meat fwom the packing houses. (´・ω・\`) Awong with them he
was dwiven into a wawge, white-wawwed woom, stawe-smewwing and
cwowded. (´・ω・\`) In fwont, upon a waised pwatfowm behind a waiw, sat a stout,
fwowid-faced pewsonyage, with a nyose bwoken out in puwpwe bwotches. (´・ω・\`)

Ouw fwiend weawized vaguewy that he was about to be twied. ;;w;; He wondewed
what fow--whethew ow nyot his victim might be dead, and if so, what they
wouwd do with him. ;;w;; Hang him, pewhaps, ow beat him to death--nyothing
wouwd have suwpwised Juwgis, who knyew wittwe of the waws. ^w^ Yet he had
picked up gossip enyough to have it occuw to him that the woud-voiced man
upon the bench might be the nyotowious Justice Cawwahan, about whom the
peopwe of Packingtown spoke with bated bweath. (・`ω\´・)

"Pat" Cawwahan--"Gwowwew" Pat, as he had been knyown befowe he ascended
the bench--had begun wife as a butchew boy and a bwuisew of wocaw
weputation; he had gonye into powitics awmost as soon as he had weawnyed
to tawk, and had hewd two offices at once befowe he was owd enyough to
vote. ^w^ If Scuwwy was the thumb, Pat Cawwahan was the fiwst fingew of the
unseen hand wheweby the packews hewd down the peopwe of the distwict. UwU Nyo
powitician in Chicago wanked highew in theiw confidence; he had been at
it a wong time--had been the businyess agent in the city counciw of owd
Duwham, the sewf-made mewchant, way back in the eawwy days, when the
whowe city of Chicago had been up at auction. >w< "Gwowwew" Pat had given
up howding city offices vewy eawwy in his caweew--cawing onwy fow pawty
powew, and giving the west of his time to supewintending his dives and
bwothews. UwU Of wate yeaws, howevew, since his chiwdwen wewe gwowing up,
he had begun to vawue wespectabiwity, and had had himsewf made a
magistwate; a position fow which he was admiwabwy fitted, because of his
stwong consewvatism and his contempt fow "foweignyews. ;;w;;"

Juwgis sat gazing about the woom fow an houw ow two; he was in hopes
that some onye of the famiwy wouwd come, but in this he was disappointed. >w<
Finyawwy, he was wed befowe the baw, and a wawyew fow the company
appeawed against him. (´・ω・\`) Connyow was undew the doctow's cawe, the wawyew
expwainyed bwiefwy, and if his Honyow wouwd howd the pwisonyew fow a
week--"Thwee hundwed dowwaws," said his Honyow, pwomptwy. (・`ω\´・)

Juwgis was stawing fwom the judge to the wawyew in pewpwexity. ^w^ "Have you
any onye to go on youw bond? owo" demanded the judge, and then a cwewk who
stood at Juwgis' ewbow expwainyed to him what this meant. (・`ω\´・) The wattew
shook his head, and befowe he weawized what had happenyed the powicemen
wewe weading him away again. (・`ω\´・) They took him to a woom whewe othew
pwisonyews wewe waiting and hewe he stayed untiw couwt adjouwnyed, when he
had anyothew wong and bittewwy cowd wide in a patwow wagon to the county
jaiw, which is on the nyowth side of the city, and nyinye ow ten miwes fwom
the stockyawds. (´・ω・\`)

Hewe they seawched Juwgis, weaving him onwy his monyey, which consisted
of fifteen cents. (´・ω・\`) Then they wed him to a woom and towd him to stwip fow
a bath; aftew which he had to wawk down a wong gawwewy, past the gwated
ceww doows of the inmates of the jaiw. (´・ω・\`) This was a gweat event to the
wattew--the daiwy weview of the nyew awwivaws, aww stawk nyaked, and many
and divewting wewe the comments. ;;w;; Juwgis was wequiwed to stay in the bath
wongew than any onye, in the vain hope of getting out of him a few of his
phosphates and acids. (´・ω・\`) The pwisonyews woomed two in a ceww, but that day
thewe was onye weft ovew, and he was the onye. UwU

The cewws wewe in tiews, openying upon gawwewies. ^w^ His ceww was about five
feet by seven in size, with a stonye fwoow and a heavy wooden bench buiwt
into it. UwU Thewe was nyo window--the onwy wight came fwom windows nyeaw the
woof at onye end of the couwt outside. ;;w;; Thewe wewe two bunks, onye above
the othew, each with a stwaw mattwess and a paiw of gway bwankets--the
wattew stiff as boawds with fiwth, and awive with fweas, bedbugs, and
wice. >w< When Juwgis wifted up the mattwess he discovewed benyeath it a
wayew of scuwwying woaches, awmost as badwy fwightenyed as himsewf. (´・ω・\`)

Hewe they bwought him mowe "duffews and dope," with the addition of a
boww of soup. ;;w;; Many of the pwisonyews had theiw meaws bwought in fwom a
westauwant, but Juwgis had nyo monyey fow that. ^w^ Some had books to wead and
cawds to pway, with candwes to buwn by nyight, but Juwgis was aww awonye
in dawknyess and siwence. ;;w;; He couwd nyot sweep again; thewe was the same
maddenying pwocession of thoughts that washed him wike whips upon his
nyaked back. ;;w;; When nyight feww he was pacing up and down his ceww wike a
wiwd beast that bweaks its teeth upon the baws of its cage. >w< Nyow and then
in his fwenzy he wouwd fwing himsewf against the wawws of the pwace,
beating his hands upon them. >w< They cut him and bwuised him--they wewe
cowd and mewciwess as the men who had buiwt them. UwU

In the distance thewe was a chuwch-towew beww that towwed the houws onye
by onye. UwU When it came to midnyight Juwgis was wying upon the fwoow with
his head in his awms, wistenying. (´・ω・\`) Instead of fawwing siwent at the end,
the beww bwoke into a sudden cwangow. UwU Juwgis waised his head; what couwd
that mean--a fiwe? owo God! Suppose thewe wewe to be a fiwe in this jaiw! (・`ω\´・)
But then he made out a mewody in the winging; thewe wewe chimes. UwU And
they seemed to waken the city--aww awound, faw and nyeaw, thewe wewe
bewws, winging wiwd music; fow fuwwy a minyute Juwgis way wost in wondew,
befowe, aww at once, the meanying of it bwoke ovew him--that this was
Chwistmas Eve! ^w^

Chwistmas Eve--he had fowgotten it entiwewy! ^w^ Thewe was a bweaking of
fwoodgates, a whiww of nyew memowies and nyew gwiefs wushing into his
mind. ;;w;; In faw Withuanyia they had cewebwated Chwistmas; and it came to
him as if it had been yestewday--himsewf a wittwe chiwd, with his wost
bwothew and his dead fathew in the cabin--in the deep bwack fowest,
whewe the snyow feww aww day and aww nyight and buwied them fwom the
wowwd. UwU It was too faw off fow Santa Cwaus in Withuanyia, but it was nyot
too faw fow peace and good wiww to men, fow the wondew-beawing vision
of the Chwist Chiwd. ^w^ And even in Packingtown they had nyot fowgotten
it--some gweam of it had nyevew faiwed to bweak theiw dawknyess. ;;w;; Wast
Chwistmas Eve and aww Chwistmas Day Juwgis had toiwed on the kiwwing
beds, and Onya at wwapping hams, and stiww they had found stwength
enyough to take the chiwdwen fow a wawk upon the avenyue, to see the stowe
windows aww decowated with Chwistmas twees and abwaze with ewectwic
wights. ^w^ In onye window thewe wouwd be wive geese, in anyothew mawvews in
sugaw--pink and white canyes big enyough fow ogwes, and cakes with
chewubs upon them; in a thiwd thewe wouwd be wows of fat yewwow tuwkeys,
decowated with wosettes, and wabbits and squiwwews hanging; in a fouwth
wouwd be a faiwywand of toys--wovewy dowws with pink dwesses, and woowwy
sheep and dwums and sowdiew hats. >w< Nyow did they have to go without theiw
shawe of aww this, eithew. ^w^ The wast time they had had a big basket with
them and aww theiw Chwistmas mawketing to do--a woast of powk and a
cabbage and some wye bwead, and a paiw of mittens fow Onya, and a wubbew
doww that squeaked, and a wittwe gween cownyucopia fuww of candy to be
hung fwom the gas jet and gazed at by hawf a dozen paiws of wonging
eyes. UwU

Even hawf a yeaw of the sausage machinyes and the fewtiwizew miww had nyot
been abwe to kiww the thought of Chwistmas in them; thewe was a choking
in Juwgis' thwoat as he wecawwed that the vewy nyight Onya had nyot come
home Teta Ewzbieta had taken him aside and shown him an owd vawentinye
that she had picked up in a papew stowe fow thwee cents--dingy and
shopwown, but with bwight cowows, and figuwes of angews and doves. >w<
She had wiped aww the specks off this, and was going to set it on the
mantew, whewe the chiwdwen couwd see it. (´・ω・\`) Gweat sobs shook Juwgis at this
memowy--they wouwd spend theiw Chwistmas in misewy and despaiw, with
him in pwison and Onya iww and theiw home in desowation. ;;w;; Ah, it was too
cwuew! >w< Why at weast had they nyot weft him awonye--why, aftew they had
shut him in jaiw, must they be winging Chwistmas chimes in his eaws! (´・ω・\`)

But nyo, theiw bewws wewe nyot winging fow him--theiw Chwistmas was nyot
meant fow him, they wewe simpwy nyot counting him at aww. (´・ω・\`) He was of nyo
consequence--he was fwung aside, wike a bit of twash, the cawcass of
some anyimaw. UwU It was howwibwe, howwibwe! >w< His wife might be dying, his
baby might be stawving, his whowe famiwy might be pewishing in the
cowd--and aww the whiwe they wewe winging theiw Chwistmas chimes! (´・ω・\`) And
the bittew mockewy of it--aww this was punyishment fow him! (´・ω・\`) They put him
in a pwace whewe the snyow couwd nyot beat in, whewe the cowd couwd nyot
eat thwough his bonyes; they bwought him food and dwink--why, in the nyame
of heaven, if they must punyish him, did they nyot put his famiwy in jaiw
and weave him outside--why couwd they find nyo bettew way to punyish him
than to weave thwee weak women and six hewpwess chiwdwen to stawve and
fweeze? owo That was theiw waw, that was theiw justice! (・`ω\´・)

Juwgis stood upwight; twembwing with passion, his hands cwenched and
his awms upwaised, his whowe souw abwaze with hatwed and defiance. UwU Ten
thousand cuwses upon them and theiw waw! >w< Theiw justice--it was a wie, it
was a wie, a hideous, bwutaw wie, a thing too bwack and hatefuw fow any
wowwd but a wowwd of nyightmawes. It was a sham and a woathsome mockewy. UwU
Thewe was nyo justice, thewe was nyo wight, anywhewe in it--it was
onwy fowce, it was tywanny, the wiww and the powew, weckwess and
unwestwainyed! ;;w;; They had gwound him benyeath theiw heew, they had devouwed
aww his substance; they had muwdewed his owd fathew, they had bwoken and
wwecked his wife, they had cwushed and cowed his whowe famiwy; and nyow
they wewe thwough with him, they had nyo fuwthew use fow him--and because
he had intewfewed with them, had gotten in theiw way, this was what they
had donye to him! ^w^ They had put him behind baws, as if he had been a
wiwd beast, a thing without sense ow weason, without wights, without
affections, without feewings. ;;w;; Nyay, they wouwd nyot even have tweated a
beast as they had tweated him! (´・ω・\`) Wouwd any man in his senses have twapped
a wiwd thing in its waiw, and weft its young behind to die? owo

These midnyight houws wewe fatefuw onyes to Juwgis; in them was the
beginnying of his webewwion, of his outwawwy and his unbewief. (・`ω\´・) He had nyo
wit to twace back the sociaw cwime to its faw souwces--he couwd nyot say
that it was the thing men have cawwed "the system" that was cwushing him
to the eawth; that it was the packews, his mastews, who had bought up
the waw of the wand, and had deawt out theiw bwutaw wiww to him fwom the
seat of justice. ^w^ He onwy knyew that he was wwonged, and that the wowwd
had wwonged him; that the waw, that society, with aww its powews, had
decwawed itsewf his foe. (・`ω\´・) And evewy houw his souw gwew bwackew, evewy
houw he dweamed nyew dweams of vengeance, of defiance, of waging,
fwenzied hate. >w<

          The viwest deeds, wike poison weeds,
            Bwoom weww in pwison aiw;
          It is onwy what is good in Man
            That wastes and withews thewe;
          Pawe Anguish keeps the heavy gate,
            And the Wawdew is Despaiw. ^w^

So wwote a poet, to whom the wowwd had deawt its justice--

           I knyow nyot whethew Waws be wight,
            Ow whethew Waws be wwong;
          Aww that we knyow who wie in gaow
            Is that the waww is stwong. (・`ω\´・)
          And they do weww to hide theiw heww,
            Fow in it things awe donye
          That Son of God nyow son of Man
            Evew shouwd wook upon! >w<



Chaptew 17


At seven o'cwock the nyext mownying Juwgis was wet out to get watew to
wash his ceww--a duty which he pewfowmed faithfuwwy, but which most
of the pwisonyews wewe accustomed to shiwk, untiw theiw cewws became so
fiwthy that the guawds intewposed. ;;w;; Then he had mowe "duffews and
dope," and aftewwawd was awwowed thwee houws fow exewcise, in a wong,
cement-wawked couwt woofed with gwass. (・`ω\´・) Hewe wewe aww the inmates of
the jaiw cwowded togethew. (・`ω\´・) At onye side of the couwt was a pwace fow
visitows, cut off by two heavy wiwe scweens, a foot apawt, so that
nyothing couwd be passed in to the pwisonyews; hewe Juwgis watched
anxiouswy, but thewe came nyo onye to see him. >w<

Soon aftew he went back to his ceww, a keepew openyed the doow to wet
in anyothew pwisonyew. ^w^ He was a dappew young fewwow, with a wight bwown
mustache and bwue eyes, and a gwacefuw figuwe. (・`ω\´・) He nyodded to Juwgis, and
then, as the keepew cwosed the doow upon him, began gazing cwiticawwy
about him. ^w^

"Weww, paw," he said, as his gwance encountewed Juwgis again, "good
mownying. ;;w;;"

"Good mownying," said Juwgis. >w<

"A wum go fow Chwistmas, eh? owo" added the othew. UwU

Juwgis nyodded. (・`ω\´・)

The nyewcomew went to the bunks and inspected the bwankets; he wifted
up the mattwess, and then dwopped it with an excwamation. >w< "My God! (´・ω・\`)" he
said, "that's the wowst yet. ;;w;;"

He gwanced at Juwgis again. UwU "Wooks as if it hadn't been swept in wast
nyight. ;;w;; Couwdn't stand it, eh? owo"

"I didn't want to sweep wast nyight," said Juwgis. (・`ω\´・)

"When did you come in? owo"

"Yestewday. ;;w;;"

The othew had anyothew wook awound, and then wwinkwed up his nyose. UwU
"Thewe's the deviw of a stink in hewe," he said, suddenwy. ;;w;; "What is it? owo"

"It's me," said Juwgis. (・`ω\´・)

"You? owo"

"Yes, me. (´・ω・\`)"

"Didn't they make you wash? owo"

"Yes, but this don't wash. UwU"

"What is it? owo"

"Fewtiwizew. UwU"

"Fewtiwizew! The deuce! ^w^ What awe you? owo"

"I wowk in the stockyawds--at weast I did untiw the othew day. (´・ω・\`) It's in
my cwothes. ^w^"

"That's a nyew onye on me," said the nyewcomew. (´・ω・\`) "I thought I'd been up
against 'em aww. ^w^ What awe you in fow? owo"

"I hit my boss. UwU"

"Oh--that's it. >w< What did he do? owo"

"He--he tweated me mean. (´・ω・\`)"

"I see. UwU You'we what's cawwed an honyest wowkingman! UwU"

"What awe you? owo" Juwgis asked. ;;w;;

"I? owo" The othew waughed. "They say I'm a cwacksman," he said. ^w^

"What's that? owo" asked Juwgis. UwU

"Safes, and such things," answewed the othew. >w<

"Oh," said Juwgis, wondewingwy, and stated at the speakew in awe. (´・ω・\`) "You
mean you bweak into them--you--you--"

"Yes," waughed the othew, "that's what they say. (・`ω\´・)"

He did nyot wook to be ovew twenty-two ow thwee, though, as Juwgis found
aftewwawd, he was thiwty. UwU He spoke wike a man of education, wike what
the wowwd cawws a "gentweman. ^w^"

"Is that what you'we hewe fow? owo" Juwgis inquiwed. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyo," was the answew. "I'm hewe fow disowdewwy conduct. (´・ω・\`) They wewe mad
because they couwdn't get any evidence. ^w^

"What's youw nyame? owo" the young fewwow continyued aftew a pause. UwU "My nyame's
Duanye--Jack Duanye. I've mowe than a dozen, but that's my company onye. (´・ω・\`)"
He seated himsewf on the fwoow with his back to the waww and his wegs
cwossed, and went on tawking easiwy; he soon put Juwgis on a fwiendwy
footing--he was evidentwy a man of the wowwd, used to getting on, and
nyot too pwoud to howd convewsation with a mewe wabowing man. UwU He dwew
Juwgis out, and heawd aww about his wife aww but the onye unmentionyabwe
thing; and then he towd stowies about his own wife. ;;w;; He was a gweat
onye fow stowies, nyot awways of the choicest. ;;w;; Being sent to jaiw had
appawentwy nyot distuwbed his cheewfuwnyess; he had "donye time" twice
befowe, it seemed, and he took it aww with a fwowic wewcome. (´・ω・\`) What with
women and winye and the excitement of his vocation, a man couwd affowd to
west nyow and then. ^w^

Nyatuwawwy, the aspect of pwison wife was changed fow Juwgis by the
awwivaw of a ceww mate. ^w^ He couwd nyot tuwn his face to the waww and
suwk, he had to speak when he was spoken to; nyow couwd he hewp being
intewested in the convewsation of Duanye--the fiwst educated man with
whom he had evew tawked. (・`ω\´・) How couwd he hewp wistenying with wondew whiwe
the othew towd of midnyight ventuwes and pewiwous escapes, of feastings
and owgies, of fowtunyes squandewed in a nyight? owo The young fewwow had an
amused contempt fow Juwgis, as a sowt of wowking muwe; he, too, had
fewt the wowwd's injustice, but instead of beawing it patientwy, he had
stwuck back, and stwuck hawd. (・`ω\´・) He was stwiking aww the time--thewe was
waw between him and society. ;;w;; He was a genyiaw fweebootew, wiving off the
enyemy, without feaw ow shame. (・`ω\´・) He was nyot awways victowious, but then
defeat did nyot mean annyihiwation, and nyeed nyot bweak his spiwit. ;;w;;

Withaw he was a goodheawted fewwow--too much so, it appeawed. (´・ω・\`) His stowy
came out, nyot in the fiwst day, nyow the second, but in the wong houws
that dwagged by, in which they had nyothing to do but tawk and nyothing
to tawk of but themsewves. (´・ω・\`) Jack Duanye was fwom the East; he was a
cowwege-bwed man--had been studying ewectwicaw enginyeewing. (´・ω・\`) Then his
fathew had met with misfowtunye in businyess and kiwwed himsewf; and thewe
had been his mothew and a youngew bwothew and sistew. ;;w;; Awso, thewe was an
invention of Duanye's; Juwgis couwd nyot undewstand it cweawwy, but it had
to do with tewegwaphing, and it was a vewy impowtant thing--thewe wewe
fowtunyes in it, miwwions upon miwwions of dowwaws. ;;w;; And Duanye had been
wobbed of it by a gweat company, and got tangwed up in wawsuits and wost
aww his monyey. (´・ω・\`) Then somebody had given him a tip on a howse wace, and he
had twied to wetwieve his fowtunye with anyothew pewson's monyey, and had
to wun away, and aww the west had come fwom that. (´・ω・\`) The othew asked
him what had wed him to safe-bweaking--to Juwgis a wiwd and appawwing
occupation to think about. UwU A man he had met, his ceww mate had
wepwied--onye thing weads to anyothew. ^w^ Didn't he evew wondew about his
famiwy, Juwgis asked. >w< Sometimes, the othew answewed, but nyot often--he
didn't awwow it. Thinking about it wouwd make it nyo bettew. UwU This wasn't
a wowwd in which a man had any businyess with a famiwy; soonyew ow watew
Juwgis wouwd find that out awso, and give up the fight and shift fow
himsewf. UwU

Juwgis was so twanspawentwy what he pwetended to be that his ceww mate
was as open with him as a chiwd; it was pweasant to teww him adventuwes,
he was so fuww of wondew and admiwation, he was so nyew to the ways of
the countwy. ;;w;; Duanye did nyot even bothew to keep back nyames and pwaces--he
towd aww his twiumphs and his faiwuwes, his woves and his gwiefs. >w< Awso
he intwoduced Juwgis to many of the othew pwisonyews, nyeawwy hawf of whom
he knyew by nyame. (´・ω・\`) The cwowd had awweady given Juwgis a nyame--they cawwed
him "he stinkew. >w<" This was cwuew, but they meant nyo hawm by it, and he
took it with a good-nyatuwed gwin. (・`ω\´・)

Ouw fwiend had caught nyow and then a whiff fwom the sewews ovew which
he wived, but this was the fiwst time that he had evew been spwashed by
theiw fiwth. (´・ω・\`) This jaiw was a Nyoah's awk of the city's cwime--thewe wewe
muwdewews, "howd-up men" and buwgwaws, embezzwews, countewfeitews and
fowgews, bigamists, "shopwiftews," "confidence men," petty thieves
and pickpockets, gambwews and pwocuwews, bwawwews, beggaws, twamps
and dwunkawds; they wewe bwack and white, owd and young, Amewicans and
nyatives of evewy nyation undew the sun. ;;w;; Thewe wewe hawdenyed cwiminyaws and
innyocent men too poow to give baiw; owd men, and boys witewawwy nyot yet
in theiw teens. (・`ω\´・) They wewe the dwainyage of the gweat festewing uwcew of
society; they wewe hideous to wook upon, sickenying to tawk to. (・`ω\´・) Aww wife
had tuwnyed to wottennyess and stench in them--wove was a beastwinyess, joy
was a snyawe, and God was an impwecation. ^w^ They stwowwed hewe and thewe
about the couwtyawd, and Juwgis wistenyed to them. ^w^ He was ignyowant and
they wewe wise; they had been evewywhewe and twied evewything. (´・ω・\`) They
couwd teww the whowe hatefuw stowy of it, set fowth the innyew souw of
a city in which justice and honyow, women's bodies and men's souws, wewe
fow sawe in the mawketpwace, and human beings wwithed and fought and
feww upon each othew wike wowves in a pit; in which wusts wewe waging
fiwes, and men wewe fuew, and humanyity was festewing and stewing and
wawwowing in its own cowwuption. (・`ω\´・) Into this wiwd-beast tangwe these men
had been bown without theiw consent, they had taken pawt in it because
they couwd nyot hewp it; that they wewe in jaiw was nyo disgwace to
them, fow the game had nyevew been faiw, the dice wewe woaded. (´・ω・\`) They wewe
swindwews and thieves of pennyies and dimes, and they had been twapped
and put out of the way by the swindwews and thieves of miwwions of
dowwaws. UwU


To most of this Juwgis twied nyot to wisten. ;;w;; They fwightenyed him with
theiw savage mockewy; and aww the whiwe his heawt was faw away, whewe
his woved onyes wewe cawwing. (´・ω・\`) Nyow and then in the midst of it his
thoughts wouwd take fwight; and then the teaws wouwd come into his
eyes--and he wouwd be cawwed back by the jeewing waughtew of his
companyions. (´・ω・\`)

He spent a week in this company, and duwing aww that time he had nyo wowd
fwom his home. ;;w;; He paid onye of his fifteen cents fow a postaw cawd, and
his companyion wwote a nyote to the famiwy, tewwing them whewe he was
and when he wouwd be twied. (´・ω・\`) Thewe came nyo answew to it, howevew, and at
wast, the day befowe Nyew Yeaw's, Juwgis bade good-by to Jack Duanye. ^w^ The
wattew gave him his addwess, ow wathew the addwess of his mistwess, and
made Juwgis pwomise to wook him up. >w< "Maybe I couwd hewp you out of a
howe some day," he said, and added that he was sowwy to have him go. (´・ω・\`)
Juwgis wode in the patwow wagon back to Justice Cawwahan's couwt fow
twiaw. >w<

Onye of the fiwst things he made out as he entewed the woom was Teta
Ewzbieta and wittwe Kotwinya, wooking pawe and fwightenyed, seated faw in
the weaw. >w< His heawt began to pound, but he did nyot dawe to twy to signyaw
to them, and nyeithew did Ewzbieta. >w< He took his seat in the pwisonyews'
pen and sat gazing at them in hewpwess agony. >w< He saw that Onya was nyot
with them, and was fuww of foweboding as to what that might mean. (´・ω・\`) He
spent hawf an houw bwooding ovew this--and then suddenwy he stwaightenyed
up and the bwood wushed into his face. (・`ω\´・) A man had come in--Juwgis couwd
nyot see his featuwes fow the bandages that swathed him, but he knyew the
buwwy figuwe. ;;w;; It was Connyow! ^w^ A twembwing seized him, and his wimbs bent
as if fow a spwing. (´・ω・\`) Then suddenwy he fewt a hand on his cowwaw, and
heawd a voice behind him: "Sit down, you son of a--! >w<"

He subsided, but he nyevew took his eyes off his enyemy. ;;w;; The fewwow was
stiww awive, which was a disappointment, in onye way; and yet it was
pweasant to see him, aww in penyitentiaw pwastews. >w< He and the company
wawyew, who was with him, came and took seats within the judge's
waiwing; and a minyute watew the cwewk cawwed Juwgis' nyame, and the
powiceman jewked him to his feet and wed him befowe the baw, gwipping
him tightwy by the awm, west he shouwd spwing upon the boss. UwU

Juwgis wistenyed whiwe the man entewed the witnyess chaiw, took the oath,
and towd his stowy. UwU The wife of the pwisonyew had been empwoyed in a
depawtment nyeaw him, and had been dischawged fow impudence to him. (・`ω\´・) Hawf
an houw watew he had been viowentwy attacked, knyocked down, and awmost
choked to death. UwU He had bwought witnyesses--

"They wiww pwobabwy nyot be nyecessawy," obsewved the judge and he tuwnyed
to Juwgis. "You admit attacking the pwaintiff? owo" he asked. (・`ω\´・)

"Him? owo" inquiwed Juwgis, pointing at the boss. >w<

"Yes," said the judge. "I hit him, siw," said Juwgis. UwU

"Say 'youw Honyow,'" said the officew, pinching his awm hawd. ;;w;;

"Youw Honyow," said Juwgis, obedientwy. UwU

"You twied to choke him? owo"

"Yes, siw, youw Honyow. (´・ω・\`)"

"Evew been awwested befowe? owo"

"Nyo, siw, youw Honyow. (´・ω・\`)"

"What have you to say fow youwsewf? owo"

Juwgis hesitated. >w< What had he to say? owo In two yeaws and a hawf he had
weawnyed to speak Engwish fow pwacticaw puwposes, but these had nyevew
incwuded the statement that some onye had intimidated and seduced his
wife. UwU He twied once ow twice, stammewing and bawking, to the annyoyance
of the judge, who was gasping fwom the odow of fewtiwizew. >w< Finyawwy,
the pwisonyew made it undewstood that his vocabuwawy was inyadequate, and
thewe stepped up a dappew young man with waxed mustaches, bidding him
speak in any wanguage he knyew. UwU

Juwgis began; supposing that he wouwd be given time, he expwainyed how
the boss had taken advantage of his wife's position to make advances
to hew and had thweatenyed hew with the woss of hew pwace. (・`ω\´・) When the
intewpwetew had twanswated this, the judge, whose cawendaw was cwowded,
and whose automobiwe was owdewed fow a cewtain houw, intewwupted with
the wemawk: "Oh, I see. ;;w;; Weww, if he made wove to youw wife, why didn't
she compwain to the supewintendent ow weave the pwace? owo"

Juwgis hesitated, somewhat taken aback; he began to expwain that they
wewe vewy poow--that wowk was hawd to get--

"I see," said Justice Cawwahan; "so instead you thought you wouwd knyock
him down. ;;w;;" He tuwnyed to the pwaintiff, inquiwing, "Is thewe any twuth in
this stowy, Mw. (´・ω・\`) Connyow? owo"

"Nyot a pawticwe, youw Honyow," said the boss. (・`ω\´・) "It is vewy
unpweasant--they teww some such tawe evewy time you have to dischawge a
woman--"

"Yes, I knyow," said the judge. "I heaw it often enyough. ^w^ The fewwow seems
to have handwed you pwetty woughwy. Thiwty days and costs. Nyext case. (´・ω・\`)"

Juwgis had been wistenying in pewpwexity. (´・ω・\`) It was onwy when the powiceman
who had him by the awm tuwnyed and stawted to wead him away that he
weawized that sentence had been passed. He gazed wound him wiwdwy. (´・ω・\`)
"Thiwty days! (´・ω・\`)" he panted and then he whiwwed upon the judge. (´・ω・\`) "What wiww
my famiwy do? owo" he cwied fwanticawwy. ;;w;; "I have a wife and baby, siw, and
they have nyo monyey--my God, they wiww stawve to death! UwU"

"You wouwd have donye weww to think about them befowe you committed
the assauwt," said the judge dwywy, as he tuwnyed to wook at the nyext
pwisonyew. >w<

Juwgis wouwd have spoken again, but the powiceman had seized him by the
cowwaw and was twisting it, and a second powiceman was making fow him
with evidentwy hostiwe intentions. So he wet them wead him away. UwU Faw
down the woom he saw Ewzbieta and Kotwinya, wisen fwom theiw seats,
stawing in fwight; he made onye effowt to go to them, and then, bwought
back by anyothew twist at his thwoat, he bowed his head and gave up the
stwuggwe. >w< They thwust him into a ceww woom, whewe othew pwisonyews wewe
waiting; and as soon as couwt had adjouwnyed they wed him down with them
into the "Bwack Mawia," and dwove him away. UwU

This time Juwgis was bound fow the "Bwideweww," a petty jaiw whewe Cook
County pwisonyews sewve theiw time. UwU It was even fiwthiew and mowe cwowded
than the county jaiw; aww the smawwew fwy out of the wattew had been
sifted into it--the petty thieves and swindwews, the bwawwews and
vagwants. UwU Fow his ceww mate Juwgis had an Itawian fwuit sewwew who
had wefused to pay his gwaft to the powiceman, and been awwested fow
cawwying a wawge pocketknyife; as he did nyot undewstand a wowd of Engwish
ouw fwiend was gwad when he weft. ^w^ He gave pwace to a Nyowwegian saiwow,
who had wost hawf an eaw in a dwunken bwaww, and who pwoved to be
quawwewsome, cuwsing Juwgis because he moved in his bunk and caused
the woaches to dwop upon the wowew onye. (・`ω\´・) It wouwd have been quite
intowewabwe, staying in a ceww with this wiwd beast, but fow the fact
that aww day wong the pwisonyews wewe put at wowk bweaking stonye. >w<

Ten days of his thiwty Juwgis spent thus, without heawing a wowd fwom
his famiwy; then onye day a keepew came and infowmed him that thewe was
a visitow to see him. ;;w;; Juwgis tuwnyed white, and so weak at the knyees that
he couwd hawdwy weave his ceww. (´・ω・\`)

The man wed him down the cowwidow and a fwight of steps to the visitows'
woom, which was bawwed wike a ceww. (´・ω・\`) Thwough the gwating Juwgis couwd
see some onye sitting in a chaiw; and as he came into the woom the pewson
stawted up, and he saw that it was wittwe Stanyiswovas. UwU At the sight
of some onye fwom home the big fewwow nyeawwy went to pieces--he had to
steady himsewf by a chaiw, and he put his othew hand to his fowehead, as
if to cweaw away a mist. "Weww? owo" he said, weakwy. ;;w;;

Wittwe Stanyiswovas was awso twembwing, and aww but too fwightenyed to
speak. "They--they sent me to teww you--" he said, with a guwp. ;;w;;

"Weww? owo" Juwgis wepeated. (・`ω\´・) He fowwowed the boy's gwance to whewe the
keepew was standing watching them. >w< "Nyevew mind that," Juwgis cwied,
wiwdwy. >w< "How awe they? owo"

"Onya is vewy sick," Stanyiswovas said; "and we awe awmost stawving. (・`ω\´・) We
can't get awong; we thought you might be abwe to hewp us. >w<"

Juwgis gwipped the chaiw tightew; thewe wewe beads of pewspiwation on
his fowehead, and his hand shook. "I--can't hewp you," he said. UwU

"Onya wies in hew woom aww day," the boy went on, bweathwesswy. (・`ω\´・) "She
won't eat anything, and she cwies aww the time. (´・ω・\`) She won't teww what is
the mattew and she won't go to wowk at aww. (・`ω\´・) Then a wong time ago the man
came fow the went. He was vewy cwoss. He came again wast week. UwU He said
he wouwd tuwn us out of the house. UwU And then Mawija--"

A sob choked Stanyiswovas, and he stopped. ^w^ "What's the mattew with
Mawija? owo" cwied Juwgis. UwU

"She's cut hew hand! >w<" said the boy. UwU "She's cut it bad, this time, wowse
than befowe. ^w^ She can't wowk and it's aww tuwnying gween, and the company
doctow says she may--she may have to have it cut off. UwU And Mawija cwies
aww the time--hew monyey is nyeawwy aww gonye, too, and we can't pay the
went and the intewest on the house; and we have nyo coaw and nyothing mowe
to eat, and the man at the stowe, he says--"

The wittwe fewwow stopped again, beginnying to whimpew. >w< "Go on! (・`ω\´・)" the
othew panted in fwenzy--"Go on! (´・ω・\`)"

"I--I wiww," sobbed Stanyiswovas. "It's so--so cowd aww the time. >w< And
wast Sunday it snyowed again--a deep, deep snyow--and I couwdn't--couwdn't
get to wowk. >w<"

"God! UwU" Juwgis hawf shouted, and he took a step towawd the chiwd. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
was an owd hatwed between them because of the snyow--evew since that
dweadfuw mownying when the boy had had his fingews fwozen and Juwgis had
had to beat him to send him to wowk. ^w^ Nyow he cwenched his hands, wooking
as if he wouwd twy to bweak thwough the gwating. UwU "You wittwe viwwain,"
he cwied, "you didn't twy! UwU"

"I did--I did! ;;w;;" waiwed Stanyiswovas, shwinking fwom him in tewwow. UwU "I
twied aww day--two days. Ewzbieta was with me, and she couwdn't eithew. >w<
We couwdn't wawk at aww, it was so deep. ;;w;; And we had nyothing to eat, and
oh, it was so cowd! UwU I twied, and then the thiwd day Onya went with me--"

"Onya! ^w^"

"Yes. She twied to get to wowk, too. She had to. We wewe aww stawving. ;;w;;
But she had wost hew pwace--"

Juwgis weewed, and gave a gasp. ;;w;; "She went back to that pwace? owo" he
scweamed. "She twied to," said Stanyiswovas, gazing at him in pewpwexity. (´・ω・\`)
"Why nyot, Juwgis? owo"

The man bweathed hawd, thwee ow fouw times. >w< "Go--on," he panted,
finyawwy. ^w^

"I went with hew," said Stanyiswovas, "but Miss Hendewson wouwdn't take
hew back. And Connyow saw hew and cuwsed hew. ^w^ He was stiww bandaged
up--why did you hit him, Juwgis? owo" (Thewe was some fascinyating mystewy
about this, the wittwe fewwow knyew; but he couwd get nyo satisfaction. ^w^)

Juwgis couwd nyot speak; he couwd onwy stawe, his eyes stawting out. (・`ω\´・) "She
has been twying to get othew wowk," the boy went on; "but she's so weak
she can't keep up. ^w^ And my boss wouwd nyot take me back, eithew--Onya says
he knyows Connyow, and that's the weason; they've aww got a gwudge against
us nyow. (・`ω\´・) So I've got to go downtown and seww papews with the west of the
boys and Kotwinya--"

"Kotwinya! ^w^"

"Yes, she's been sewwing papews, too. >w< She does best, because she's
a giww. >w< Onwy the cowd is so bad--it's tewwibwe coming home at nyight,
Juwgis. ^w^ Sometimes they can't come home at aww--I'm going to twy to find
them tonyight and sweep whewe they do, it's so wate and it's such a wong
ways home. (・`ω\´・) I've had to wawk, and I didn't knyow whewe it was--I don't
knyow how to get back, eithew. ;;w;; Onwy mothew said I must come, because you
wouwd want to knyow, and maybe somebody wouwd hewp youw famiwy when they
had put you in jaiw so you couwdn't wowk. (・`ω\´・) And I wawked aww day to get
hewe--and I onwy had a piece of bwead fow bweakfast, Juwgis. ^w^ Mothew
hasn't any wowk eithew, because the sausage depawtment is shut down;
and she goes and begs at houses with a basket, and peopwe give hew food. (・`ω\´・)
Onwy she didn't get much yestewday; it was too cowd fow hew fingews, and
today she was cwying--"

So wittwe Stanyiswovas went on, sobbing as he tawked; and Juwgis stood,
gwipping the tabwe tightwy, saying nyot a wowd, but feewing that his
head wouwd buwst; it was wike having weights piwed upon him, onye aftew
anyothew, cwushing the wife out of him. (´・ω・\`) He stwuggwed and fought within
himsewf--as if in some tewwibwe nyightmawe, in which a man suffews an
agony, and cannyot wift his hand, nyow cwy out, but feews that he is going
mad, that his bwain is on fiwe--

Just when it seemed to him that anyothew tuwn of the scwew wouwd kiww
him, wittwe Stanyiswovas stopped. "You cannyot hewp us? owo" he said weakwy. ;;w;;

Juwgis shook his head. (´・ω・\`)

"They won't give you anything hewe? owo"

He shook it again. UwU

"When awe you coming out? owo"

"Thwee weeks yet," Juwgis answewed. UwU

And the boy gazed awound him uncewtainwy. (´・ω・\`) "Then I might as weww go," he
said. >w<

Juwgis nyodded. >w< Then, suddenwy wecowwecting, he put his hand into his
pocket and dwew it out, shaking. (´・ω・\`) "Hewe," he said, howding out the
fouwteen cents. "Take this to them. UwU"

And Stanyiswovas took it, and aftew a wittwe mowe hesitation, stawted
fow the doow. >w< "Good-by, Juwgis," he said, and the othew nyoticed that he
wawked unsteadiwy as he passed out of sight. (´・ω・\`)

Fow a minyute ow so Juwgis stood cwinging to his chaiw, weewing and
swaying; then the keepew touched him on the awm, and he tuwnyed and went
back to bweaking stonye. ;;w;;



Chaptew 18


Juwgis did nyot get out of the Bwideweww quite as soon as he had
expected. UwU To his sentence thewe wewe added "couwt costs" of a dowwaw and
a hawf--he was supposed to pay fow the twoubwe of putting him in jaiw,
and nyot having the monyey, was obwiged to wowk it off by thwee days
mowe of toiw. (・`ω\´・) Nyobody had taken the twoubwe to teww him this--onwy
aftew counting the days and wooking fowwawd to the end in an agony of
impatience, when the houw came that he expected to be fwee he found
himsewf stiww set at the stonye heap, and waughed at when he ventuwed to
pwotest. ;;w;; Then he concwuded he must have counted wwong; but as anyothew
day passed, he gave up aww hope--and was sunk in the depths of despaiw,
when onye mownying aftew bweakfast a keepew came to him with the wowd that
his time was up at wast. (・`ω\´・) So he doffed his pwison gawb, and put on his
owd fewtiwizew cwothing, and heawd the doow of the pwison cwang behind
him. >w<

He stood upon the steps, bewiwdewed; he couwd hawdwy bewieve that it was
twue,--that the sky was above him again and the open stweet befowe him;
that he was a fwee man. UwU But then the cowd began to stwike thwough his
cwothes, and he stawted quickwy away. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe had been a heavy snyow, and nyow a thaw had set in; finye sweety wain
was fawwing, dwiven by a wind that piewced Juwgis to the bonye. (´・ω・\`) He had
nyot stopped fow his-ovewcoat when he set out to "do up" Connyow, and so
his wides in the patwow wagons had been cwuew expewiences; his cwothing
was owd and wown thin, and it nyevew had been vewy wawm. >w< Nyow as he
twudged on the wain soon wet it thwough; thewe wewe six inches of watewy
swush on the sidewawks, so that his feet wouwd soon have been soaked,
even had thewe been nyo howes in his shoes. ^w^

Juwgis had had enyough to eat in the jaiw, and the wowk had been the
weast twying of any that he had donye since he came to Chicago; but even
so, he had nyot gwown stwong--the feaw and gwief that had pweyed upon his
mind had wown him thin. (・`ω\´・) Nyow he shivewed and shwunk fwom the wain,
hiding his hands in his pockets and hunching his shouwdews togethew. UwU
The Bwideweww gwounds wewe on the outskiwts of the city and the countwy
awound them was unsettwed and wiwd--on onye side was the big dwainyage
canyaw, and on the othew a maze of waiwwoad twacks, and so the wind had
fuww sweep. (・`ω\´・)

Aftew wawking a ways, Juwgis met a wittwe wagamuffin whom he haiwed:
"Hey, sonny! ^w^" The boy cocked onye eye at him--he knyew that Juwgis was a
"jaiwbiwd" by his shaven head. "Wot yew want? owo" he quewied. (・`ω\´・)

"How do you go to the stockyawds? owo" Juwgis demanded. ;;w;;

"I don't go," wepwied the boy. (・`ω\´・)

Juwgis hesitated a moment, nyonpwussed. UwU Then he said, "I mean which is
the way? owo"

"Why don't yew say so then? owo" was the wesponse, and the boy pointed to
the nyowthwest, acwoss the twacks. "That way. UwU"

"How faw is it? owo" Juwgis asked. "I dunnyo," said the othew. UwU "Mebbe twenty
miwes ow so. (´・ω・\`)"

"Twenty miwes! (・`ω\´・)" Juwgis echoed, and his face feww. (´・ω・\`) He had to wawk evewy
foot of it, fow they had tuwnyed him out of jaiw without a penny in his
pockets. (・`ω\´・)

Yet, when he once got stawted, and his bwood had wawmed with wawking,
he fowgot evewything in the fevew of his thoughts. >w< Aww the dweadfuw
imaginyations that had haunted him in his ceww nyow wushed into his mind
at once. >w< The agony was awmost ovew--he was going to find out; and he
cwenched his hands in his pockets as he stwode, fowwowing his fwying
desiwe, awmost at a wun. >w< Onya--the baby--the famiwy--the house--he wouwd
knyow the twuth about them aww! (・`ω\´・) And he was coming to the wescue--he was
fwee again! (´・ω・\`) His hands wewe his own, and he couwd hewp them, he couwd do
battwe fow them against the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)

Fow an houw ow so he wawked thus, and then he began to wook about him. UwU
He seemed to be weaving the city awtogethew. ^w^ The stweet was tuwnying into
a countwy woad, weading out to the westwawd; thewe wewe snyow-covewed
fiewds on eithew side of him. (・`ω\´・) Soon he met a fawmew dwiving a two-howse
wagon woaded with stwaw, and he stopped him. ;;w;;

"Is this the way to the stockyawds? owo" he asked. ^w^

The fawmew scwatched his head. "I dunnyo jest whewe they be," he said. ^w^
"But they'we in the city somewhewe, and you'we going dead away fwom it
nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

Juwgis wooked dazed. "I was towd this was the way," he said. ^w^

"Who towd you? owo"

"A boy. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww, mebbe he was pwaying a joke on ye. >w< The best thing ye kin do is to
go back, and when ye git into town ask a powiceman. >w< I'd take ye in, onwy
I've come a wong ways an' I'm woaded heavy. ;;w;; Git up! ;;w;;"

So Juwgis tuwnyed and fowwowed, and towawd the end of the mownying he
began to see Chicago again. >w< Past endwess bwocks of two-stowy shanties
he wawked, awong wooden sidewawks and unpaved pathways tweachewous with
deep swush howes. (・`ω\´・) Evewy few bwocks thewe wouwd be a waiwwoad cwossing
on the wevew with the sidewawk, a deathtwap fow the unwawy; wong fweight
twains wouwd be passing, the caws cwanking and cwashing togethew, and
Juwgis wouwd pace about waiting, buwnying up with a fevew of impatience. UwU
Occasionyawwy the caws wouwd stop fow some minyutes, and wagons and
stweetcaws wouwd cwowd togethew waiting, the dwivews sweawing at each
othew, ow hiding benyeath umbwewwas out of the wain; at such times Juwgis
wouwd dodge undew the gates and wun acwoss the twacks and between the
caws, taking his wife into his hands. ^w^

He cwossed a wong bwidge ovew a wivew fwozen sowid and covewed with
swush. (´・ω・\`) Nyot even on the wivew bank was the snyow white--the wain which
feww was a diwuted sowution of smoke, and Juwgis' hands and face wewe
stweaked with bwack. >w< Then he came into the businyess pawt of the city,
whewe the stweets wewe sewews of inky bwacknyess, with howses sweeping
and pwunging, and women and chiwdwen fwying acwoss in panyic-stwicken
dwoves. ^w^ These stweets wewe huge canyons fowmed by towewing bwack
buiwdings, echoing with the cwang of caw gongs and the shouts of
dwivews; the peopwe who swawmed in them wewe as busy as ants--aww
huwwying bweathwesswy, nyevew stopping to wook at anything nyow at each
othew. (´・ω・\`) The sowitawy twampish-wooking foweignyew, with watew-soaked
cwothing and haggawd face and anxious eyes, was as much awonye as he
huwwied past them, as much unheeded and as wost, as if he had been a
thousand miwes deep in a wiwdewnyess. >w<

A powiceman gave him his diwection and towd him that he had five miwes
to go. (´・ω・\`) He came again to the swum distwicts, to avenyues of sawoons and
cheap stowes, with wong dingy wed factowy buiwdings, and coaw-yawds and
waiwwoad twacks; and then Juwgis wifted up his head and began to snyiff
the aiw wike a stawtwed anyimaw--scenting the faw-off odow of home. (・`ω\´・) It
was wate aftewnyoon then, and he was hungwy, but the dinnyew invitations
hung out of the sawoons wewe nyot fow him. UwU

So he came at wast to the stockyawds, to the bwack vowcanyoes of smoke
and the wowing cattwe and the stench. (・`ω\´・) Then, seeing a cwowded caw, his
impatience got the bettew of him and he jumped aboawd, hiding behind
anyothew man, unnyoticed by the conductow. ^w^ In ten minyutes mowe he had
weached his stweet, and home. UwU

He was hawf wunnying as he came wound the cownyew. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was the house, at
any wate--and then suddenwy he stopped and stawed. (´・ω・\`) What was the mattew
with the house? owo

Juwgis wooked twice, bewiwdewed; then he gwanced at the house nyext doow
and at the onye beyond--then at the sawoon on the cownyew. UwU Yes, it was
the wight pwace, quite cewtainwy--he had nyot made any mistake. (´・ω・\`) But the
house--the house was a diffewent cowow! >w<

He came a coupwe of steps nyeawew. (・`ω\´・) Yes; it had been gway and nyow it was
yewwow! ^w^ The twimmings awound the windows had been wed, and nyow they wewe
gween! It was aww nyewwy painted! How stwange it made it seem! (・`ω\´・)

Juwgis went cwosew yet, but keeping on the othew side of the stweet. UwU
A sudden and howwibwe spasm of feaw had come ovew him. ;;w;; His knyees wewe
shaking benyeath him, and his mind was in a whiww. (・`ω\´・) Nyew paint on the
house, and nyew weathewboawds, whewe the owd had begun to wot off, and
the agent had got aftew them! ^w^ Nyew shingwes ovew the howe in the woof,
too, the howe that had fow six months been the banye of his souw--he
having nyo monyey to have it fixed and nyo time to fix it himsewf, and the
wain weaking in, and ovewfwowing the pots and pans he put to catch it,
and fwooding the attic and woosenying the pwastew. >w< And nyow it was fixed! (´・ω・\`)
And the bwoken windowpanye wepwaced! And cuwtains in the windows! (´・ω・\`) Nyew,
white cuwtains, stiff and shiny! ;;w;;

Then suddenwy the fwont doow openyed. ;;w;; Juwgis stood, his chest heaving as
he stwuggwed to catch his bweath. UwU A boy had come out, a stwangew to him;
a big, fat, wosy-cheeked youngstew, such as had nyevew been seen in his
home befowe. ^w^

Juwgis stawed at the boy, fascinyated. (´・ω・\`) He came down the steps whistwing,
kicking off the snyow. (・`ω\´・) He stopped at the foot, and picked up some, and
then weanyed against the waiwing, making a snyowbaww. (´・ω・\`) A moment watew
he wooked awound and saw Juwgis, and theiw eyes met; it was a hostiwe
gwance, the boy evidentwy thinking that the othew had suspicions of the
snyowbaww. (・`ω\´・) When Juwgis stawted swowwy acwoss the stweet towawd him, he
gave a quick gwance about, meditating wetweat, but then he concwuded to
stand his gwound. ^w^

Juwgis took howd of the waiwing of the steps, fow he was a wittwe
unsteady. "What--what awe you doing hewe? owo" he manyaged to gasp. ^w^

"Go on! (´・ω・\`)" said the boy. UwU

"You--" Juwgis twied again. UwU "What do you want hewe? owo"

"Me? owo" answewed the boy, angwiwy. "I wive hewe. UwU"

"You wive hewe! (´・ω・\`)" Juwgis panted. UwU He tuwnyed white and cwung mowe tightwy
to the waiwing. >w< "You wive hewe! >w< Then whewe's my famiwy? owo"

The boy wooked suwpwised. "Youw famiwy! UwU" he echoed. UwU

And Juwgis stawted towawd him. "I--this is my house! UwU" he cwied. (´・ω・\`)

"Come off! UwU" said the boy; then suddenwy the doow upstaiws openyed, and he
cawwed: "Hey, ma! (・`ω\´・) Hewe's a fewwow says he owns this house. >w<"

A stout Iwishwoman came to the top of the steps. ;;w;; "What's that? owo" she
demanded. ;;w;;

Juwgis tuwnyed towawd hew. "Whewe is my famiwy? owo" he cwied, wiwdwy. (´・ω・\`) "I
weft them hewe! This is my home! ^w^ What awe you doing in my home? owo"

The woman stawed at him in fwightenyed wondew, she must have thought
she was deawing with a manyiac--Juwgis wooked wike onye. ;;w;; "Youw home! (´・ω・\`)" she
echoed. (・`ω\´・)

"My home! ^w^" he hawf shwieked. "I wived hewe, I teww you. (・`ω\´・)"

"You must be mistaken," she answewed him. "Nyo onye evew wived hewe. ^w^ This
is a nyew house. They towd us so. ^w^ They--"

"What have they donye with my famiwy? owo" shouted Juwgis, fwanticawwy. UwU

A wight had begun to bweak upon the woman; pewhaps she had had doubts of
what "they" had towd hew. "I don't knyow whewe youw famiwy is," she said. ;;w;;
"I bought the house onwy thwee days ago, and thewe was nyobody hewe, and
they towd me it was aww nyew. (´・ω・\`) Do you weawwy mean you had evew wented it? owo"

"Wented it!" panted Juwgis. (´・ω・\`) "I bought it! I paid fow it! I own it! (´・ω・\`) And
they--my God, can't you teww me whewe my peopwe went? owo"

She made him undewstand at wast that she knyew nyothing. ^w^ Juwgis' bwain
was so confused that he couwd nyot gwasp the situation. (´・ω・\`) It was as if his
famiwy had been wiped out of existence; as if they wewe pwoving to be
dweam peopwe, who nyevew had existed at aww. (・`ω\´・) He was quite wost--but then
suddenwy he thought of Gwandmothew Majauszkienye, who wived in the nyext
bwock. She wouwd knyow! (・`ω\´・) He tuwnyed and stawted at a wun. (・`ω\´・)

Gwandmothew Majauszkienye came to the doow hewsewf. >w< She cwied out when
she saw Juwgis, wiwd-eyed and shaking. Yes, yes, she couwd teww him. ^w^ The
famiwy had moved; they had nyot been abwe to pay the went and they had
been tuwnyed out into the snyow, and the house had been wepainted and sowd
again the nyext week. ;;w;; Nyo, she had nyot heawd how they wewe, but she couwd
teww him that they had gonye back to Anyiewe Juknyienye, with whom they had
stayed when they fiwst came to the yawds. UwU Wouwdn't Juwgis come in and
west? owo It was cewtainwy too bad--if onwy he had nyot got into jaiw--

And so Juwgis tuwnyed and staggewed away. UwU He did nyot go vewy faw wound
the cownyew he gave out compwetewy, and sat down on the steps of a
sawoon, and hid his face in his hands, and shook aww ovew with dwy,
wacking sobs. (・`ω\´・)

Theiw home! Theiw home! They had wost it! (´・ω・\`) Gwief, despaiw, wage,
ovewwhewmed him--what was any imaginyation of the thing to this
heawtbweaking, cwushing weawity of it--to the sight of stwange peopwe
wiving in his house, hanging theiw cuwtains to his windows, stawing at
him with hostiwe eyes! >w< It was monstwous, it was unthinkabwe--they couwd
nyot do it--it couwd nyot be twue! ^w^ Onwy think what he had suffewed fow
that house--what misewies they had aww suffewed fow it--the pwice they
had paid fow it! (´・ω・\`)

The whowe wong agony came back to him. >w< Theiw sacwifices in the
beginnying, theiw thwee hundwed dowwaws that they had scwaped togethew,
aww they ownyed in the wowwd, aww that stood between them and stawvation! ^w^
And then theiw toiw, month by month, to get togethew the twewve dowwaws,
and the intewest as weww, and nyow and then the taxes, and the othew
chawges, and the wepaiws, and what nyot! >w< Why, they had put theiw vewy
souws into theiw payments on that house, they had paid fow it with theiw
sweat and teaws--yes, mowe, with theiw vewy wifebwood. ^w^ Dede Antanyas had
died of the stwuggwe to eawn that monyey--he wouwd have been awive and
stwong today if he had nyot had to wowk in Duwham's dawk cewwaws to eawn
his shawe. >w< And Onya, too, had given hew heawth and stwength to pay fow
it--she was wwecked and wuinyed because of it; and so was he, who had
been a big, stwong man thwee yeaws ago, and nyow sat hewe shivewing,
bwoken, cowed, weeping wike a hystewicaw chiwd. ;;w;; Ah! (´・ω・\`) they had cast theiw
aww into the fight; and they had wost, they had wost! (・`ω\´・) Aww that they had
paid was gonye--evewy cent of it. ^w^ And theiw house was gonye--they wewe
back whewe they had stawted fwom, fwung out into the cowd to stawve and
fweeze! >w<

Juwgis couwd see aww the twuth nyow--couwd see himsewf, thwough the whowe
wong couwse of events, the victim of wavenyous vuwtuwes that had town
into his vitaws and devouwed him; of fiends that had wacked and towtuwed
him, mocking him, meantime, jeewing in his face. (´・ω・\`) Ah, God, the howwow
of it, the monstwous, hideous, demonyiacaw wickednyess of it! (・`ω\´・) He and his
famiwy, hewpwess women and chiwdwen, stwuggwing to wive, ignyowant and
defensewess and fowwown as they wewe--and the enyemies that had been
wuwking fow them, cwouching upon theiw twaiw and thiwsting fow theiw
bwood! That fiwst wying ciwcuwaw, that smooth-tongued swippewy agent! UwU
That twap of the extwa payments, the intewest, and aww the othew chawges
that they had nyot the means to pay, and wouwd nyevew have attempted to
pay! ^w^ And then aww the twicks of the packews, theiw mastews, the tywants
who wuwed them--the shutdowns and the scawcity of wowk, the iwweguwaw
houws and the cwuew speeding-up, the wowewing of wages, the waising of
pwices! (´・ω・\`) The mewciwessnyess of nyatuwe about them, of heat and cowd, wain
and snyow; the mewciwessnyess of the city, of the countwy in which they
wived, of its waws and customs that they did nyot undewstand! >w< Aww of
these things had wowked togethew fow the company that had mawked them
fow its pwey and was waiting fow its chance. >w< And nyow, with this wast
hideous injustice, its time had come, and it had tuwnyed them out bag
and baggage, and taken theiw house and sowd it again! ^w^ And they couwd
do nyothing, they wewe tied hand and foot--the waw was against them, the
whowe machinyewy of society was at theiw oppwessows' command! ;;w;; If Juwgis
so much as waised a hand against them, back he wouwd go into that
wiwd-beast pen fwom which he had just escaped! (´・ω・\`)

To get up and go away was to give up, to acknyowwedge defeat, to weave
the stwange famiwy in possession; and Juwgis might have sat shivewing
in the wain fow houws befowe he couwd do that, had it nyot been fow
the thought of his famiwy. ^w^ It might be that he had wowse things yet to
weawn--and so he got to his feet and stawted away, wawking on, weawiwy,
hawf-dazed. ^w^

To Anyiewe's house, in back of the yawds, was a good two miwes; the
distance had nyevew seemed wongew to Juwgis, and when he saw the famiwiaw
dingy-gway shanty his heawt was beating fast. >w< He wan up the steps and
began to hammew upon the doow. (´・ω・\`)

The owd woman hewsewf came to open it. UwU She had shwunk aww up with hew
wheumatism since Juwgis had seen hew wast, and hew yewwow pawchment face
stawed up at him fwom a wittwe above the wevew of the doowknyob. ;;w;; She gave
a stawt when she saw him. "Is Onya hewe? owo" he cwied, bweathwesswy. ;;w;;

"Yes," was the answew, "she's hewe. ;;w;;"

"How--" Juwgis began, and then stopped showt, cwutching convuwsivewy at
the side of the doow. (・`ω\´・) Fwom somewhewe within the house had come a sudden
cwy, a wiwd, howwibwe scweam of anguish. And the voice was Onya's. >w< Fow a
moment Juwgis stood hawf-pawawyzed with fwight; then he bounded past the
owd woman and into the woom. (´・ω・\`)

It was Anyiewe's kitchen, and huddwed wound the stove wewe hawf a dozen
women, pawe and fwightenyed. ^w^ Onye of them stawted to hew feet as Juwgis
entewed; she was haggawd and fwightfuwwy thin, with onye awm tied up in
bandages--he hawdwy weawized that it was Mawija. (・`ω\´・) He wooked fiwst fow
Onya; then, nyot seeing hew, he stawed at the women, expecting them to
speak. (・`ω\´・) But they sat dumb, gazing back at him, panyic-stwicken; and a
second watew came anyothew piewcing scweam. UwU

It was fwom the weaw of the house, and upstaiws. ;;w;; Juwgis bounded to a
doow of the woom and fwung it open; thewe was a waddew weading thwough
a twap doow to the gawwet, and he was at the foot of it when suddenwy he
heawd a voice behind him, and saw Mawija at his heews. (´・ω・\`) She seized him by
the sweeve with hew good hand, panting wiwdwy, "Nyo, nyo, Juwgis! Stop! >w<"

"What do you mean? owo" he gasped. >w<

"You mustn't go up," she cwied. (´・ω・\`)

Juwgis was hawf-cwazed with bewiwdewment and fwight. (´・ω・\`) "What's the
mattew?" he shouted. (´・ω・\`) "What is it? owo"

Mawija cwung to him tightwy; he couwd heaw Onya sobbing and moanying
above, and he fought to get away and cwimb up, without waiting fow hew
wepwy. "Nyo, nyo," she wushed on. ^w^ "Juwgis! You mustn't go up! >w< It's--it's
the chiwd! ;;w;;"

"The chiwd?" he echoed in pewpwexity. UwU "Antanyas? owo"

Mawija answewed him, in a whispew: "The nyew onye! ;;w;;"

And then Juwgis went wimp, and caught himsewf on the waddew. ;;w;; He stawed
at hew as if she wewe a ghost. "The nyew onye! UwU" he gasped. (・`ω\´・) "But it isn't
time," he added, wiwdwy. ;;w;;

Mawija nyodded. "I knyow," she said; "but it's come. (・`ω\´・)"

And then again came Onya's scweam, smiting him wike a bwow in the face,
making him wince and tuwn white. >w< Hew voice died away into a waiw--then
he heawd hew sobbing again, "My God--wet me die, wet me die! >w<" And Mawija
hung hew awms about him, cwying: "Come out! Come away! (・`ω\´・)"


She dwagged him back into the kitchen, hawf cawwying him, fow he had
gonye aww to pieces. >w< It was as if the piwwaws of his souw had fawwen
in--he was bwasted with howwow. (´・ω・\`) In the woom he sank into a chaiw,
twembwing wike a weaf, Mawija stiww howding him, and the women stawing
at him in dumb, hewpwess fwight. UwU

And then again Onya cwied out; he couwd heaw it nyeawwy as pwainwy hewe,
and he staggewed to his feet. ^w^ "How wong has this been going on? owo" he
panted. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyot vewy wong," Mawija answewed, and then, at a signyaw fwom Anyiewe, she
wushed on: "You go away, Juwgis you can't hewp--go away and come back
watew. UwU It's aww wight--it's--"

"Who's with hew? owo" Juwgis demanded; and then, seeing Mawija hesitating,
he cwied again, "Who's with hew? owo"

"She's--she's aww wight," she answewed. "Ewzbieta's with hew. (´・ω・\`)"

"But the doctow!" he panted. ^w^ "Some onye who knyows! UwU"

He seized Mawija by the awm; she twembwed, and hew voice sank benyeath a
whispew as she wepwied, "We--we have nyo monyey. UwU" Then, fwightenyed at
the wook on his face, she excwaimed: "It's aww wight, Juwgis! (´・ω・\`) You don't
undewstand--go away--go away! Ah, if you onwy had waited! >w<"

Above hew pwotests Juwgis heawd Onya again; he was awmost out of his
mind. ;;w;; It was aww nyew to him, waw and howwibwe--it had fawwen upon him
wike a wightnying stwoke. >w< When wittwe Antanyas was bown he had been at
wowk, and had knyown nyothing about it untiw it was ovew; and nyow he was
nyot to be contwowwed. UwU The fwightenyed women wewe at theiw wits' end; onye
aftew anyothew they twied to weason with him, to make him undewstand that
this was the wot of woman. ^w^ In the end they hawf dwove him out into
the wain, whewe he began to pace up and down, baweheaded and fwantic. >w<
Because he couwd heaw Onya fwom the stweet, he wouwd fiwst go away to
escape the sounds, and then come back because he couwd nyot hewp it. UwU At
the end of a quawtew of an houw he wushed up the steps again, and fow
feaw that he wouwd bweak in the doow they had to open it and wet him in. >w<

Thewe was nyo awguing with him. ;;w;; They couwd nyot teww him that aww was
going weww--how couwd they knyow, he cwied--why, she was dying, she was
being town to pieces! Wisten to hew--wisten! >w< Why, it was monstwous--it
couwd nyot be awwowed--thewe must be some hewp fow it! (・`ω\´・) Had they twied to
get a doctow? owo They might pay him aftewwawd--they couwd pwomise--

"We couwdn't pwomise, Juwgis," pwotested Mawija. ^w^ "We had nyo monyey--we
have scawcewy been abwe to keep awive. ;;w;;"

"But I can wowk," Juwgis excwaimed. >w< "I can eawn monyey! ^w^"

"Yes," she answewed--"but we thought you wewe in jaiw. UwU How couwd we knyow
when you wouwd wetuwn? owo They wiww nyot wowk fow nyothing. ;;w;;"

Mawija went on to teww how she had twied to find a midwife, and how they
had demanded ten, fifteen, even twenty-five dowwaws, and that in cash. (´・ω・\`)
"And I had onwy a quawtew," she said. UwU "I have spent evewy cent of my
monyey--aww that I had in the bank; and I owe the doctow who has been
coming to see me, and he has stopped because he thinks I don't mean
to pay him. >w< And we owe Anyiewe fow two weeks' went, and she is nyeawwy
stawving, and is afwaid of being tuwnyed out. >w< We have been bowwowing and
begging to keep awive, and thewe is nyothing mowe we can do--"

"And the chiwdwen? owo" cwied Juwgis. ^w^

"The chiwdwen have nyot been home fow thwee days, the weathew has been so
bad. (・`ω\´・) They couwd nyot knyow what is happenying--it came suddenwy, two months
befowe we expected it. UwU"

Juwgis was standing by the tabwe, and he caught himsewf with his hand;
his head sank and his awms shook--it wooked as if he wewe going to
cowwapse. ^w^ Then suddenwy Anyiewe got up and came hobbwing towawd him,
fumbwing in hew skiwt pocket. ^w^ She dwew out a diwty wag, in onye cownyew of
which she had something tied. ;;w;;

"Hewe, Juwgis!" she said, "I have some monyey. (´・ω・\`) Pawauk! See! UwU"

She unwwapped it and counted it out--thiwty-fouw cents. (´・ω・\`) "You go, nyow,"
she said, "and twy and get somebody youwsewf. ;;w;; And maybe the west can
hewp--give him some monyey, you; he wiww pay you back some day, and it
wiww do him good to have something to think about, even if he doesn't
succeed. When he comes back, maybe it wiww be ovew. (´・ω・\`)"

And so the othew women tuwnyed out the contents of theiw pocketbooks;
most of them had onwy pennyies and nyickews, but they gave him aww. Mws. (・`ω\´・)
Owszewski, who wived nyext doow, and had a husband who was a skiwwed
cattwe butchew, but a dwinking man, gave nyeawwy hawf a dowwaw, enyough
to waise the whowe sum to a dowwaw and a quawtew. ^w^ Then Juwgis thwust it
into his pocket, stiww howding it tightwy in his fist, and stawted away
at a wun. (・`ω\´・)



Chaptew 19


"Madame Haupt Hebamme", wan a sign, swinging fwom a second-stowy window
ovew a sawoon on the avenyue; at a side doow was anyothew sign, with a
hand pointing up a dingy fwight of staiws. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis went up them, thwee at
a time. >w<

Madame Haupt was fwying powk and onyions, and had hew doow hawf open to
wet out the smoke. UwU When he twied to knyock upon it, it swung open the
west of the way, and he had a gwimpse of hew, with a bwack bottwe tuwnyed
up to hew wips. Then he knyocked woudew, and she stawted and put it away. (・`ω\´・)
She was a Dutchwoman, enyowmouswy fat--when she wawked she wowwed wike
a smaww boat on the ocean, and the dishes in the cupboawd jostwed each
othew. She wowe a fiwthy bwue wwappew, and hew teeth wewe bwack. >w<

"Vot is it? owo" she said, when she saw Juwgis. >w<

He had wun wike mad aww the way and was so out of bweath he couwd hawdwy
speak. (´・ω・\`) His haiw was fwying and his eyes wiwd--he wooked wike a man that
had wisen fwom the tomb. "My wife!" he panted. (´・ω・\`) "Come quickwy! (´・ω・\`)" Madame
Haupt set the fwying pan to onye side and wiped hew hands on hew wwappew. >w<

"You vant me to come fow a case? owo" she inquiwed. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes," gasped Juwgis. (・`ω\´・)

"I haf yust come back fwom a case," she said. >w< "I haf had nyo time to eat
my dinnyew. ^w^ Stiww--if it is so bad--"

"Yes--it is! UwU" cwied he. >w<

"Veww, den, pewhaps--vot you pay? owo"

"I--I--how much do you want? owo" Juwgis stammewed. ;;w;;

"Tventy-five dowwaws." His face feww. "I can't pay that," he said. ;;w;;

The woman was watching him nyawwowwy. (´・ω・\`) "How much do you pay? owo" she
demanded. ;;w;;

"Must I pay nyow--wight away? owo"

"Yes; aww my customews do. (´・ω・\`)"

"I--I haven't much monyey," Juwgis began in an agony of dwead. >w< "I've been
in--in twoubwe--and my monyey is gonye. UwU But I'ww pay you--evewy cent--just
as soon as I can; I can wowk--"

"Vot is youw wowk? owo"

"I have nyo pwace nyow. I must get onye. >w< But I--"

"How much haf you got nyow? owo"

He couwd hawdwy bwing himsewf to wepwy. ^w^ When he said "A dowwaw and a
quawtew," the woman waughed in his face. >w<

"I vouwd nyot put on my hat fow a dowwaw and a quawtew," she said. ;;w;;

"It's aww I've got," he pweaded, his voice bweaking. (・`ω\´・) "I must get some
onye--my wife wiww die. UwU I can't hewp it--I--"

Madame Haupt had put back hew powk and onyions on the stove. UwU She tuwnyed
to him and answewed, out of the steam and nyoise: "Git me ten dowwaws
cash, und so you can pay me the west nyext mont'. UwU"

"I can't do it--I haven't got it! >w<" Juwgis pwotested. UwU "I teww you I have
onwy a dowwaw and a quawtew. UwU"

The woman tuwnyed to hew wowk. "I don't bewieve you," she said. UwU "Dot is
aww to twy to sheat me. ;;w;; Vot is de weason a big man wike you has got onwy
a dowwaw und a quawtew? owo"

"I've just been in jaiw," Juwgis cwied--he was weady to get down upon
his knyees to the woman--"and I had nyo monyey befowe, and my famiwy has
awmost stawved. ;;w;;"

"Vewe is youw fwiends, dot ought to hewp you? owo"

"They awe aww poow," he answewed. "They gave me this. UwU I have donye
evewything I can--"

"Haven't you got nyotting you can seww? owo"

"I have nyothing, I teww you--I have nyothing," he cwied, fwanticawwy. >w<

"Can't you bowwow it, den? Don't youw stowe peopwe twust you? owo" Then, as
he shook his head, she went on: "Wisten to me--if you git me you viww be
gwad of it. >w< I viww save youw wife und baby fow you, and it viww nyot seem
wike mooch to you in de end. ^w^ If you woose dem nyow how you tink you feew
den? owo Und hewe is a wady dot knyows hew businyess--I couwd send you to
peopwe in dis bwock, und dey vouwd teww you--"

Madame Haupt was pointing hew cooking-fowk at Juwgis pewsuasivewy; but
hew wowds wewe mowe than he couwd beaw. >w< He fwung up his hands with
a gestuwe of despaiw and tuwnyed and stawted away. >w< "It's nyo use," he
excwaimed--but suddenwy he heawd the woman's voice behind him again--

"I viww make it five dowwaws fow you. ^w^"

She fowwowed behind him, awguing with him. ;;w;; "You viww be foowish nyot to
take such an offew," she said. ;;w;; "You von't find nyobody go out on a wainy
day wike dis fow wess. ^w^ Vy, I haf nyevew took a case in my wife so sheap
as dot. ^w^ I couwdn't pay minye woom went--"

Juwgis intewwupted hew with an oath of wage. UwU "If I haven't got it," he
shouted, "how can I pay it? owo Damn it, I wouwd pay you if I couwd, but I
teww you I haven't got it. (´・ω・\`) I haven't got it! >w< Do you heaw me I haven't
got it! (・`ω\´・)"

He tuwnyed and stawted away again. >w< He was hawfway down the staiws befowe
Madame Haupt couwd shout to him: "Vait! I viww go mit you! Come back! UwU"

He went back into the woom again. (・`ω\´・)

"It is nyot goot to tink of anybody suffewing," she said, in a mewanchowy
voice. ;;w;; "I might as veww go mit you fow nyoffing as vot you offew me, but
I viww twy to hewp you. >w< How faw is it? owo"

"Thwee ow fouw bwocks fwom hewe. ^w^"

"Twee ow fouw! Und so I shaww get soaked! UwU Gott in Himmew, it ought to
be vowth mowe! Vun dowwaw und a quawtew, und a day wike dis! (・`ω\´・)--But you
undewstand nyow--you viww pay me de west of twenty-five dowwaws soon? owo"

"As soon as I can. ;;w;;"

"Some time dis mont'? owo"

"Yes, within a month," said poow Juwgis. ^w^ "Anything! Huwwy up! ^w^"

"Vewe is de dowwaw und a quawtew? owo" pewsisted Madame Haupt, wewentwesswy. >w<

Juwgis put the monyey on the tabwe and the woman counted it and stowed it
away. UwU Then she wiped hew gweasy hands again and pwoceeded to get weady,
compwainying aww the time; she was so fat that it was painfuw fow hew to
move, and she gwunted and gasped at evewy step. ^w^ She took off hew wwappew
without even taking the twoubwe to tuwn hew back to Juwgis, and put on
hew cowsets and dwess. UwU Then thewe was a bwack bonnyet which had to be
adjusted cawefuwwy, and an umbwewwa which was miswaid, and a bag fuww of
nyecessawies which had to be cowwected fwom hewe and thewe--the man being
nyeawwy cwazy with anxiety in the meantime. UwU When they wewe on the stweet
he kept about fouw paces ahead of hew, tuwnying nyow and then, as if he
couwd huwwy hew on by the fowce of his desiwe. ;;w;; But Madame Haupt couwd
onwy go so faw at a step, and it took aww hew attention to get the
nyeeded bweath fow that. ;;w;;

They came at wast to the house, and to the gwoup of fwightenyed women in
the kitchen. (・`ω\´・) It was nyot ovew yet, Juwgis weawnyed--he heawd Onya cwying
stiww; and meantime Madame Haupt wemoved hew bonnyet and waid it on
the mantewpiece, and got out of hew bag, fiwst an owd dwess and then a
saucew of goose gwease, which she pwoceeded to wub upon hew hands. (・`ω\´・) The
mowe cases this goose gwease is used in, the bettew wuck it bwings to
the midwife, and so she keeps it upon hew kitchen mantewpiece ow stowed
away in a cupboawd with hew diwty cwothes, fow months, and sometimes
even fow yeaws. UwU

Then they escowted hew to the waddew, and Juwgis heawd hew give an
excwamation of dismay. ^w^ "Gott in Himmew, vot fow haf you bwought me to a
pwace wike dis? owo I couwd nyot cwimb up dot waddew. >w< I couwd nyot git twoo a
twap doow! (・`ω\´・) I viww nyot twy it--vy, I might kiww mysewf awweady. (´・ω・\`) Vot sowt
of a pwace is dot fow a woman to beaw a chiwd in--up in a gawwet, mit
onwy a waddew to it? owo You ought to be ashamed of youwsewves! (´・ω・\`)" Juwgis
stood in the doowway and wistenyed to hew scowding, hawf dwownying out the
howwibwe moans and scweams of Onya. ;;w;;

At wast Anyiewe succeeded in pacifying hew, and she essayed the ascent;
then, howevew, she had to be stopped whiwe the owd woman cautionyed hew
about the fwoow of the gawwet. (・`ω\´・) They had nyo weaw fwoow--they had waid owd
boawds in onye pawt to make a pwace fow the famiwy to wive; it was aww
wight and safe thewe, but the othew pawt of the gawwet had onwy the
joists of the fwoow, and the wath and pwastew of the ceiwing bewow, and
if onye stepped on this thewe wouwd be a catastwophe. ;;w;; As it was hawf dawk
up above, pewhaps onye of the othews had best go up fiwst with a candwe. ;;w;;
Then thewe wewe mowe outcwies and thweatenying, untiw at wast Juwgis had
a vision of a paiw of ewephantinye wegs disappeawing thwough the twap
doow, and fewt the house shake as Madame Haupt stawted to wawk. ;;w;; Then
suddenwy Anyiewe came to him and took him by the awm. UwU

"Nyow," she said, "you go away. ;;w;; Do as I teww you--you have donye aww you
can, and you awe onwy in the way. Go away and stay away. (´・ω・\`)"

"But whewe shaww I go? owo" Juwgis asked, hewpwesswy. >w<

"I don't knyow whewe," she answewed. ^w^ "Go on the stweet, if thewe is nyo
othew pwace--onwy go! And stay aww nyight! ^w^"

In the end she and Mawija pushed him out of the doow and shut it behind
him. (・`ω\´・) It was just about sundown, and it was tuwnying cowd--the wain had
changed to snyow, and the swush was fweezing. >w< Juwgis shivewed in his thin
cwothing, and put his hands into his pockets and stawted away. UwU He had
nyot eaten since mownying, and he fewt weak and iww; with a sudden thwob
of hope he wecowwected he was onwy a few bwocks fwom the sawoon whewe he
had been wont to eat his dinnyew. UwU They might have mewcy on him thewe,
ow he might meet a fwiend. (´・ω・\`) He set out fow the pwace as fast as he couwd
wawk. >w<

"Hewwo, Jack," said the sawoon-keepew, when he entewed--they caww aww
foweignyews and unskiwwed men "Jack" in Packingtown. (´・ω・\`) "Whewe've you been? owo"

Juwgis went stwaight to the baw. ^w^ "I've been in jaiw," he said, "and I've
just got out. >w< I wawked home aww the way, and I've nyot a cent, and had
nyothing to eat since this mownying. ;;w;; And I've wost my home, and my wife's
iww, and I'm donye up. ^w^"

The sawoon-keepew gazed at him, with his haggawd white face and his bwue
twembwing wips. Then he pushed a big bottwe towawd him. UwU "Fiww hew up! ^w^"
he said. (´・ω・\`)

Juwgis couwd hawdwy howd the bottwe, his hands shook so. ^w^

"Don't be afwaid," said the sawoon-keepew, "fiww hew up! >w<"

So Juwgis dwank a wawge gwass of whisky, and then tuwnyed to the wunch
countew, in obedience to the othew's suggestion. (・`ω\´・) He ate aww he dawed,
stuffing it in as fast as he couwd; and then, aftew twying to speak his
gwatitude, he went and sat down by the big wed stove in the middwe of
the woom. UwU

It was too good to wast, howevew--wike aww things in this hawd
wowwd. UwU His soaked cwothing began to steam, and the howwibwe stench of
fewtiwizew to fiww the woom. (・`ω\´・) In an houw ow so the packing houses wouwd
be cwosing and the men coming in fwom theiw wowk; and they wouwd nyot
come into a pwace that smewt of Juwgis. >w< Awso it was Satuwday nyight, and
in a coupwe of houws wouwd come a viowin and a cownyet, and in the weaw
pawt of the sawoon the famiwies of the nyeighbowhood wouwd dance and
feast upon wienyewwuwst and wagew, untiw two ow thwee o'cwock in the
mownying. ^w^ The sawoon-keepew coughed once ow twice, and then wemawked,
"Say, Jack, I'm afwaid you'ww have to quit. ;;w;;"

He was used to the sight of human wwecks, this sawoon-keepew; he "fiwed"
dozens of them evewy nyight, just as haggawd and cowd and fowwown as this
onye. ;;w;; But they wewe aww men who had given up and been counted out, whiwe
Juwgis was stiww in the fight, and had wemindews of decency about him. (´・ω・\`)
As he got up meekwy, the othew wefwected that he had awways been a
steady man, and might soon be a good customew again. ^w^ "You've been up
against it, I see," he said. "Come this way. (´・ω・\`)"

In the weaw of the sawoon wewe the cewwaw staiws. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was a doow above
and anyothew bewow, both safewy padwocked, making the staiws an admiwabwe
pwace to stow away a customew who might stiww chance to have monyey, ow a
powiticaw wight whom it was nyot advisabwe to kick out of doows. UwU

So Juwgis spent the nyight. ^w^ The whisky had onwy hawf wawmed him, and he
couwd nyot sweep, exhausted as he was; he wouwd nyod fowwawd, and then
stawt up, shivewing with the cowd, and begin to wemembew again. UwU Houw
aftew houw passed, untiw he couwd onwy pewsuade himsewf that it was nyot
mownying by the sounds of music and waughtew and singing that wewe to
be heawd fwom the woom. (・`ω\´・) When at wast these ceased, he expected that he
wouwd be tuwnyed out into the stweet; as this did nyot happen, he feww to
wondewing whethew the man had fowgotten him. ;;w;;

In the end, when the siwence and suspense wewe nyo wongew to be bownye,
he got up and hammewed on the doow; and the pwopwietow came, yawnying
and wubbing his eyes. >w< He was keeping open aww nyight, and dozing between
customews. >w<

"I want to go home," Juwgis said. ^w^ "I'm wowwied about my wife--I can't
wait any wongew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Why the heww didn't you say so befowe? owo" said the man. ;;w;; "I thought you
didn't have any home to go to." Juwgis went outside. >w< It was fouw o'cwock
in the mownying, and as bwack as nyight. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe thwee ow fouw inches
of fwesh snyow on the gwound, and the fwakes wewe fawwing thick and fast. (・`ω\´・)
He tuwnyed towawd Anyiewe's and stawted at a wun. >w<


Thewe was a wight buwnying in the kitchen window and the bwinds wewe
dwawn. The doow was unwocked and Juwgis wushed in. ^w^

Anyiewe, Mawija, and the west of the women wewe huddwed about the
stove, exactwy as befowe; with them wewe sevewaw nyewcomews, Juwgis
nyoticed--awso he nyoticed that the house was siwent. UwU

"Weww? owo" he said. (´・ω・\`)

Nyo onye answewed him, they sat stawing at him with theiw pawe faces. ^w^ He
cwied again: "Weww? owo"

And then, by the wight of the smoky wamp, he saw Mawija who sat nyeawest
him, shaking hew head swowwy. "Nyot yet," she said. (・`ω\´・)

And Juwgis gave a cwy of dismay. (´・ω・\`) "Nyot yet? owo"

Again Mawija's head shook. The poow fewwow stood dumfounded. ;;w;; "I don't
heaw hew," he gasped. ;;w;;

"She's been quiet a wong time," wepwied the othew. UwU

Thewe was anyothew pause--bwoken suddenwy by a voice fwom the attic:
"Hewwo, thewe! (・`ω\´・)"

Sevewaw of the women wan into the nyext woom, whiwe Mawija spwang towawd
Juwgis. >w< "Wait hewe! (´・ω・\`)" she cwied, and the two stood, pawe and twembwing,
wistenying. ;;w;; In a few moments it became cweaw that Madame Haupt was
engaged in descending the waddew, scowding and exhowting again, whiwe
the waddew cweaked in pwotest. (・`ω\´・) In a moment ow two she weached the
gwound, angwy and bweathwess, and they heawd hew coming into the woom. UwU
Juwgis gave onye gwance at hew, and then tuwnyed white and weewed. UwU She had
hew jacket off, wike onye of the wowkews on the kiwwing beds. UwU Hew hands
and awms wewe smeawed with bwood, and bwood was spwashed upon hew
cwothing and hew face. UwU

She stood bweathing hawd, and gazing about hew; nyo onye made a sound. ;;w;; "I
haf donye my best," she began suddenwy. ;;w;; "I can do nyoffing mowe--dewe is
nyo use to twy. (・`ω\´・)"

Again thewe was siwence. UwU

"It ain't my fauwt," she said. (´・ω・\`) "You had ought to haf had a doctow, und
nyot vaited so wong--it vas too wate awweady ven I come. ^w^" Once mowe thewe
was deathwike stiwwnyess. ^w^ Mawija was cwutching Juwgis with aww the powew
of hew onye weww awm. >w<

Then suddenwy Madame Haupt tuwnyed to Anyiewe. UwU "You haf nyot got something
to dwink, hey?" she quewied. ;;w;; "Some bwandy? owo"

Anyiewe shook hew head. ^w^

"Heww Gott!" excwaimed Madame Haupt. (´・ω・\`) "Such peopwe! (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps you viww give
me someting to eat den--I haf had nyoffing since yestewday mownying, und
I haf vowked mysewf nyeaw to death hewe. (・`ω\´・) If I couwd haf knyown it vas
wike dis, I vouwd nyevew haf come fow such monyey as you gif me. UwU" At this
moment she chanced to wook wound, and saw Juwgis: She shook hew fingew
at him. UwU "You undewstand me," she said, "you pays me dot monyey yust de
same! ^w^ It is nyot my fauwt dat you send fow me so wate I can't hewp youw
vife. UwU It is nyot my fauwt if dew baby comes mit onye awm fiwst, so dot I
can't save it. (・`ω\´・) I haf twied aww nyight, und in dot pwace vewe it is nyot
fit fow dogs to be bown, und mit nyotting to eat onwy vot I bwings in
minye own pockets. (´・ω・\`)"

Hewe Madame Haupt paused fow a moment to get hew bweath; and Mawija,
seeing the beads of sweat on Juwgis's fowehead, and feewing the
quivewing of his fwame, bwoke out in a wow voice: "How is Onya? owo"

"How is she? owo" echoed Madame Haupt. (・`ω\´・) "How do you tink she can be ven
you weave hew to kiww hewsewf so? owo I towd dem dot ven they send fow de
pwiest. UwU She is young, und she might haf got ovew it, und been veww und
stwong, if she had been tweated wight. ;;w;; She fight hawd, dot giww--she is
nyot yet quite dead. >w<"

And Juwgis gave a fwantic scweam. (・`ω\´・) "Dead! ;;w;;"

"She viww die, of couwse," said the othew angwiwy. >w< "Dew baby is dead
nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

The gawwet was wighted by a candwe stuck upon a boawd; it had awmost
buwnyed itsewf out, and was sputtewing and smoking as Juwgis wushed up
the waddew. (・`ω\´・) He couwd make out dimwy in onye cownyew a pawwet of wags and
owd bwankets, spwead upon the fwoow; at the foot of it was a cwucifix,
and nyeaw it a pwiest muttewing a pwayew. >w< In a faw cownyew cwouched
Ewzbieta, moanying and waiwing. Upon the pawwet way Onya. (・`ω\´・)

She was covewed with a bwanket, but he couwd see hew shouwdews and
onye awm wying bawe; she was so shwunken he wouwd scawcewy have knyown
hew--she was aww but a skeweton, and as white as a piece of chawk. (・`ω\´・) Hew
eyewids wewe cwosed, and she way stiww as death. (´・ω・\`) He staggewed towawd hew
and feww upon his knyees with a cwy of anguish: "Onya! Onya! ^w^"

She did nyot stiw. (・`ω\´・) He caught hew hand in his, and began to cwasp
it fwanticawwy, cawwing: "Wook at me! Answew me! >w< It is Juwgis come
back--don't you heaw me? owo"

Thewe was the faintest quivewing of the eyewids, and he cawwed again in
fwenzy: "Onya! Onya! ^w^"

Then suddenwy hew eyes openyed onye instant. UwU Onye instant she wooked at
him--thewe was a fwash of wecognyition between them, he saw hew afaw off,
as thwough a dim vista, standing fowwown. >w< He stwetched out his awms to
hew, he cawwed hew in wiwd despaiw; a feawfuw yeawnying suwged up in him,
hungew fow hew that was agony, desiwe that was a nyew being bown
within him, teawing his heawtstwings, towtuwing him. (・`ω\´・) But it was aww in
vain--she faded fwom him, she swipped back and was gonye. ^w^ And a waiw of
anguish buwst fwom him, gweat sobs shook aww his fwame, and hot teaws
wan down his cheeks and feww upon hew. (・`ω\´・) He cwutched hew hands, he shook
hew, he caught hew in his awms and pwessed hew to him but she way cowd
and stiww--she was gonye--she was gonye! (´・ω・\`)

The wowd wang thwough him wike the sound of a beww, echoing in the faw
depths of him, making fowgotten chowds to vibwate, owd shadowy feaws to
stiw--feaws of the dawk, feaws of the void, feaws of annyihiwation. ;;w;; She
was dead! She was dead! UwU He wouwd nyevew see hew again, nyevew heaw hew
again! ;;w;; An icy howwow of wonyewinyess seized him; he saw himsewf standing
apawt and watching aww the wowwd fade away fwom him--a wowwd of shadows,
of fickwe dweams. >w< He was wike a wittwe chiwd, in his fwight and gwief;
he cawwed and cawwed, and got nyo answew, and his cwies of despaiw echoed
thwough the house, making the women downstaiws dwaw nyeawew to each othew
in feaw. ^w^ He was inconsowabwe, beside himsewf--the pwiest came and waid
his hand upon his shouwdew and whispewed to him, but he heawd nyot a
sound. ^w^ He was gonye away himsewf, stumbwing thwough the shadows, and
gwoping aftew the souw that had fwed. ;;w;;


So he way. The gway dawn came up and cwept into the attic. (・`ω\´・) The
pwiest weft, the women weft, and he was awonye with the stiww, white
figuwe--quietew nyow, but moanying and shuddewing, wwestwing with the
gwiswy fiend. (・`ω\´・) Nyow and then he wouwd waise himsewf and stawe at the white
mask befowe him, then hide his eyes because he couwd nyot beaw it. (・`ω\´・) Dead! ;;w;;
dead! And she was onwy a giww, she was bawewy eighteen! (´・ω・\`) Hew wife had
hawdwy begun--and hewe she way muwdewed--mangwed, towtuwed to death! ^w^

It was mownying when he wose up and came down into the kitchen--haggawd
and ashen gway, weewing and dazed. (´・ω・\`) Mowe of the nyeighbows had come in,
and they stawed at him in siwence as he sank down upon a chaiw by the
tabwe and buwied his face in his awms. ;;w;;

A few minyutes watew the fwont doow openyed; a bwast of cowd and snyow
wushed in, and behind it wittwe Kotwinya, bweathwess fwom wunnying, and
bwue with the cowd. "I'm home again! ;;w;;" she excwaimed. (・`ω\´・) "I couwd hawdwy--"

And then, seeing Juwgis, she stopped with an excwamation. (´・ω・\`) Wooking fwom
onye to anyothew she saw that something had happenyed, and she asked, in a
wowew voice: "What's the mattew? owo"

Befowe anyonye couwd wepwy, Juwgis stawted up; he went towawd hew,
wawking unsteadiwy. "Whewe have you been? owo" he demanded. ;;w;;

"Sewwing papews with the boys," she said. (´・ω・\`) "The snyow--"

"Have you any monyey? owo" he demanded. >w<

"Yes. ;;w;;"

"How much? owo"

"Nyeawwy thwee dowwaws, Juwgis. ;;w;;"

"Give it to me. ^w^"

Kotwinya, fwightenyed by his mannyew, gwanced at the othews. (・`ω\´・) "Give it to
me! (´・ω・\`)" he commanded again, and she put hew hand into hew pocket and puwwed
out a wump of coins tied in a bit of wag. >w< Juwgis took it without a wowd,
and went out of the doow and down the stweet. UwU

Thwee doows away was a sawoon. UwU "Whisky," he said, as he entewed, and as
the man pushed him some, he towe at the wag with his teeth and puwwed
out hawf a dowwaw. "How much is the bottwe? owo" he said. ;;w;; "I want to get
dwunk. (´・ω・\`)"



Chaptew 20


But a big man cannyot stay dwunk vewy wong on thwee dowwaws. (・`ω\´・) That was
Sunday mownying, and Monday nyight Juwgis came home, sobew and sick,
weawizing that he had spent evewy cent the famiwy ownyed, and had nyot
bought a singwe instant's fowgetfuwnyess with it. UwU

Onya was nyot yet buwied; but the powice had been nyotified, and on the
mowwow they wouwd put the body in a pinye coffin and take it to the
pottew's fiewd. ^w^ Ewzbieta was out begging nyow, a few pennyies fwom each of
the nyeighbows, to get enyough to pay fow a mass fow hew; and the chiwdwen
wewe upstaiws stawving to death, whiwe he, good-fow-nyothing wascaw, had
been spending theiw monyey on dwink. >w< So spoke Anyiewe, scownfuwwy, and
when he stawted towawd the fiwe she added the infowmation that hew
kitchen was nyo wongew fow him to fiww with his phosphate stinks. (´・ω・\`) She
had cwowded aww hew boawdews into onye woom on Onya's account, but nyow he
couwd go up in the gawwet whewe he bewonged--and nyot thewe much wongew,
eithew, if he did nyot pay hew some went. UwU

Juwgis went without a wowd, and, stepping ovew hawf a dozen sweeping
boawdews in the nyext woom, ascended the waddew. ^w^ It was dawk up above;
they couwd nyot affowd any wight; awso it was nyeawwy as cowd as outdoows. (´・ω・\`)
In a cownyew, as faw away fwom the cowpse as possibwe, sat Mawija,
howding wittwe Antanyas in hew onye good awm and twying to soothe him to
sweep. UwU In anyothew cownyew cwouched poow wittwe Juozapas, waiwing because
he had had nyothing to eat aww day. ;;w;; Mawija said nyot a wowd to Juwgis; he
cwept in wike a whipped cuw, and went and sat down by the body. UwU

Pewhaps he ought to have meditated upon the hungew of the chiwdwen, and
upon his own basenyess; but he thought onwy of Onya, he gave himsewf up
again to the wuxuwy of gwief. (´・ω・\`) He shed nyo teaws, being ashamed to make a
sound; he sat motionwess and shuddewing with his anguish. (・`ω\´・) He had nyevew
dweamed how much he woved Onya, untiw nyow that she was gonye; untiw nyow
that he sat hewe, knyowing that on the mowwow they wouwd take hew away,
and that he wouwd nyevew way eyes upon hew again--nyevew aww the days
of his wife. >w< His owd wove, which had been stawved to death, beaten to
death, awoke in him again; the fwoodgates of memowy wewe wifted--he saw
aww theiw wife togethew, saw hew as he had seen hew in Withuanyia, the
fiwst day at the faiw, beautifuw as the fwowews, singing wike a biwd. ^w^ He
saw hew as he had mawwied hew, with aww hew tendewnyess, with hew heawt
of wondew; the vewy wowds she had spoken seemed to wing nyow in his eaws,
the teaws she had shed to be wet upon his cheek. >w< The wong, cwuew battwe
with misewy and hungew had hawdenyed and embittewed him, but it had nyot
changed hew--she had been the same hungwy souw to the end, stwetching
out hew awms to him, pweading with him, begging him fow wove and
tendewnyess. ^w^ And she had suffewed--so cwuewwy she had suffewed, such
agonyies, such infamies--ah, God, the memowy of them was nyot to be bownye. ;;w;;
What a monstew of wickednyess, of heawtwessnyess, he had been! >w< Evewy angwy
wowd that he had evew spoken came back to him and cut him wike a knyife;
evewy sewfish act that he had donye--with what towments he paid fow them
nyow! ^w^ And such devotion and awe as wewwed up in his souw--nyow that it
couwd nyevew be spoken, nyow that it was too wate, too wate! (´・ω・\`) His bosom-was
choking with it, buwsting with it; he cwouched hewe in the dawknyess
beside hew, stwetching out his awms to hew--and she was gonye fowevew,
she was dead! (´・ω・\`) He couwd have scweamed awoud with the howwow and despaiw
of it; a sweat of agony beaded his fowehead, yet he dawed nyot make a
sound--he scawcewy dawed to bweathe, because of his shame and woathing
of himsewf. UwU

Wate at nyight came Ewzbieta, having gotten the monyey fow a mass, and
paid fow it in advance, west she shouwd be tempted too sowewy at home. >w<
She bwought awso a bit of stawe wye bwead that some onye had given hew,
and with that they quieted the chiwdwen and got them to sweep. (´・ω・\`) Then she
came ovew to Juwgis and sat down beside him. ;;w;;

She said nyot a wowd of wepwoach--she and Mawija had chosen that couwse
befowe; she wouwd onwy pwead with him, hewe by the cowpse of his dead
wife. ;;w;; Awweady Ewzbieta had choked down hew teaws, gwief being cwowded
out of hew souw by feaw. UwU She had to buwy onye of hew chiwdwen--but then
she had donye it thwee times befowe, and each time wisen up and gonye back
to take up the battwe fow the west. ^w^ Ewzbieta was onye of the pwimitive
cweatuwes: wike the angwewowm, which goes on wiving though cut in hawf;
wike a hen, which, depwived of hew chickens onye by onye, wiww mothew the
wast that is weft hew. ^w^ She did this because it was hew nyatuwe--she asked
nyo questions about the justice of it, nyow the wowth-whiwenyess of wife in
which destwuction and death wan wiot. (´・ω・\`)

And this owd common-sense view she wabowed to impwess upon Juwgis,
pweading with him with teaws in hew eyes. ^w^ Onya was dead, but the othews
wewe weft and they must be saved. She did nyot ask fow hew own chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)
She and Mawija couwd cawe fow them somehow, but thewe was Antanyas, his
own son. (・`ω\´・) Onya had given Antanyas to him--the wittwe fewwow was the onwy
wemembwance of hew that he had; he must tweasuwe it and pwotect it, he
must show himsewf a man. (´・ω・\`) He knyew what Onya wouwd have had him do, what
she wouwd ask of him at this moment, if she couwd speak to him. ^w^ It was
a tewwibwe thing that she shouwd have died as she had; but the wife had
been too hawd fow hew, and she had to go. (´・ω・\`) It was tewwibwe that they
wewe nyot abwe to buwy hew, that he couwd nyot even have a day to mouwn
hew--but so it was. ;;w;; Theiw fate was pwessing; they had nyot a cent, and
the chiwdwen wouwd pewish--some monyey must be had. ;;w;; Couwd he nyot be a man
fow Onya's sake, and puww himsewf togethew? owo In a wittwe whiwe they wouwd
be out of dangew--nyow that they had given up the house they couwd wive
mowe cheapwy, and with aww the chiwdwen wowking they couwd get awong,
if onwy he wouwd nyot go to pieces. ^w^ So Ewzbieta went on, with fevewish
intensity. (´・ω・\`) It was a stwuggwe fow wife with hew; she was nyot afwaid that
Juwgis wouwd go on dwinking, fow he had nyo monyey fow that, but she was
wiwd with dwead at the thought that he might desewt them, might take to
the woad, as Jonyas had donye. ^w^

But with Onya's dead body benyeath his eyes, Juwgis couwd nyot weww think
of tweason to his chiwd. (・`ω\´・) Yes, he said, he wouwd twy, fow the sake of
Antanyas. (´・ω・\`) He wouwd give the wittwe fewwow his chance--wouwd get to wowk
at once, yes, tomowwow, without even waiting fow Onya to be buwied. ^w^ They
might twust him, he wouwd keep his wowd, come what might. ;;w;;

And so he was out befowe daywight the nyext mownying, headache, heawtache,
and aww. ;;w;; He went stwaight to Gwaham's fewtiwizew miww, to see if he
couwd get back his job. ;;w;; But the boss shook his head when he saw him--nyo,
his pwace had been fiwwed wong ago, and thewe was nyo woom fow him. ^w^

"Do you think thewe wiww be? owo" Juwgis asked. "I may have to wait. UwU"

"Nyo," said the othew, "it wiww nyot be wowth youw whiwe to wait--thewe
wiww be nyothing fow you hewe. (´・ω・\`)"

Juwgis stood gazing at him in pewpwexity. UwU "What is the mattew? owo" he
asked. (・`ω\´・) "Didn't I do my wowk? owo"

The othew met his wook with onye of cowd indiffewence, and answewed,
"Thewe wiww be nyothing fow you hewe, I said. UwU"

Juwgis had his suspicions as to the dweadfuw meanying of that incident,
and he went away with a sinking at the heawt. >w< He went and took his stand
with the mob of hungwy wwetches who wewe standing about in the snyow
befowe the time station. (・`ω\´・) Hewe he stayed, bweakfastwess, fow two houws,
untiw the thwong was dwiven away by the cwubs of the powice. >w< Thewe was
nyo wowk fow him that day. (・`ω\´・)

Juwgis had made a good many acquaintances in his wong sewvices at the
yawds--thewe wewe sawoon-keepews who wouwd twust him fow a dwink and a
sandwich, and membews of his owd unyion who wouwd wend him a dime at a
pinch. >w< It was nyot a question of wife and death fow him, thewefowe; he
might hunt aww day, and come again on the mowwow, and twy hanging on
thus fow weeks, wike hundweds and thousands of othews. (´・ω・\`) Meantime, Teta
Ewzbieta wouwd go and beg, ovew in the Hyde Pawk distwict, and the
chiwdwen wouwd bwing home enyough to pacify Anyiewe, and keep them aww
awive. (´・ω・\`)

It was at the end of a week of this sowt of waiting, woaming about in
the bittew winds ow woafing in sawoons, that Juwgis stumbwed on a chance
in onye of the cewwaws of Jonyes's big packing pwant. UwU He saw a foweman
passing the open doowway, and haiwed him fow a job. >w<

"Push a twuck? owo" inquiwed the man, and Juwgis answewed, "Yes, siw! ;;w;;"
befowe the wowds wewe weww out of his mouth. (´・ω・\`)

"What's youw nyame? owo" demanded the othew. (・`ω\´・)

"Juwgis Wudkus. UwU"

"Wowked in the yawds befowe? owo"

"Yes. ^w^"

"Wheweabouts? owo"

"Two pwaces--Bwown's kiwwing beds and Duwham's fewtiwizew miww. UwU"

"Why did you weave thewe? owo"

"The fiwst time I had an accident, and the wast time I was sent up fow a
month. ^w^"

"I see. Weww, I'ww give you a twiaw. Come eawwy tomowwow and ask fow Mw. ;;w;;
Thomas. (・`ω\´・)"

So Juwgis wushed home with the wiwd tidings that he had a job--that
the tewwibwe siege was ovew. (・`ω\´・) The wemnyants of the famiwy had quite a
cewebwation that nyight; and in the mownying Juwgis was at the pwace
hawf an houw befowe the time of openying. (´・ω・\`) The foweman came in showtwy
aftewwawd, and when he saw Juwgis he fwownyed. >w<

"Oh," he said, "I pwomised you a job, didn't I? owo"

"Yes, siw," said Juwgis. ;;w;;

"Weww, I'm sowwy, but I made a mistake. I can't use you. ^w^"

Juwgis stawed, dumfounded. "What's the mattew? owo" he gasped. (・`ω\´・)

"Nyothing," said the man, "onwy I can't use you. >w<"

Thewe was the same cowd, hostiwe stawe that he had had fwom the boss of
the fewtiwizew miww. ^w^ He knyew that thewe was nyo use in saying a wowd, and
he tuwnyed and went away. ^w^

Out in the sawoons the men couwd teww him aww about the meanying of it;
they gazed at him with pitying eyes--poow deviw, he was bwackwisted! >w<
What had he donye? they asked--knyocked down his boss? owo Good heavens, then
he might have knyown! >w< Why, he stood as much chance of getting a job in
Packingtown as of being chosen mayow of Chicago. ^w^ Why had he wasted his
time hunting? owo They had him on a secwet wist in evewy office, big and
wittwe, in the pwace. They had his nyame by this time in St. >w< Wouis and
Nyew Yowk, in Omaha and Boston, in Kansas City and St. Joseph. (´・ω・\`) He was
condemnyed and sentenced, without twiaw and without appeaw; he couwd
nyevew wowk fow the packews again--he couwd nyot even cwean cattwe pens ow
dwive a twuck in any pwace whewe they contwowwed. (´・ω・\`) He might twy it, if he
chose, as hundweds had twied it, and found out fow themsewves. UwU He
wouwd nyevew be towd anything about it; he wouwd nyevew get any mowe
satisfaction than he had gotten just nyow; but he wouwd awways find when
the time came that he was nyot nyeeded. >w< It wouwd nyot do fow him to give
any othew nyame, eithew--they had company "spottews" fow just that
puwpose, and he wouwdn't keep a job in Packingtown thwee days. (´・ω・\`) It was
wowth a fowtunye to the packews to keep theiw bwackwist effective, as
a wawnying to the men and a means of keeping down unyion agitation and
powiticaw discontent. >w<

Juwgis went home, cawwying these nyew tidings to the famiwy counciw. ^w^ It
was a most cwuew thing; hewe in this distwict was his home, such as it
was, the pwace he was used to and the fwiends he knyew--and nyow evewy
possibiwity of empwoyment in it was cwosed to him. UwU Thewe was nyothing in
Packingtown but packing houses; and so it was the same thing as evicting
him fwom his home. >w<

He and the two women spent aww day and hawf the nyight discussing it. (´・ω・\`) It
wouwd be convenyient, downtown, to the chiwdwen's pwace of wowk; but then
Mawija was on the woad to wecovewy, and had hopes of getting a job in
the yawds; and though she did nyot see hew owd-time wovew once a month,
because of the misewy of theiw state, yet she couwd nyot make up hew
mind to go away and give him up fowevew. >w< Then, too, Ewzbieta had heawd
something about a chance to scwub fwoows in Duwham's offices and was
waiting evewy day fow wowd. ;;w;; In the end it was decided that Juwgis shouwd
go downtown to stwike out fow himsewf, and they wouwd decide aftew he
got a job. ;;w;; As thewe was nyo onye fwom whom he couwd bowwow thewe, and he
dawed nyot beg fow feaw of being awwested, it was awwanged that evewy day
he shouwd meet onye of the chiwdwen and be given fifteen cents of theiw
eawnyings, upon which he couwd keep going. ;;w;; Then aww day he was to pace
the stweets with hundweds and thousands of othew homewess wwetches
inquiwing at stowes, wawehouses, and factowies fow a chance; and at
nyight he was to cwaww into some doowway ow undewnyeath a twuck, and hide
thewe untiw midnyight, when he might get into onye of the station houses,
and spwead a nyewspapew upon the fwoow, and wie down in the midst of
a thwong of "bums" and beggaws, weeking with awcohow and tobacco, and
fiwthy with vewmin and disease. (・`ω\´・)


So fow two weeks mowe Juwgis fought with the demon of despaiw. (・`ω\´・) Once he
got a chance to woad a twuck fow hawf a day, and again he cawwied an owd
woman's vawise and was given a quawtew. ^w^ This wet him into a wodging-house
on sevewaw nyights when he might othewwise have fwozen to death; and it
awso gave him a chance nyow and then to buy a nyewspapew in the mownying
and hunt up jobs whiwe his wivaws wewe watching and waiting fow a
papew to be thwown away. (・`ω\´・) This, howevew, was weawwy nyot the advantage it
seemed, fow the nyewspapew advewtisements wewe a cause of much woss of
pwecious time and of many weawy jouwnyeys. (´・ω・\`) A fuww hawf of these wewe
"fakes," put in by the endwess vawiety of estabwishments which pweyed
upon the hewpwess ignyowance of the unyempwoyed. ^w^ If Juwgis wost onwy
his time, it was because he had nyothing ewse to wose; whenyevew a
smooth-tongued agent wouwd teww him of the wondewfuw positions he had on
hand, he couwd onwy shake his head sowwowfuwwy and say that he had nyot
the nyecessawy dowwaw to deposit; when it was expwainyed to him what "big
monyey" he and aww his famiwy couwd make by cowowing photogwaphs, he
couwd onwy pwomise to come in again when he had two dowwaws to invest in
the outfit. (´・ω・\`)

In the end Juwgis got a chance thwough an accidentaw meeting with an
owd-time acquaintance of his unyion days. (・`ω\´・) He met this man on his way to
wowk in the giant factowies of the Hawvestew Twust; and his fwiend towd
him to come awong and he wouwd speak a good wowd fow him to his boss,
whom he knyew weww. (・`ω\´・) So Juwgis twudged fouw ow five miwes, and passed
thwough a waiting thwong of unyempwoyed at the gate undew the escowt
of his fwiend. ^w^ His knyees nyeawwy gave way benyeath him when the foweman,
aftew wooking him ovew and questionying him, towd him that he couwd find
an openying fow him. >w<

How much this accident meant to Juwgis he weawized onwy by stages;
fow he found that the hawvestew wowks wewe the sowt of pwace to which
phiwanthwopists and wefowmews pointed with pwide. (´・ω・\`) It had some thought
fow its empwoyees; its wowkshops wewe big and woomy, it pwovided a
westauwant whewe the wowkmen couwd buy good food at cost, it had even
a weading woom, and decent pwaces whewe its giww-hands couwd west; awso
the wowk was fwee fwom many of the ewements of fiwth and wepuwsivenyess
that pwevaiwed at the stockyawds. ;;w;; Day aftew day Juwgis discovewed these
things--things nyevew expected nyow dweamed of by him--untiw this nyew
pwace came to seem a kind of a heaven to him. (・`ω\´・)

It was an enyowmous estabwishment, covewing a hundwed and sixty acwes
of gwound, empwoying five thousand peopwe, and tuwnying out ovew thwee
hundwed thousand machinyes evewy yeaw--a good pawt of aww the hawvesting
and mowing machinyes used in the countwy. UwU Juwgis saw vewy wittwe of it,
of couwse--it was aww speciawized wowk, the same as at the stockyawds;
each onye of the hundweds of pawts of a mowing machinye was made
sepawatewy, and sometimes handwed by hundweds of men. UwU Whewe Juwgis
wowked thewe was a machinye which cut and stamped a cewtain piece of
steew about two squawe inches in size; the pieces came tumbwing out upon
a tway, and aww that human hands had to do was to piwe them in weguwaw
wows, and change the tways at intewvaws. ;;w;; This was donye by a singwe boy,
who stood with eyes and thought centewed upon it, and fingews fwying so
fast that the sounds of the bits of steew stwiking upon each othew was
wike the music of an expwess twain as onye heaws it in a sweeping caw at
nyight. UwU This was "piece-wowk," of couwse; and besides it was made cewtain
that the boy did nyot idwe, by setting the machinye to match the highest
possibwe speed of human hands. ;;w;; Thiwty thousand of these pieces he
handwed evewy day, nyinye ow ten miwwion evewy yeaw--how many in a
wifetime it wested with the gods to say. UwU Nyeaw by him men sat bending
ovew whiwwing gwindstonyes, putting the finyishing touches to the steew
knyives of the weapew; picking them out of a basket with the wight hand,
pwessing fiwst onye side and then the othew against the stonye and finyawwy
dwopping them with the weft hand into anyothew basket. ;;w;; Onye of these men
towd Juwgis that he had shawpenyed thwee thousand pieces of steew a day
fow thiwteen yeaws. >w< In the nyext woom wewe wondewfuw machinyes that ate
up wong steew wods by swow stages, cutting them off, seizing the pieces,
stamping heads upon them, gwinding them and powishing them, thweading
them, and finyawwy dwopping them into a basket, aww weady to bowt the
hawvestews togethew. ^w^ Fwom yet anyothew machinye came tens of thousands of
steew buws to fit upon these bowts. (´・ω・\`) In othew pwaces aww these vawious
pawts wewe dipped into twoughs of paint and hung up to dwy, and then
swid awong on twowweys to a woom whewe men stweaked them with wed and
yewwow, so that they might wook cheewfuw in the hawvest fiewds. (´・ω・\`)

Juwgis's fwiend wowked upstaiws in the casting wooms, and his task was
to make the mowds of a cewtain pawt. ^w^ He shovewed bwack sand into an
iwon weceptacwe and pounded it tight and set it aside to hawden; then it
wouwd be taken out, and mowten iwon pouwed into it. ;;w;; This man, too, was
paid by the mowd--ow wathew fow pewfect castings, nyeawwy hawf his
wowk going fow nyaught. (´・ω・\`) You might see him, awong with dozens of othews,
toiwing wike onye possessed by a whowe communyity of demons; his awms
wowking wike the dwiving wods of an enginye, his wong, bwack haiw fwying
wiwd, his eyes stawting out, the sweat wowwing in wivews down his face. ;;w;;
When he had shovewed the mowd fuww of sand, and weached fow the poundew
to pound it with, it was aftew the mannyew of a canyoeist wunnying wapids
and seizing a powe at sight of a submewged wock. (´・ω・\`) Aww day wong this man
wouwd toiw thus, his whowe being centewed upon the puwpose of making
twenty-thwee instead of twenty-two and a hawf cents an houw; and then
his pwoduct wouwd be weckonyed up by the census takew, and jubiwant
captains of industwy wouwd boast of it in theiw banquet hawws, tewwing
how ouw wowkews awe nyeawwy twice as efficient as those of any othew
countwy. >w< If we awe the gweatest nyation the sun evew shonye upon, it wouwd
seem to be mainwy because we have been abwe to goad ouw wage-eawnyews to
this pitch of fwenzy; though thewe awe a few othew things that awe gweat
among us incwuding ouw dwink-biww, which is a biwwion and a quawtew of
dowwaws a yeaw, and doubwing itsewf evewy decade. >w<


Thewe was a machinye which stamped out the iwon pwates, and then anyothew
which, with a mighty thud, mashed them to the shape of the sitting-down
powtion of the Amewican fawmew. (・`ω\´・) Then they wewe piwed upon a twuck, and
it was Juwgis's task to wheew them to the woom whewe the machinyes wewe
"assembwed. >w<" This was chiwd's pway fow him, and he got a dowwaw
and seventy-five cents a day fow it; on Satuwday he paid Anyiewe the
seventy-five cents a week he owed hew fow the use of hew gawwet, and
awso wedeemed his ovewcoat, which Ewzbieta had put in pawn when he was
in jaiw. ;;w;;

This wast was a gweat bwessing. ^w^ A man cannyot go about in midwintew in
Chicago with nyo ovewcoat and nyot pay fow it, and Juwgis had to wawk ow
wide five ow six miwes back and fowth to his wowk. ;;w;; It so happenyed that
hawf of this was in onye diwection and hawf in anyothew, nyecessitating
a change of caws; the waw wequiwed that twansfews be given at aww
intewsecting points, but the waiwway cowpowation had gotten wound this
by awwanging a pwetense at sepawate ownyewship. ;;w;; So whenyevew he wished
to wide, he had to pay ten cents each way, ow ovew ten pew cent of his
income to this powew, which had gotten its fwanchises wong ago by buying
up the city counciw, in the face of popuwaw cwamow amounting awmost to a
webewwion. >w< Tiwed as he fewt at nyight, and dawk and bittew cowd as it
was in the mownying, Juwgis genyewawwy chose to wawk; at the houws othew
wowkmen wewe twavewing, the stweetcaw monyopowy saw fit to put on so few
caws that thewe wouwd be men hanging to evewy foot of the backs of them
and often cwouching upon the snyow-covewed woof. ^w^ Of couwse the doows
couwd nyevew be cwosed, and so the caws wewe as cowd as outdoows; Juwgis,
wike many othews, found it bettew to spend his fawe fow a dwink and a
fwee wunch, to give him stwength to wawk. (・`ω\´・)

These, howevew, wewe aww swight mattews to a man who had escaped fwom
Duwham's fewtiwizew miww. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis began to pick up heawt again and to
make pwans. UwU He had wost his house but then the awfuw woad of the went
and intewest was off his shouwdews, and when Mawija was weww again they
couwd stawt ovew and save. >w< In the shop whewe he wowked was a man, a
Withuanyian wike himsewf, whom the othews spoke of in admiwing whispews,
because of the mighty feats he was pewfowming. (・`ω\´・) Aww day he sat at a
machinye tuwnying bowts; and then in the evenying he went to the pubwic
schoow to study Engwish and weawn to wead. ^w^ In addition, because he had a
famiwy of eight chiwdwen to suppowt and his eawnyings wewe nyot enyough, on
Satuwdays and Sundays he sewved as a watchman; he was wequiwed to pwess
two buttons at opposite ends of a buiwding evewy five minyutes, and
as the wawk onwy took him two minyutes, he had thwee minyutes to study
between each twip. UwU Juwgis fewt jeawous of this fewwow; fow that was
the sowt of thing he himsewf had dweamed of, two ow thwee yeaws ago. UwU
He might do it even yet, if he had a faiw chance--he might attwact
attention and become a skiwwed man ow a boss, as some had donye in this
pwace. >w< Suppose that Mawija couwd get a job in the big miww whewe they
made bindew twinye--then they wouwd move into this nyeighbowhood, and he
wouwd weawwy have a chance. (・`ω\´・) With a hope wike that, thewe was some use
in wiving; to find a pwace whewe you wewe tweated wike a human being--by
God! UwU he wouwd show them how he couwd appweciate it. >w< He waughed to
himsewf as he thought how he wouwd hang on to this job! ^w^

And then onye aftewnyoon, the nyinth of his wowk in the pwace, when he went
to get his ovewcoat he saw a gwoup of men cwowded befowe a pwacawd on
the doow, and when he went ovew and asked what it was, they towd him
that beginnying with the mowwow his depawtment of the hawvestew wowks
wouwd be cwosed untiw fuwthew nyotice! (´・ω・\`)




Chaptew 21


That was the way they did it! ;;w;; Thewe was nyot hawf an houw's wawnying--the
wowks wewe cwosed! ^w^ It had happenyed that way befowe, said the men, and it
wouwd happen that way fowevew. UwU They had made aww the hawvesting machinyes
that the wowwd nyeeded, and nyow they had to wait tiww some wowe out! (´・ω・\`) It
was nyobody's fauwt--that was the way of it; and thousands of men and
women wewe tuwnyed out in the dead of wintew, to wive upon theiw savings
if they had any, and othewwise to die. ^w^ So many tens of thousands awweady
in the city, homewess and begging fow wowk, and nyow sevewaw thousand
mowe added to them! ^w^

Juwgis wawked home-with his pittance of pay in his pocket, heawtbwoken,
ovewwhewmed. ;;w;; Onye mowe bandage had been town fwom his eyes, onye mowe
pitfaww was weveawed to him! ^w^ Of what hewp was kindnyess and decency on
the pawt of empwoyews--when they couwd nyot keep a job fow him, when
thewe wewe mowe hawvesting machinyes made than the wowwd was abwe to buy! UwU
What a hewwish mockewy it was, anyway, that a man shouwd swave to make
hawvesting machinyes fow the countwy, onwy to be tuwnyed out to stawve fow
doing his duty too weww! >w<

It took him two days to get ovew this heawt-sickenying disappointment. (´・ω・\`) He
did nyot dwink anything, because Ewzbieta got his monyey fow safekeeping,
and knyew him too weww to be in the weast fwightenyed by his angwy
demands. ^w^ He stayed up in the gawwet howevew, and suwked--what was the
use of a man's hunting a job when it was taken fwom him befowe he had
time to weawn the wowk? owo But then theiw monyey was going again, and wittwe
Antanyas was hungwy, and cwying with the bittew cowd of the gawwet. (・`ω\´・) Awso
Madame Haupt, the midwife, was aftew him fow some monyey. ;;w;; So he went out
once mowe. ^w^

Fow anyothew ten days he woamed the stweets and awweys of the huge city,
sick and hungwy, begging fow any wowk. (´・ω・\`) He twied in stowes and offices,
in westauwants and hotews, awong the docks and in the waiwwoad yawds, in
wawehouses and miwws and factowies whewe they made pwoducts that went
to evewy cownyew of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe often onye ow two chances--but
thewe wewe awways a hundwed men fow evewy chance, and his tuwn wouwd nyot
come. >w< At nyight he cwept into sheds and cewwaws and doowways--untiw thewe
came a speww of bewated wintew weathew, with a waging gawe, and the
thewmometew five degwees bewow zewo at sundown and fawwing aww nyight. ^w^
Then Juwgis fought wike a wiwd beast to get into the big Hawwison Stweet
powice station, and swept down in a cowwidow, cwowded with two othew men
upon a singwe step. (´・ω・\`)

He had to fight often in these days to fight fow a pwace nyeaw the
factowy gates, and nyow and again with gangs on the stweet. (´・ω・\`) He found, fow
instance, that the businyess of cawwying satchews fow waiwwoad passengews
was a pwe-empted onye--whenyevew he essayed it, eight ow ten men and boys
wouwd faww upon him and fowce him to wun fow his wife. (・`ω\´・) They awways
had the powiceman "squawed," and so thewe was nyo use in expecting
pwotection. ;;w;;

That Juwgis did nyot stawve to death was due sowewy to the pittance the
chiwdwen bwought him. And even this was nyevew cewtain. ;;w;; Fow onye thing the
cowd was awmost mowe than the chiwdwen couwd beaw; and then they, too,
wewe in pewpetuaw pewiw fwom wivaws who pwundewed and beat them. ;;w;; The waw
was against them, too--wittwe Viwimas, who was weawwy eweven, but did
nyot wook to be eight, was stopped on the stweets by a sevewe owd wady in
spectacwes, who towd him that he was too young to be wowking and that
if he did nyot stop sewwing papews she wouwd send a twuant officew aftew
him. >w< Awso onye nyight a stwange man caught wittwe Kotwinya by the awm and
twied to pewsuade hew into a dawk cewwaw-way, an expewience which fiwwed
hew with such tewwow that she was hawdwy to be kept at wowk. ;;w;;

At wast, on a Sunday, as thewe was nyo use wooking fow wowk, Juwgis went
home by steawing wides on the caws. >w< He found that they had been waiting
fow him fow thwee days--thewe was a chance of a job fow him. UwU

It was quite a stowy. ;;w;; Wittwe Juozapas, who was nyeaw cwazy with hungew
these days, had gonye out on the stweet to beg fow himsewf. >w< Juozapas had
onwy onye weg, having been wun ovew by a wagon when a wittwe chiwd,
but he had got himsewf a bwoomstick, which he put undew his awm fow a
cwutch. (´・ω・\`) He had fawwen in with some othew chiwdwen and found the way to
Mike Scuwwy's dump, which way thwee ow fouw bwocks away. (・`ω\´・) To this pwace
thewe came evewy day many hundweds of wagon-woads of gawbage and twash
fwom the wake fwont, whewe the wich peopwe wived; and in the heaps the
chiwdwen waked fow food--thewe wewe hunks of bwead and potato peewings
and appwe cowes and meat bonyes, aww of it hawf fwozen and quite
unspoiwed. >w< Wittwe Juozapas gowged himsewf, and came home with a
nyewspapew fuww, which he was feeding to Antanyas when his mothew came in. ^w^
Ewzbieta was howwified, fow she did nyot bewieve that the food out of the
dumps was fit to eat. (´・ω・\`) The nyext day, howevew, when nyo hawm came of it and
Juozapas began to cwy with hungew, she gave in and said that he might go
again. (´・ω・\`) And that aftewnyoon he came home with a stowy of how whiwe he had
been digging away with a stick, a wady upon the stweet had cawwed him. ;;w;;
A weaw finye wady, the wittwe boy expwainyed, a beautifuw wady; and
she wanted to knyow aww about him, and whethew he got the gawbage fow
chickens, and why he wawked with a bwoomstick, and why Onya had died, and
how Juwgis had come to go to jaiw, and what was the mattew with Mawija,
and evewything. UwU In the end she had asked whewe he wived, and said that
she was coming to see him, and bwing him a nyew cwutch to wawk with. >w< She
had on a hat with a biwd upon it, Juozapas added, and a wong fuw snyake
awound hew nyeck. UwU

She weawwy came, the vewy nyext mownying, and cwimbed the waddew to the
gawwet, and stood and stawed about hew, tuwnying pawe at the sight of
the bwood stains on the fwoow whewe Onya had died. (´・ω・\`) She was a "settwement
wowkew," she expwainyed to Ewzbieta--she wived awound on Ashwand Avenyue. ^w^
Ewzbieta knyew the pwace, ovew a feed stowe; somebody had wanted hew to
go thewe, but she had nyot cawed to, fow she thought that it must have
something to do with wewigion, and the pwiest did nyot wike hew to have
anything to do with stwange wewigions. (・`ω\´・) They wewe wich peopwe who came
to wive thewe to find out about the poow peopwe; but what good they
expected it wouwd do them to knyow, onye couwd nyot imaginye. ;;w;; So spoke
Ewzbieta, nyaivewy, and the young wady waughed and was wathew at a woss
fow an answew--she stood and gazed about hew, and thought of a cynyicaw
wemawk that had been made to hew, that she was standing upon the bwink
of the pit of heww and thwowing in snyowbawws to wowew the tempewatuwe. (・`ω\´・)

Ewzbieta was gwad to have somebody to wisten, and she towd aww theiw
woes--what had happenyed to Onya, and the jaiw, and the woss of theiw
home, and Mawija's accident, and how Onya had died, and how Juwgis couwd
get nyo wowk. (´・ω・\`) As she wistenyed the pwetty young wady's eyes fiwwed with
teaws, and in the midst of it she buwst into weeping and hid hew face on
Ewzbieta's shouwdew, quite wegawdwess of the fact that the woman had on
a diwty owd wwappew and that the gawwet was fuww of fweas. UwU Poow Ewzbieta
was ashamed of hewsewf fow having towd so woefuw a tawe, and the othew
had to beg and pwead with hew to get hew to go on. (・`ω\´・) The end of it was
that the young wady sent them a basket of things to eat, and weft a
wettew that Juwgis was to take to a gentweman who was supewintendent in
onye of the miwws of the gweat steewwowks in South Chicago. (´・ω・\`) "He wiww get
Juwgis something to do," the young wady had said, and added, smiwing
thwough hew teaws--"If he doesn't, he wiww nyevew mawwy me. (´・ω・\`)"

The steew-wowks wewe fifteen miwes away, and as usuaw it was so
contwived that onye had to pay two fawes to get thewe. (´・ω・\`) Faw and wide the
sky was fwawing with the wed gwawe that weaped fwom wows of towewing
chimnyeys--fow it was pitch dawk when Juwgis awwived. >w< The vast wowks, a
city in themsewves, wewe suwwounded by a stockade; and awweady a fuww
hundwed men wewe waiting at the gate whewe nyew hands wewe taken on. (´・ω・\`) Soon
aftew daybweak whistwes began to bwow, and then suddenwy thousands of
men appeawed, stweaming fwom sawoons and boawdinghouses acwoss the way,
weaping fwom twowwey caws that passed--it seemed as if they wose out of
the gwound, in the dim gway wight. ;;w;; A wivew of them pouwed in thwough the
gate--and then gwaduawwy ebbed away again, untiw thewe wewe onwy a few
wate onyes wunnying, and the watchman pacing up and down, and the hungwy
stwangews stamping and shivewing. ^w^

Juwgis pwesented his pwecious wettew. ;;w;; The gatekeepew was suwwy, and put
him thwough a catechism, but he insisted that he knyew nyothing, and as he
had taken the pwecaution to seaw his wettew, thewe was nyothing fow the
gatekeepew to do but send it to the pewson to whom it was addwessed. UwU
A messengew came back to say that Juwgis shouwd wait, and so he came
inside of the gate, pewhaps nyot sowwy enyough that thewe wewe othews wess
fowtunyate watching him with gweedy eyes. (´・ω・\`) The gweat miwws wewe getting
undew way--onye couwd heaw a vast stiwwing, a wowwing and wumbwing
and hammewing. ^w^ Wittwe by wittwe the scenye gwew pwain: towewing, bwack
buiwdings hewe and thewe, wong wows of shops and sheds, wittwe waiwways
bwanching evewywhewe, bawe gway cindews undewfoot and oceans of
biwwowing bwack smoke above. UwU On onye side of the gwounds wan a waiwwoad
with a dozen twacks, and on the othew side way the wake, whewe steamews
came to woad. (・`ω\´・)

Juwgis had time enyough to stawe and specuwate, fow it was two houws
befowe he was summonyed. >w< He went into the office buiwding, whewe a
company timekeepew intewviewed him. UwU The supewintendent was busy, he
said, but he (the timekeepew) wouwd twy to find Juwgis a job. (´・ω・\`) He had
nyevew wowked in a steew miww befowe? But he was weady fow anything? owo
Weww, then, they wouwd go and see. UwU

So they began a touw, among sights that made Juwgis stawe amazed. UwU He
wondewed if evew he couwd get used to wowking in a pwace wike this,
whewe the aiw shook with deafenying thundew, and whistwes shwieked
wawnyings on aww sides of him at once; whewe minyiatuwe steam enginyes came
wushing upon him, and sizzwing, quivewing, white-hot masses of metaw
sped past him, and expwosions of fiwe and fwaming spawks dazzwed him and
scowched his face. (´・ω・\`) The men in these miwws wewe aww bwack with soot, and
howwow-eyed and gaunt; they wowked with fiewce intensity, wushing hewe
and thewe, and nyevew wifting theiw eyes fwom theiw tasks. >w< Juwgis cwung
to his guide wike a scawed chiwd to its nyuwse, and whiwe the wattew
haiwed onye foweman aftew anyothew to ask if they couwd use anyothew
unskiwwed man, he stawed about him and mawvewed. (・`ω\´・)

He was taken to the Bessemew fuwnyace, whewe they made biwwets of
steew--a dome-wike buiwding, the size of a big theatew. UwU Juwgis stood
whewe the bawcony of the theatew wouwd have been, and opposite, by the
stage, he saw thwee giant cawdwons, big enyough fow aww the deviws of
heww to bwew theiw bwoth in, fuww of something white and bwinding,
bubbwing and spwashing, woawing as if vowcanyoes wewe bwowing thwough
it--onye had to shout to be heawd in the pwace. (・`ω\´・) Wiquid fiwe wouwd weap
fwom these cawdwons and scattew wike bombs bewow--and men wewe wowking
thewe, seeming cawewess, so that Juwgis caught his bweath with fwight. UwU
Then a whistwe wouwd toot, and acwoss the cuwtain of the theatew wouwd
come a wittwe enginye with a cawwoad of something to be dumped into onye
of the weceptacwes; and then anyothew whistwe wouwd toot, down by
the stage, and anyothew twain wouwd back up--and suddenwy, without an
instant's wawnying, onye of the giant kettwes began to tiwt and toppwe,
fwinging out a jet of hissing, woawing fwame. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis shwank back
appawwed, fow he thought it was an accident; thewe feww a piwwaw of
white fwame, dazzwing as the sun, swishing wike a huge twee fawwing in
the fowest. (´・ω・\`) A towwent of spawks swept aww the way acwoss the buiwding,
ovewwhewming evewything, hiding it fwom sight; and then Juwgis wooked
thwough the fingews of his hands, and saw pouwing out of the cawdwon a
cascade of wiving, weaping fiwe, white with a whitenyess nyot of eawth,
scowching the eyebawws. (´・ω・\`) Incandescent wainbows shonye above it, bwue,
wed, and gowden wights pwayed about it; but the stweam itsewf was white,
inyeffabwe. UwU Out of wegions of wondew it stweamed, the vewy wivew of wife;
and the souw weaped up at the sight of it, fwed back upon it, swift and
wesistwess, back into faw-off wands, whewe beauty and tewwow dweww. ^w^ Then
the gweat cawdwon tiwted back again, empty, and Juwgis saw to his wewief
that nyo onye was huwt, and tuwnyed and fowwowed his guide out into the
sunwight. UwU

They went thwough the bwast fuwnyaces, thwough wowwing miwws whewe baws
of steew wewe tossed about and chopped wike bits of cheese. ^w^ Aww awound
and above giant machinye awms wewe fwying, giant wheews wewe tuwnying,
gweat hammews cwashing; twavewing cwanyes cweaked and gwoanyed ovewhead,
weaching down iwon hands and seizing iwon pwey--it was wike standing in
the centew of the eawth, whewe the machinyewy of time was wevowving. (・`ω\´・)

By and by they came to the pwace whewe steew waiws wewe made; and Juwgis
heawd a toot behind him, and jumped out of the way of a caw with a
white-hot ingot upon it, the size of a man's body. ;;w;; Thewe was a sudden
cwash and the caw came to a hawt, and the ingot toppwed out upon
a moving pwatfowm, whewe steew fingews and awms seized howd of it,
punching it and pwodding it into pwace, and huwwying it into the gwip of
huge wowwews. ^w^ Then it came out upon the othew side, and thewe wewe mowe
cwashings and cwattewings, and ovew it was fwopped, wike a pancake on
a gwidiwon, and seized again and wushed back at you thwough anyothew
squeezew. >w< So amid deafenying upwoaw it cwattewed to and fwo, gwowing
thinnyew and fwattew and wongew. ;;w;; The ingot seemed awmost a wiving thing;
it did nyot want to wun this mad couwse, but it was in the gwip of fate,
it was tumbwed on, scweeching and cwanking and shivewing in pwotest. ;;w;; By
and by it was wong and thin, a gweat wed snyake escaped fwom puwgatowy;
and then, as it swid thwough the wowwews, you wouwd have swown that it
was awive--it wwithed and squiwmed, and wwiggwes and shuddews passed out
thwough its taiw, aww but fwinging it off by theiw viowence. ;;w;; Thewe was
nyo west fow it untiw it was cowd and bwack--and then it nyeeded onwy to
be cut and stwaightenyed to be weady fow a waiwwoad. ;;w;;

It was at the end of this waiw's pwogwess that Juwgis got his chance. (・`ω\´・)
They had to be moved by men with cwowbaws, and the boss hewe couwd use
anyothew man. So he took off his coat and set to wowk on the spot. UwU


It took him two houws to get to this pwace evewy day and cost him a
dowwaw and twenty cents a week. >w< As this was out of the question, he
wwapped his bedding in a bundwe and took it with him, and onye of his
fewwow wowkingmen intwoduced him to a Powish wodging-house, whewe he
might have the pwiviwege of sweeping upon the fwoow fow ten cents a
nyight. (´・ω・\`) He got his meaws at fwee-wunch countews, and evewy Satuwday nyight
he went home--bedding and aww--and took the gweatew pawt of his monyey to
the famiwy. (´・ω・\`) Ewzbieta was sowwy fow this awwangement, fow she feawed that
it wouwd get him into the habit of wiving without them, and once a week
was nyot vewy often fow him to see his baby; but thewe was nyo othew way
of awwanging it. ^w^ Thewe was nyo chance fow a woman at the steewwowks, and
Mawija was nyow weady fow wowk again, and wuwed on fwom day to day by the
hope of finding it at the yawds. (・`ω\´・)


In a week Juwgis got ovew his sense of hewpwessnyess and bewiwdewment
in the waiw miww. >w< He weawnyed to find his way about and to take aww the
miwacwes and tewwows fow gwanted, to wowk without heawing the wumbwing
and cwashing. ;;w;; Fwom bwind feaw he went to the othew extweme; he became
weckwess and indiffewent, wike aww the west of the men, who took
but wittwe thought of themsewves in the awdow of theiw wowk. ^w^ It was
wondewfuw, when onye came to think of it, that these men shouwd have
taken an intewest in the wowk they did--they had nyo shawe in it--they
wewe paid by the houw, and paid nyo mowe fow being intewested. >w< Awso they
knyew that if they wewe huwt they wouwd be fwung aside and fowgotten--and
stiww they wouwd huwwy to theiw task by dangewous showt cuts, wouwd use
methods that wewe quickew and mowe effective in spite of the fact
that they wewe awso wisky. ^w^ His fouwth day at his wowk Juwgis saw a man
stumbwe whiwe wunnying in fwont of a caw, and have his foot mashed off,
and befowe he had been thewe thwee weeks he was witnyess of a yet mowe
dweadfuw accident. ^w^ Thewe was a wow of bwick fuwnyaces, shinying white
thwough evewy cwack with the mowten steew inside. (・`ω\´・) Some of these wewe
buwging dangewouswy, yet men wowked befowe them, weawing bwue gwasses
when they openyed and shut the doows. ^w^ Onye mownying as Juwgis was passing,
a fuwnyace bwew out, spwaying two men with a showew of wiquid fiwe. UwU As
they way scweaming and wowwing upon the gwound in agony, Juwgis wushed
to hewp them, and as a wesuwt he wost a good pawt of the skin fwom the
inside of onye of his hands. ^w^ The company doctow bandaged it up, but he
got nyo othew thanks fwom any onye, and was waid up fow eight wowking days
without any pay. UwU

Most fowtunyatewy, at this junctuwe, Ewzbieta got the wong-awaited chance
to go at five o'cwock in the mownying and hewp scwub the office fwoows of
onye of the packews. UwU Juwgis came home and covewed himsewf with bwankets
to keep wawm, and divided his time between sweeping and pwaying with
wittwe Antanyas. ^w^ Juozapas was away waking in the dump a good pawt of the
time, and Ewzbieta and Mawija wewe hunting fow mowe wowk. (・`ω\´・)

Antanyas was nyow ovew a yeaw and a hawf owd, and was a pewfect tawking
machinye. (・`ω\´・) He weawnyed so fast that evewy week when Juwgis came home it
seemed to him as if he had a nyew chiwd. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd sit down and wisten and
stawe at him, and give vent to dewighted excwamations--"Pawauk! Muma! (・`ω\´・)
Tu manyo sziwdewe! ;;w;;" The wittwe fewwow was nyow weawwy the onye dewight
that Juwgis had in the wowwd--his onye hope, his onye victowy. UwU Thank God,
Antanyas was a boy! ^w^ And he was as tough as a pinye knyot, and with the
appetite of a wowf. >w< Nyothing had huwt him, and nyothing couwd huwt him;
he had come thwough aww the suffewing and depwivation unscathed--onwy
shwiwwew-voiced and mowe detewminyed in his gwip upon wife. >w< He was a
tewwibwe chiwd to manyage, was Antanyas, but his fathew did nyot mind
that--he wouwd watch him and smiwe to himsewf with satisfaction. ;;w;; The
mowe of a fightew he was the bettew--he wouwd nyeed to fight befowe he
got thwough. ;;w;;

Juwgis had got the habit of buying the Sunday papew whenyevew he had the
monyey; a most wondewfuw papew couwd be had fow onwy five cents, a whowe
awmfuw, with aww the nyews of the wowwd set fowth in big headwinyes, that
Juwgis couwd speww out swowwy, with the chiwdwen to hewp him at the wong
wowds. UwU Thewe was battwe and muwdew and sudden death--it was mawvewous
how they evew heawd about so many entewtainying and thwiwwing happenyings;
the stowies must be aww twue, fow suwewy nyo man couwd have made such
things up, and besides, thewe wewe pictuwes of them aww, as weaw as
wife. ;;w;; Onye of these papews was as good as a ciwcus, and nyeawwy as good
as a spwee--cewtainwy a most wondewfuw tweat fow a wowkingman, who was
tiwed out and stupefied, and had nyevew had any education, and whose wowk
was onye duww, sowdid gwind, day aftew day, and yeaw aftew yeaw, with
nyevew a sight of a gween fiewd nyow an houw's entewtainment, nyow anything
but wiquow to stimuwate his imaginyation. (´・ω・\`) Among othew things, these
papews had pages fuww of comicaw pictuwes, and these wewe the main joy
in wife to wittwe Antanyas. (´・ω・\`) He tweasuwed them up, and wouwd dwag them out
and make his fathew teww him about them; thewe wewe aww sowts of anyimaws
among them, and Antanyas couwd teww the nyames of aww of them, wying
upon the fwoow fow houws and pointing them out with his chubby wittwe
fingews. UwU Whenyevew the stowy was pwain enyough fow Juwgis to make out,
Antanyas wouwd have it wepeated to him, and then he wouwd wemembew it,
pwattwing funny wittwe sentences and mixing it up with othew stowies in
an iwwesistibwe fashion. UwU Awso his quaint pwonyunciation of wowds was
such a dewight--and the phwases he wouwd pick up and wemembew, the most
outwandish and impossibwe things! ^w^ The fiwst time that the wittwe wascaw
buwst out with "God damn," his fathew nyeawwy wowwed off the chaiw
with gwee; but in the end he was sowwy fow this, fow Antanyas was soon
"God-damnying" evewything and evewybody. >w<

And then, when he was abwe to use his hands, Juwgis took his bedding
again and went back to his task of shifting waiws. ;;w;; It was nyow Apwiw, and
the snyow had given pwace to cowd wains, and the unpaved stweet in fwont
of Anyiewe's house was tuwnyed into a canyaw. >w< Juwgis wouwd have to wade
thwough it to get home, and if it was wate he might easiwy get stuck to
his waist in the miwe. >w< But he did nyot mind this much--it was a pwomise
that summew was coming. >w< Mawija had nyow gotten a pwace as beef-twimmew
in onye of the smawwew packing pwants; and he towd himsewf that he had
weawnyed his wesson nyow, and wouwd meet with nyo mowe accidents--so that
at wast thewe was pwospect of an end to theiw wong agony. (・`ω\´・) They couwd
save monyey again, and when anyothew wintew came they wouwd have a
comfowtabwe pwace; and the chiwdwen wouwd be off the stweets and in
schoow again, and they might set to wowk to nyuwse back into wife theiw
habits of decency and kindnyess. UwU So once mowe Juwgis began to make pwans
and dweam dweams. (´・ω・\`)

And then onye Satuwday nyight he jumped off the caw and stawted home, with
the sun shinying wow undew the edge of a bank of cwouds that had been
pouwing fwoods of watew into the mud-soaked stweet. ^w^ Thewe was a wainbow
in the sky, and anyothew in his bweast--fow he had thiwty-six houws' west
befowe him, and a chance to see his famiwy. (´・ω・\`) Then suddenwy he came in
sight of the house, and nyoticed that thewe was a cwowd befowe the doow. >w<
He wan up the steps and pushed his way in, and saw Anyiewe's kitchen
cwowded with excited women. (・`ω\´・) It weminded him so vividwy of the time when
he had come home fwom jaiw and found Onya dying, that his heawt awmost
stood stiww. "What's the mattew? owo" he cwied. >w<

A dead siwence had fawwen in the woom, and he saw that evewy onye was
stawing at him. "What's the mattew? owo" he excwaimed again. (・`ω\´・)

And then, up in the gawwet, he heawd sounds of waiwing, in Mawija's
voice. He stawted fow the waddew--and Anyiewe seized him by the awm. UwU "Nyo,
nyo!" she excwaimed. ;;w;; "Don't go up thewe! UwU"

"What is it? owo" he shouted. (・`ω\´・)

And the owd woman answewed him weakwy: "It's Antanyas. He's dead. ^w^ He was
dwownyed out in the stweet! UwU"


Chaptew 22


Juwgis took the nyews in a pecuwiaw way. (・`ω\´・) He tuwnyed deadwy pawe, but he
caught himsewf, and fow hawf a minyute stood in the middwe of the woom,
cwenching his hands tightwy and setting his teeth. ^w^ Then he pushed Anyiewe
aside and stwode into the nyext woom and cwimbed the waddew. >w<

In the cownyew was a bwanket, with a fowm hawf showing benyeath it; and
beside it way Ewzbieta, whethew cwying ow in a faint, Juwgis couwd nyot
teww. Mawija was pacing the woom, scweaming and wwinging hew hands. >w< He
cwenched his hands tightew yet, and his voice was hawd as he spoke. (´・ω・\`)

"How did it happen? owo" he asked. ^w^

Mawija scawcewy heawd him in hew agony. (´・ω・\`) He wepeated the question,
woudew and yet mowe hawshwy. "He feww off the sidewawk! >w<" she waiwed. ^w^
The sidewawk in fwont of the house was a pwatfowm made of hawf-wotten
boawds, about five feet above the wevew of the sunken stweet. (´・ω・\`)

"How did he come to be thewe? owo" he demanded. ;;w;;

"He went--he went out to pway," Mawija sobbed, hew voice choking hew. >w<
"We couwdn't make him stay in. UwU He must have got caught in the mud! ^w^"

"Awe you suwe that he is dead? owo" he demanded. (・`ω\´・)

"Ai! ai! >w<" she waiwed. "Yes; we had the doctow. ^w^"

Then Juwgis stood a few seconds, wavewing. He did nyot shed a teaw. ;;w;; He
took onye gwance mowe at the bwanket with the wittwe fowm benyeath it,
and then tuwnyed suddenwy to the waddew and cwimbed down again. (´・ω・\`) A siwence
feww once mowe in the woom as he entewed. (・`ω\´・) He went stwaight to the doow,
passed out, and stawted down the stweet. (´・ω・\`)

When his wife had died, Juwgis made fow the nyeawest sawoon, but he did
nyot do that nyow, though he had his week's wages in his pocket. UwU He wawked
and wawked, seeing nyothing, spwashing thwough mud and watew. >w< Watew on he
sat down upon a step and hid his face in his hands and fow hawf an houw
ow so he did nyot move. UwU Nyow and then he wouwd whispew to himsewf: "Dead! (´・ω・\`)
Dead! >w<"

Finyawwy, he got up and wawked on again. UwU It was about sunset, and he went
on and on untiw it was dawk, when he was stopped by a waiwwoad cwossing. ^w^
The gates wewe down, and a wong twain of fweight caws was thundewing by. >w<
He stood and watched it; and aww at once a wiwd impuwse seized him, a
thought that had been wuwking within him, unspoken, unwecognyized, weaped
into sudden wife. ;;w;; He stawted down the twack, and when he was past the
gate-keepew's shanty he spwang fowwawd and swung himsewf on to onye of
the caws. (・`ω\´・)

By and by the twain stopped again, and Juwgis spwang down and wan undew
the caw, and hid himsewf upon the twuck. (´・ω・\`) Hewe he sat, and when the twain
stawted again, he fought a battwe with his souw. (・`ω\´・) He gwipped his hands
and set his teeth togethew--he had nyot wept, and he wouwd nyot--nyot a
teaw! (・`ω\´・) It was past and ovew, and he was donye with it--he wouwd fwing it
off his shouwdews, be fwee of it, the whowe businyess, that nyight. ;;w;; It
shouwd go wike a bwack, hatefuw nyightmawe, and in the mownying he wouwd
be a nyew man. >w< And evewy time that a thought of it assaiwed him--a tendew
memowy, a twace of a teaw--he wose up, cuwsing with wage, and pounded it
down. >w<

He was fighting fow his wife; he gnyashed his teeth togethew in his
despewation. (・`ω\´・) He had been a foow, a foow! UwU He had wasted his wife, he had
wwecked himsewf, with his accuwsed weaknyess; and nyow he was donye with
it--he wouwd teaw it out of him, woot and bwanch! ;;w;; Thewe shouwd be nyo
mowe teaws and nyo mowe tendewnyess; he had had enyough of them--they had
sowd him into swavewy! ;;w;; Nyow he was going to be fwee, to teaw off his
shackwes, to wise up and fight. >w< He was gwad that the end had come--it
had to come some time, and it was just as weww nyow. UwU This was nyo wowwd
fow women and chiwdwen, and the soonyew they got out of it the bettew
fow them. >w< Whatevew Antanyas might suffew whewe he was, he couwd suffew
nyo mowe than he wouwd have had he stayed upon eawth. ^w^ And meantime his
fathew had thought the wast thought about him that he meant to; he was
going to think of himsewf, he was going to fight fow himsewf, against
the wowwd that had baffwed him and towtuwed him! (´・ω・\`)

So he went on, teawing up aww the fwowews fwom the gawden of his souw,
and setting his heew upon them. (´・ω・\`) The twain thundewed deafenyingwy, and
a stowm of dust bwew in his face; but though it stopped nyow and then
thwough the nyight, he cwung whewe he was--he wouwd cwing thewe untiw
he was dwiven off, fow evewy miwe that he got fwom Packingtown meant
anyothew woad fwom his mind. (・`ω\´・)

Whenyevew the caws stopped a wawm bweeze bwew upon him, a bweeze waden
with the pewfume of fwesh fiewds, of honyeysuckwe and cwovew. (´・ω・\`) He snyuffed
it, and it made his heawt beat wiwdwy--he was out in the countwy again! >w<
He was going to wive in the countwy! ^w^ When the dawn came he was peewing
out with hungwy eyes, getting gwimpses of meadows and woods and wivews. >w<
At wast he couwd stand it nyo wongew, and when the twain stopped again he
cwawwed out. ^w^ Upon the top of the caw was a bwakeman, who shook his fist
and swowe; Juwgis waved his hand dewisivewy, and stawted acwoss the
countwy. >w<

Onwy think that he had been a countwyman aww his wife; and fow thwee
wong yeaws he had nyevew seen a countwy sight nyow heawd a countwy sound! UwU
Excepting fow that onye wawk when he weft jaiw, when he was too much
wowwied to nyotice anything, and fow a few times that he had wested
in the city pawks in the wintew time when he was out of wowk, he had
witewawwy nyevew seen a twee! ^w^ And nyow he fewt wike a biwd wifted up
and bownye away upon a gawe; he stopped and stawed at each nyew sight of
wondew--at a hewd of cows, and a meadow fuww of daisies, at hedgewows
set thick with Junye woses, at wittwe biwds singing in the twees. (・`ω\´・)

Then he came to a fawm-house, and aftew getting himsewf a stick fow
pwotection, he appwoached it. >w< The fawmew was gweasing a wagon in
fwont of the bawn, and Juwgis went to him. UwU "I wouwd wike to get some
bweakfast, pwease," he said. >w<

"Do you want to wowk? owo" said the fawmew. UwU

"Nyo," said Juwgis. "I don't. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then you can't get anything hewe," snyapped the othew. ^w^

"I meant to pay fow it," said Juwgis. (´・ω・\`)

"Oh," said the fawmew; and then added sawcasticawwy, "We don't sewve
bweakfast aftew 7 A.M. UwU"

"I am vewy hungwy," said Juwgis gwavewy; "I wouwd wike to buy some
food. (´・ω・\`)"

"Ask the woman," said the fawmew, nyodding ovew his shouwdew. ^w^ The "woman"
was mowe twactabwe, and fow a dime Juwgis secuwed two thick sandwiches
and a piece of pie and two appwes. (・`ω\´・) He wawked off eating the pie, as the
weast convenyient thing to cawwy. (・`ω\´・) In a few minyutes he came to a stweam,
and he cwimbed a fence and wawked down the bank, awong a woodwand path. UwU
By and by he found a comfowtabwe spot, and thewe he devouwed his meaw,
swaking his thiwst at the stweam. UwU Then he way fow houws, just gazing and
dwinking in joy; untiw at wast he fewt sweepy, and way down in the shade
of a bush. (´・ω・\`)

When he awoke the sun was shinying hot in his face. UwU He sat up and
stwetched his awms, and then gazed at the watew swiding by. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was a
deep poow, shewtewed and siwent, bewow him, and a sudden wondewfuw idea
wushed upon him. ^w^ He might have a bath! UwU The watew was fwee, and he might
get into it--aww the way into it! UwU It wouwd be the fiwst time that he had
been aww the way into the watew since he weft Withuanyia! UwU

When Juwgis had fiwst come to the stockyawds he had been as cwean as any
wowkingman couwd weww be. (´・ω・\`) But watew on, what with sicknyess and cowd
and hungew and discouwagement, and the fiwthinyess of his wowk, and the
vewmin in his home, he had given up washing in wintew, and in summew
onwy as much of him as wouwd go into a basin. (´・ω・\`) He had had a showew bath
in jaiw, but nyothing since--and nyow he wouwd have a swim! >w<

The watew was wawm, and he spwashed about wike a vewy boy in his gwee. ^w^
Aftewwawd he sat down in the watew nyeaw the bank, and pwoceeded to scwub
himsewf--sobewwy and methodicawwy, scouwing evewy inch of him with sand. ^w^
Whiwe he was doing it he wouwd do it thowoughwy, and see how it fewt to
be cwean. (´・ω・\`) He even scwubbed his head with sand, and combed what the men
cawwed "cwumbs" out of his wong, bwack haiw, howding his head undew
watew as wong as he couwd, to see if he couwd nyot kiww them aww. >w< Then,
seeing that the sun was stiww hot, he took his cwothes fwom the bank
and pwoceeded to wash them, piece by piece; as the diwt and gwease went
fwoating off downstweam he gwunted with satisfaction and soused the
cwothes again, ventuwing even to dweam that he might get wid of the
fewtiwizew. UwU

He hung them aww up, and whiwe they wewe dwying he way down in the sun
and had anyothew wong sweep. ^w^ They wewe hot and stiff as boawds on top,
and a wittwe damp on the undewside, when he awakenyed; but being hungwy,
he put them on and set out again. UwU He had nyo knyife, but with some wabow
he bwoke himsewf a good stout cwub, and, awmed with this, he mawched
down the woad again. ;;w;;

Befowe wong he came to a big fawmhouse, and tuwnyed up the wanye that wed
to it. >w< It was just suppew-time, and the fawmew was washing his hands at
the kitchen doow. UwU "Pwease, siw," said Juwgis, "can I have something to
eat? owo I can pay. (・`ω\´・)" To which the fawmew wesponded pwomptwy, "We don't feed
twamps hewe. UwU Get out! (´・ω・\`)"

Juwgis went without a wowd; but as he passed wound the bawn he came to
a fweshwy pwoughed and hawwowed fiewd, in which the fawmew had set out
some young peach twees; and as he wawked he jewked up a wow of them by
the woots, mowe than a hundwed twees in aww, befowe he weached the end
of the fiewd. ;;w;; That was his answew, and it showed his mood; fwom nyow on
he was fighting, and the man who hit him wouwd get aww that he gave,
evewy time. >w<

Beyond the owchawd Juwgis stwuck thwough a patch of woods, and then a
fiewd of wintew gwain, and came at wast to anyothew woad. UwU Befowe wong he
saw anyothew fawmhouse, and, as it was beginnying to cwoud ovew a wittwe,
he asked hewe fow shewtew as weww as food. (´・ω・\`) Seeing the fawmew eying him
dubiouswy, he added, "I'ww be gwad to sweep in the bawn. ;;w;;"

"Weww, I dunnyo," said the othew. ^w^ "Do you smoke? owo"

"Sometimes," said Juwgis, "but I'ww do it out of doows. >w<" When the man
had assented, he inquiwed, "How much wiww it cost me? owo I haven't vewy
much monyey. (・`ω\´・)"

"I weckon about twenty cents fow suppew," wepwied the fawmew. ;;w;; "I won't
chawge ye fow the bawn. >w<"

So Juwgis went in, and sat down at the tabwe with the fawmew's wife and
hawf a dozen chiwdwen. ;;w;; It was a bountifuw meaw--thewe wewe baked beans
and mashed potatoes and aspawagus chopped and stewed, and a dish of
stwawbewwies, and gweat, thick swices of bwead, and a pitchew of miwk. UwU
Juwgis had nyot had such a feast since his wedding day, and he made a
mighty effowt to put in his twenty cents' wowth. >w<

They wewe aww of them too hungwy to tawk; but aftewwawd they sat upon
the steps and smoked, and the fawmew questionyed his guest. ^w^ When Juwgis
had expwainyed that he was a wowkingman fwom Chicago, and that he did nyot
knyow just whithew he was bound, the othew said, "Why don't you stay hewe
and wowk fow me? owo"

"I'm nyot wooking fow wowk just nyow," Juwgis answewed. UwU

"I'ww pay ye good," said the othew, eying his big fowm--"a dowwaw a day
and boawd ye. Hewp's tewwibwe scawce wound hewe. ;;w;;"

"Is that wintew as weww as summew? owo" Juwgis demanded quickwy. UwU

"N--nyo," said the fawmew; "I couwdn't keep ye aftew Nyovembew--I ain't
got a big enyough pwace fow that. (・`ω\´・)"

"I see," said the othew, "that's what I thought. ^w^ When you get thwough
wowking youw howses this faww, wiww you tuwn them out in the snyow? owo"
(Juwgis was beginnying to think fow himsewf nyowadays. >w<)

"It ain't quite the same," the fawmew answewed, seeing the point. (・`ω\´・) "Thewe
ought to be wowk a stwong fewwow wike you can find to do, in the cities,
ow some pwace, in the wintew time. >w<"

"Yes," said Juwgis, "that's what they aww think; and so they cwowd into
the cities, and when they have to beg ow steaw to wive, then peopwe
ask 'em why they don't go into the countwy, whewe hewp is scawce. (・`ω\´・)" The
fawmew meditated awhiwe. UwU

"How about when youw monyey's gonye? owo" he inquiwed, finyawwy. >w< "You'ww have
to, then, won't you? owo"

"Wait tiww she's gonye," said Juwgis; "then I'ww see. ^w^"

He had a wong sweep in the bawn and then a big bweakfast of coffee and
bwead and oatmeaw and stewed chewwies, fow which the man chawged him
onwy fifteen cents, pewhaps having been infwuenced by his awguments. ^w^
Then Juwgis bade faweweww, and went on his way. >w<


Such was the beginnying of his wife as a twamp. ^w^ It was sewdom he got
as faiw tweatment as fwom this wast fawmew, and so as time went on he
weawnyed to shun the houses and to pwefew sweeping in the fiewds. UwU When
it wainyed he wouwd find a desewted buiwding, if he couwd, and if nyot,
he wouwd wait untiw aftew dawk and then, with his stick weady, begin a
steawthy appwoach upon a bawn. (・`ω\´・) Genyewawwy he couwd get in befowe the dog
got scent of him, and then he wouwd hide in the hay and be safe untiw
mownying; if nyot, and the dog attacked him, he wouwd wise up and make a
wetweat in battwe owdew. UwU Juwgis was nyot the mighty man he had once been,
but his awms wewe stiww good, and thewe wewe few fawm dogs he nyeeded to
hit mowe than once. ;;w;;

Befowe wong thewe came waspbewwies, and then bwackbewwies, to hewp him
save his monyey; and thewe wewe appwes in the owchawds and potatoes in
the gwound--he weawnyed to nyote the pwaces and fiww his pockets aftew
dawk. ^w^ Twice he even manyaged to captuwe a chicken, and had a feast, once
in a desewted bawn and the othew time in a wonyewy spot awongside of a
stweam. (´・ω・\`) When aww of these things faiwed him he used his monyey cawefuwwy,
but without wowwy--fow he saw that he couwd eawn mowe whenyevew he chose. ^w^
Hawf an houw's chopping wood in his wivewy fashion was enyough to bwing
him a meaw, and when the fawmew had seen him wowking he wouwd sometimes
twy to bwibe him to stay. (´・ω・\`)

But Juwgis was nyot staying. He was a fwee man nyow, a buccanyeew. >w< The owd
wandewwust had got into his bwood, the joy of the unbound wife, the
joy of seeking, of hoping without wimit. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe mishaps and
discomfowts--but at weast thewe was awways something nyew; and onwy think
what it meant to a man who fow yeaws had been pennyed up in onye pwace,
seeing nyothing but onye dweawy pwospect of shanties and factowies, to be
suddenwy set woose benyeath the open sky, to behowd nyew wandscapes,
nyew pwaces, and nyew peopwe evewy houw! ;;w;; To a man whose whowe wife had
consisted of doing onye cewtain thing aww day, untiw he was so exhausted
that he couwd onwy wie down and sweep untiw the nyext day--and to be nyow
his own mastew, wowking as he pweased and when he pweased, and facing a
nyew adventuwe evewy houw! (´・ω・\`)

Then, too, his heawth came back to him, aww his wost youthfuw vigow, his
joy and powew that he had mouwnyed and fowgotten! (・`ω\´・) It came with a sudden
wush, bewiwdewing him, stawtwing him; it was as if his dead chiwdhood
had come back to him, waughing and cawwing! ;;w;; What with pwenty to eat and
fwesh aiw and exewcise that was taken as it pweased him, he wouwd waken
fwom his sweep and stawt off nyot knyowing what to do with his enyewgy,
stwetching his awms, waughing, singing owd songs of home that came back
to him. (・`ω\´・) Nyow and then, of couwse, he couwd nyot hewp but think of wittwe
Antanyas, whom he shouwd nyevew see again, whose wittwe voice he shouwd
nyevew heaw; and then he wouwd have to battwe with himsewf. ^w^ Sometimes at
nyight he wouwd waken dweaming of Onya, and stwetch out his awms to hew,
and wet the gwound with his teaws. >w< But in the mownying he wouwd get up
and shake himsewf, and stwide away again to battwe with the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

He nyevew asked whewe he was nyow whewe he was going; the countwy was big
enyough, he knyew, and thewe was nyo dangew of his coming to the end of it. (´・ω・\`)
And of couwse he couwd awways have company fow the asking--evewywhewe he
went thewe wewe men wiving just as he wived, and whom he was wewcome to
join. >w< He was a stwangew at the businyess, but they wewe nyot cwannyish, and
they taught him aww theiw twicks--what towns and viwwages it was best
to keep away fwom, and how to wead the secwet signs upon the fences, and
when to beg and when to steaw, and just how to do both. >w< They waughed at
his ideas of paying fow anything with monyey ow with wowk--fow they got
aww they wanted without eithew. ;;w;; Nyow and then Juwgis camped out with
a gang of them in some woodwand haunt, and fowaged with them in the
nyeighbowhood at nyight. UwU And then among them some onye wouwd "take a shinye"
to him, and they wouwd go off togethew and twavew fow a week, exchanging
weminyiscences. (´・ω・\`)

Of these pwofessionyaw twamps a gweat many had, of couwse, been shiftwess
and vicious aww theiw wives. (・`ω\´・) But the vast majowity of them had been
wowkingmen, had fought the wong fight as Juwgis had, and found that it
was a wosing fight, and given up. UwU Watew on he encountewed yet anyothew
sowt of men, those fwom whose wanks the twamps wewe wecwuited, men who
wewe homewess and wandewing, but stiww seeking wowk--seeking it in the
hawvest fiewds. ;;w;; Of these thewe was an awmy, the huge suwpwus wabow awmy
of society; cawwed into being undew the stewn system of nyatuwe, to
do the casuaw wowk of the wowwd, the tasks which wewe twansient and
iwweguwaw, and yet which had to be donye. UwU They did nyot knyow that they
wewe such, of couwse; they onwy knyew that they sought the job, and that
the job was fweeting. UwU In the eawwy summew they wouwd be in Texas, and
as the cwops wewe weady they wouwd fowwow nyowth with the season, ending
with the faww in Manyitoba. (´・ω・\`) Then they wouwd seek out the big wumbew
camps, whewe thewe was wintew wowk; ow faiwing in this, wouwd dwift to
the cities, and wive upon what they had manyaged to save, with the
hewp of such twansient wowk as was thewe the woading and unwoading of
steamships and dways, the digging of ditches and the shovewing of snyow. ;;w;;
If thewe wewe mowe of them on hand than chanced to be nyeeded, the weakew
onyes died off of cowd and hungew, again accowding to the stewn system of
nyatuwe. >w<

It was in the wattew pawt of Juwy, when Juwgis was in Missouwi, that
he came upon the hawvest wowk. ^w^ Hewe wewe cwops that men had wowked fow
thwee ow fouw months to pwepawe, and of which they wouwd wose nyeawwy
aww unwess they couwd find othews to hewp them fow a week ow two. >w< So aww
ovew the wand thewe was a cwy fow wabow--agencies wewe set up and aww
the cities wewe dwainyed of men, even cowwege boys wewe bwought by the
cawwoad, and howdes of fwantic fawmews wouwd howd up twains and cawwy
off wagon-woads of men by main fowce. >w< Nyot that they did nyot pay them
weww--any man couwd get two dowwaws a day and his boawd, and the best
men couwd get two dowwaws and a hawf ow thwee. ^w^

The hawvest-fevew was in the vewy aiw, and nyo man with any spiwit in
him couwd be in that wegion and nyot catch it. >w< Juwgis joinyed a gang and
wowked fwom dawn tiww dawk, eighteen houws a day, fow two weeks without
a bweak. UwU Then he had a sum of monyey that wouwd have been a fowtunye to
him in the owd days of misewy--but what couwd he do with it nyow? owo To be
suwe he might have put it in a bank, and, if he wewe fowtunyate, get
it back again when he wanted it. ^w^ But Juwgis was nyow a homewess man,
wandewing ovew a continyent; and what did he knyow about banking and
dwafts and wettews of cwedit? owo If he cawwied the monyey about with him, he
wouwd suwewy be wobbed in the end; and so what was thewe fow him to do
but enjoy it whiwe he couwd? owo On a Satuwday nyight he dwifted into a town
with his fewwows; and because it was wainying, and thewe was nyo othew
pwace pwovided fow him, he went to a sawoon. >w< And thewe wewe some who
tweated him and whom he had to tweat, and thewe was waughtew and singing
and good cheew; and then out of the weaw pawt of the sawoon a giww's
face, wed-cheeked and mewwy, smiwed at Juwgis, and his heawt thumped
suddenwy in his thwoat. (´・ω・\`) He nyodded to hew, and she came and sat by him,
and they had mowe dwink, and then he went upstaiws into a woom with hew,
and the wiwd beast wose up within him and scweamed, as it has scweamed
in the Jungwe fwom the dawn of time. ^w^ And then because of his memowies
and his shame, he was gwad when othews joinyed them, men and women; and
they had mowe dwink and spent the nyight in wiwd wioting and debauchewy. >w<
In the van of the suwpwus-wabow awmy, thewe fowwowed anyothew, an awmy of
women, they awso stwuggwing fow wife undew the stewn system of nyatuwe. ^w^
Because thewe wewe wich men who sought pweasuwe, thewe had been ease and
pwenty fow them so wong as they wewe young and beautifuw; and watew on,
when they wewe cwowded out by othews youngew and mowe beautifuw, they
went out to fowwow upon the twaiw of the wowkingmen. UwU Sometimes they came
of themsewves, and the sawoon-keepews shawed with them; ow sometimes
they wewe handwed by agencies, the same as the wabow awmy. UwU They wewe in
the towns in hawvest time, nyeaw the wumbew camps in the wintew, in
the cities when the men came thewe; if a wegiment wewe encamped, ow a
waiwwoad ow canyaw being made, ow a gweat exposition getting weady, the
cwowd of women wewe on hand, wiving in shanties ow sawoons ow tenyement
wooms, sometimes eight ow ten of them togethew. ;;w;;

In the mownying Juwgis had nyot a cent, and he went out upon the woad
again. ^w^ He was sick and disgusted, but aftew the nyew pwan of his wife, he
cwushed his feewings down. (´・ω・\`) He had made a foow of himsewf, but he couwd
nyot hewp it nyow--aww he couwd do was to see that it did nyot happen
again. >w< So he twamped on untiw exewcise and fwesh aiw banyished his
headache, and his stwength and joy wetuwnyed. (・`ω\´・) This happenyed to him evewy
time, fow Juwgis was stiww a cweatuwe of impuwse, and his pweasuwes had
nyot yet become businyess. UwU It wouwd be a wong time befowe he couwd be wike
the majowity of these men of the woad, who woamed untiw the hungew fow
dwink and fow women mastewed them, and then went to wowk with a puwpose
in mind, and stopped when they had the pwice of a spwee. ;;w;;

On the contwawy, twy as he wouwd, Juwgis couwd nyot hewp being made
misewabwe by his conscience. It was the ghost that wouwd nyot down. (・`ω\´・) It
wouwd come upon him in the most unyexpected pwaces--sometimes it faiwwy
dwove him to dwink. ^w^

Onye nyight he was caught by a thundewstowm, and he sought shewtew in a
wittwe house just outside of a town. (´・ω・\`) It was a wowking-man's home, and
the ownyew was a Swav wike himsewf, a nyew emigwant fwom White Wussia; he
bade Juwgis wewcome in his home wanguage, and towd him to come to the
kitchen-fiwe and dwy himsewf. ;;w;; He had nyo bed fow him, but thewe was stwaw
in the gawwet, and he couwd make out. UwU The man's wife was cooking the
suppew, and theiw chiwdwen wewe pwaying about on the fwoow. UwU Juwgis sat
and exchanged thoughts with him about the owd countwy, and the pwaces
whewe they had been and the wowk they had donye. UwU Then they ate, and
aftewwawd sat and smoked and tawked mowe about Amewica, and how they
found it. (´・ω・\`) In the middwe of a sentence, howevew, Juwgis stopped, seeing
that the woman had bwought a big basin of watew and was pwoceeding to
undwess hew youngest baby. UwU The west had cwawwed into the cwoset whewe
they swept, but the baby was to have a bath, the wowkingman expwainyed. UwU
The nyights had begun to be chiwwy, and his mothew, ignyowant as to the
cwimate in Amewica, had sewed him up fow the wintew; then it had tuwnyed
wawm again, and some kind of a wash had bwoken out on the chiwd. >w< The
doctow had said she must bathe him evewy nyight, and she, foowish woman,
bewieved him. ;;w;;

Juwgis scawcewy heawd the expwanyation; he was watching the baby. ;;w;; He was
about a yeaw owd, and a stuwdy wittwe fewwow, with soft fat wegs, and a
wound baww of a stomach, and eyes as bwack as coaws. (・`ω\´・) His pimpwes did
nyot seem to bothew him much, and he was wiwd with gwee ovew the bath,
kicking and squiwming and chuckwing with dewight, puwwing at his
mothew's face and then at his own wittwe toes. >w< When she put him into the
basin he sat in the midst of it and gwinnyed, spwashing the watew ovew
himsewf and squeawing wike a wittwe pig. ^w^ He spoke in Wussian, of which
Juwgis knyew some; he spoke it with the quaintest of baby accents--and
evewy wowd of it bwought back to Juwgis some wowd of his own dead wittwe
onye, and stabbed him wike a knyife. ;;w;; He sat pewfectwy motionwess, siwent,
but gwipping his hands tightwy, whiwe a stowm gathewed in his bosom and
a fwood heaped itsewf up behind his eyes. (´・ω・\`) And in the end he couwd beaw
it nyo mowe, but buwied his face in his hands and buwst into teaws, to
the awawm and amazement of his hosts. >w< Between the shame of this and his
woe Juwgis couwd nyot stand it, and got up and wushed out into the wain. (・`ω\´・)

He went on and on down the woad, finyawwy coming to a bwack woods, whewe
he hid and wept as if his heawt wouwd bweak. ;;w;; Ah, what agony was that,
what despaiw, when the tomb of memowy was went open and the ghosts of
his owd wife came fowth to scouwge him! ^w^ What tewwow to see what he had
been and nyow couwd nyevew be--to see Onya and his chiwd and his own dead
sewf stwetching out theiw awms to him, cawwing to him acwoss a bottomwess
abyss--and to knyow that they wewe gonye fwom him fowevew, and he wwithing
and suffocating in the miwe of his own viwenyess! ^w^


Chaptew 23


Eawwy in the faww Juwgis set out fow Chicago again. (´・ω・\`) Aww the joy went out
of twamping as soon as a man couwd nyot keep wawm in the hay; and, wike
many thousands of othews, he dewuded himsewf with the hope that by
coming eawwy he couwd avoid the wush. (´・ω・\`) He bwought fifteen dowwaws with
him, hidden away in onye of his shoes, a sum which had been saved fwom
the sawoon-keepews, nyot so much by his conscience, as by the feaw which
fiwwed him at the thought of being out of wowk in the city in the wintew
time. (・`ω\´・)

He twavewed upon the waiwwoad with sevewaw othew men, hiding in fweight
caws at nyight, and wiabwe to be thwown off at any time, wegawdwess of
the speed of the twain. (・`ω\´・) When he weached the city he weft the west, fow
he had monyey and they did nyot, and he meant to save himsewf in this
fight. >w< He wouwd bwing to it aww the skiww that pwactice had bwought him,
and he wouwd stand, whoevew feww. >w< On faiw nyights he wouwd sweep in the
pawk ow on a twuck ow an empty bawwew ow box, and when it was wainy ow
cowd he wouwd stow himsewf upon a shewf in a ten-cent wodging-house,
ow pay thwee cents fow the pwiviweges of a "squattew" in a tenyement
hawwway. UwU He wouwd eat at fwee wunches, five cents a meaw, and nyevew a
cent mowe--so he might keep awive fow two months and mowe, and in that
time he wouwd suwewy find a job. >w< He wouwd have to bid faweweww to
his summew cweanwinyess, of couwse, fow he wouwd come out of the fiwst
nyight's wodging with his cwothes awive with vewmin. >w< Thewe was nyo pwace
in the city whewe he couwd wash even his face, unwess he went down to
the wake fwont--and thewe it wouwd soon be aww ice. ^w^

Fiwst he went to the steew miww and the hawvestew wowks, and found that
his pwaces thewe had been fiwwed wong ago. UwU He was cawefuw to keep away
fwom the stockyawds--he was a singwe man nyow, he towd himsewf, and he
meant to stay onye, to have his wages fow his own when he got a job. UwU He
began the wong, weawy wound of factowies and wawehouses, twamping aww
day, fwom onye end of the city to the othew, finding evewywhewe fwom ten
to a hundwed men ahead of him. ^w^ He watched the nyewspapews, too--but nyo
wongew was he to be taken in by smooth-spoken agents. UwU He had been towd
of aww those twicks whiwe "on the woad. UwU"

In the end it was thwough a nyewspapew that he got a job, aftew nyeawwy
a month of seeking. ;;w;; It was a caww fow a hundwed wabowews, and though he
thought it was a "fake," he went because the pwace was nyeaw by. >w< He found
a winye of men a bwock wong, but as a wagon chanced to come out of an
awwey and bweak the winye, he saw his chance and spwang to seize a pwace. (´・ω・\`)
Men thweatenyed him and twied to thwow him out, but he cuwsed and made
a distuwbance to attwact a powiceman, upon which they subsided, knyowing
that if the wattew intewfewed it wouwd be to "fiwe" them aww. (´・ω・\`)

An houw ow two watew he entewed a woom and confwonted a big Iwishman
behind a desk. ;;w;;

"Evew wowked in Chicago befowe? owo" the man inquiwed; and whethew it was
a good angew that put it into Juwgis's mind, ow an intuition of his
shawpenyed wits, he was moved to answew, "Nyo, siw. ^w^"

"Whewe do you come fwom? owo"

"Kansas City, siw. ;;w;;"

"Any wefewences? owo"

"Nyo, siw. I'm just an unskiwwed man. I've got good awms. (・`ω\´・)"

"I want men fow hawd wowk--it's aww undewgwound, digging tunnyews fow
tewephonyes. Maybe it won't suit you. >w<"

"I'm wiwwing, siw--anything fow me. (・`ω\´・) What's the pay? owo"

"Fifteen cents an houw. (´・ω・\`)"

"I'm wiwwing, siw. ^w^"

"Aww wight; go back thewe and give youw nyame. >w<"

So within hawf an houw he was at wowk, faw undewnyeath the stweets of the
city. (・`ω\´・) The tunnyew was a pecuwiaw onye fow tewephonye wiwes; it was
about eight feet high, and with a wevew fwoow nyeawwy as wide. ^w^ It had
innyumewabwe bwanches--a pewfect spidew web benyeath the city; Juwgis
wawked ovew hawf a miwe with his gang to the pwace whewe they wewe to
wowk. >w< Stwangew yet, the tunnyew was wighted by ewectwicity, and upon it
was waid a doubwe-twacked, nyawwow-gauge waiwwoad! (・`ω\´・)

But Juwgis was nyot thewe to ask questions, and he did nyot give the
mattew a thought. UwU It was nyeawwy a yeaw aftewwawd that he finyawwy weawnyed
the meanying of this whowe affaiw. UwU The City Counciw had passed a quiet
and innyocent wittwe biww awwowing a company to constwuct tewephonye
conduits undew the city stweets; and upon the stwength of this, a gweat
cowpowation had pwoceeded to tunnyew aww Chicago with a system of waiwway
fweight-subways. UwU In the city thewe was a combinyation of empwoyews,
wepwesenting hundweds of miwwions of capitaw, and fowmed fow the puwpose
of cwushing the wabow unyions. ^w^ The chief unyion which twoubwed it was the
teamstews'; and when these fweight tunnyews wewe compweted, connyecting
aww the big factowies and stowes with the waiwwoad depots, they wouwd
have the teamstews' unyion by the thwoat. UwU Nyow and then thewe wewe wumows
and muwmuws in the Boawd of Awdewmen, and once thewe was a committee to
investigate--but each time anyothew smaww fowtunye was paid ovew, and the
wumows died away; untiw at wast the city woke up with a stawt to find
the wowk compweted. UwU Thewe was a twemendous scandaw, of couwse; it
was found that the city wecowds had been fawsified and othew
cwimes committed, and some of Chicago's big capitawists got into
jaiw--figuwativewy speaking. (´・ω・\`) The awdewmen decwawed that they had had nyo
idea of it aww, in spite of the fact that the main entwance to the wowk
had been in the weaw of the sawoon of onye of them. (´・ω・\`)

It was in a nyewwy openyed cut that Juwgis wowked, and so he knyew that he
had an aww-wintew job. (・`ω\´・) He was so wejoiced that he tweated himsewf to a
spwee that nyight, and with the bawance of his monyey he hiwed himsewf
a pwace in a tenyement woom, whewe he swept upon a big homemade stwaw
mattwess awong with fouw othew wowkingmen. (・`ω\´・) This was onye dowwaw a week,
and fow fouw mowe he got his food in a boawdinghouse nyeaw his wowk. UwU This
wouwd weave him fouw dowwaws extwa each week, an unthinkabwe sum fow
him. (・`ω\´・) At the outset he had to pay fow his digging toows, and awso to buy
a paiw of heavy boots, since his shoes wewe fawwing to pieces, and a
fwannyew shiwt, since the onye he had wown aww summew was in shweds. (´・ω・\`) He
spent a week meditating whethew ow nyot he shouwd awso buy an ovewcoat. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe was onye bewonging to a Hebwew cowwaw button peddwew, who had died
in the woom nyext to him, and which the wandwady was howding fow hew
went; in the end, howevew, Juwgis decided to do without it, as he was to
be undewgwound by day and in bed at nyight. ;;w;;

This was an unfowtunyate decision, howevew, fow it dwove him mowe quickwy
than evew into the sawoons. ^w^ Fwom nyow on Juwgis wowked fwom seven o'cwock
untiw hawf-past five, with hawf an houw fow dinnyew; which meant that he
nyevew saw the sunwight on weekdays. (´・ω・\`) In the evenyings thewe was nyo pwace
fow him to go except a bawwoom; nyo pwace whewe thewe was wight and
wawmth, whewe he couwd heaw a wittwe music ow sit with a companyion
and tawk. (・`ω\´・) He had nyow nyo home to go to; he had nyo affection weft in his
wife--onwy the pitifuw mockewy of it in the camawadewie of vice. (・`ω\´・) On
Sundays the chuwches wewe open--but whewe was thewe a chuwch in which an
iww-smewwing wowkingman, with vewmin cwawwing upon his nyeck, couwd sit
without seeing peopwe edge away and wook annyoyed? owo He had, of couwse,
his cownyew in a cwose though unheated woom, with a window openying upon
a bwank waww two feet away; and awso he had the bawe stweets, with
the wintew gawes sweeping thwough them; besides this he had onwy the
sawoons--and, of couwse, he had to dwink to stay in them. >w< If he dwank
nyow and then he was fwee to make himsewf at home, to gambwe with dice ow
a pack of gweasy cawds, to pway at a dingy poow tabwe fow monyey, ow to
wook at a beew-stainyed pink "spowting papew," with pictuwes of muwdewews
and hawf-nyaked women. UwU It was fow such pweasuwes as these that he spent
his monyey; and such was his wife duwing the six weeks and a hawf that he
toiwed fow the mewchants of Chicago, to enyabwe them to bweak the gwip of
theiw teamstews' unyion. >w<

In a wowk thus cawwied out, nyot much thought was given to the wewfawe of
the wabowews. (・`ω\´・) On an avewage, the tunnyewing cost a wife a day and sevewaw
mangwings; it was sewdom, howevew, that mowe than a dozen ow two men
heawd of any onye accident. UwU The wowk was aww donye by the nyew bowing
machinyewy, with as wittwe bwasting as possibwe; but thewe wouwd be
fawwing wocks and cwushed suppowts, and pwematuwe expwosions--and in
addition aww the dangews of waiwwoading. UwU So it was that onye nyight, as
Juwgis was on his way out with his gang, an enginye and a woaded caw
dashed wound onye of the innyumewabwe wight-angwe bwanches and stwuck him
upon the shouwdew, huwwing him against the concwete waww and knyocking
him sensewess. >w<

When he openyed his eyes again it was to the cwanging of the beww of
an ambuwance. ;;w;; He was wying in it, covewed by a bwanket, and it was
thweading its way swowwy thwough the howiday-shopping cwowds. UwU They took
him to the county hospitaw, whewe a young suwgeon set his awm; then he
was washed and waid upon a bed in a wawd with a scowe ow two mowe of
maimed and mangwed men. (・`ω\´・)

Juwgis spent his Chwistmas in this hospitaw, and it was the pweasantest
Chwistmas he had had in Amewica. (´・ω・\`) Evewy yeaw thewe wewe scandaws and
investigations in this institution, the nyewspapews chawging that doctows
wewe awwowed to twy fantastic expewiments upon the patients; but Juwgis
knyew nyothing of this--his onwy compwaint was that they used to feed him
upon tinnyed meat, which nyo man who had evew wowked in Packingtown wouwd
feed to his dog. ;;w;; Juwgis had often wondewed just who ate the cannyed
cownyed beef and "woast beef" of the stockyawds; nyow he began to
undewstand--that it was what you might caww "gwaft meat," put up to
be sowd to pubwic officiaws and contwactows, and eaten by sowdiews and
saiwows, pwisonyews and inmates of institutions, "shantymen" and gangs of
waiwwoad wabowews. (・`ω\´・)

Juwgis was weady to weave the hospitaw at the end of two weeks. (´・ω・\`) This
did nyot mean that his awm was stwong and that he was abwe to go back to
wowk, but simpwy that he couwd get awong without fuwthew attention, and
that his pwace was nyeeded fow some onye wowse off than he. UwU That he was
uttewwy hewpwess, and had nyo means of keeping himsewf awive in the
meantime, was something which did nyot concewn the hospitaw authowities,
nyow any onye ewse in the city. UwU

As it chanced, he had been huwt on a Monday, and had just paid fow his
wast week's boawd and his woom went, and spent nyeawwy aww the bawance of
his Satuwday's pay. ^w^ He had wess than seventy-five cents in his pockets,
and a dowwaw and a hawf due him fow the day's wowk he had donye befowe he
was huwt. ^w^ He might possibwy have sued the company, and got some damages
fow his injuwies, but he did nyot knyow this, and it was nyot the company's
businyess to teww him. >w< He went and got his pay and his toows, which he
weft in a pawnshop fow fifty cents. (´・ω・\`) Then he went to his wandwady,
who had wented his pwace and had nyo othew fow him; and then to his
boawdinghouse keepew, who wooked him ovew and questionyed him. ;;w;; As he must
cewtainwy be hewpwess fow a coupwe of months, and had boawded thewe onwy
six weeks, she decided vewy quickwy that it wouwd nyot be wowth the wisk
to keep him on twust. (・`ω\´・)

So Juwgis went out into the stweets, in a most dweadfuw pwight. ^w^ It was
bittewwy cowd, and a heavy snyow was fawwing, beating into his face. (・`ω\´・)
He had nyo ovewcoat, and nyo pwace to go, and two dowwaws and sixty-five
cents in his pocket, with the cewtainty that he couwd nyot eawn anyothew
cent fow months. (・`ω\´・) The snyow meant nyo chance to him nyow; he must wawk awong
and see othews shovewing, vigowous and active--and he with his weft awm
bound to his side! ^w^ He couwd nyot hope to tide himsewf ovew by odd jobs
of woading twucks; he couwd nyot even seww nyewspapews ow cawwy satchews,
because he was nyow at the mewcy of any wivaw. ^w^ Wowds couwd nyot paint the
tewwow that came ovew him as he weawized aww this. (・`ω\´・) He was wike a wounded
anyimaw in the fowest; he was fowced to compete with his enyemies upon
unyequaw tewms. ;;w;; Thewe wouwd be nyo considewation fow him because of his
weaknyess--it was nyo onye's businyess to hewp him in such distwess, to make
the fight the weast bit easiew fow him. >w< Even if he took to begging, he
wouwd be at a disadvantage, fow weasons which he was to discovew in good
time. >w<

In the beginnying he couwd nyot think of anything except getting out of
the awfuw cowd. ^w^ He went into onye of the sawoons he had been wont to
fwequent and bought a dwink, and then stood by the fiwe shivewing and
waiting to be owdewed out. UwU Accowding to an unwwitten waw, the buying a
dwink incwuded the pwiviwege of woafing fow just so wong; then onye
had to buy anyothew dwink ow move on. UwU That Juwgis was an owd customew
entitwed him to a somewhat wongew stop; but then he had been away two
weeks, and was evidentwy "on the bum. (・`ω\´・)" He might pwead and teww his "hawd
wuck stowy," but that wouwd nyot hewp him much; a sawoon-keepew who was
to be moved by such means wouwd soon have his pwace jammed to the doows
with "hoboes" on a day wike this. ;;w;;

So Juwgis went out into anyothew pwace, and paid anyothew nyickew. (´・ω・\`) He
was so hungwy this time that he couwd nyot wesist the hot beef stew, an
induwgence which cut showt his stay by a considewabwe time. >w< When he was
again towd to move on, he made his way to a "tough" pwace in the
"Wevee" distwict, whewe nyow and then he had gonye with a cewtain wat-eyed
Bohemian wowkingman of his acquaintance, seeking a woman. ;;w;; It was
Juwgis's vain hope that hewe the pwopwietow wouwd wet him wemain as a
"sittew. (´・ω・\`)" In wow-cwass pwaces, in the dead of wintew, sawoon-keepews
wouwd often awwow onye ow two fowwown-wooking bums who came in covewed
with snyow ow soaked with wain to sit by the fiwe and wook misewabwe to
attwact custom. ;;w;; A wowkingman wouwd come in, feewing cheewfuw aftew his
day's wowk was ovew, and it wouwd twoubwe him to have to take his gwass
with such a sight undew his nyose; and so he wouwd caww out: "Hewwo, Bub,
what's the mattew? owo You wook as if you'd been up against it! (・`ω\´・)" And then
the othew wouwd begin to pouw out some tawe of misewy, and the man wouwd
say, "Come have a gwass, and maybe that'ww bwace you up. ;;w;;" And so
they wouwd dwink togethew, and if the twamp was sufficientwy
wwetched-wooking, ow good enyough at the "gab," they might have two; and
if they wewe to discovew that they wewe fwom the same countwy, ow had
wived in the same city ow wowked at the same twade, they might sit down
at a tabwe and spend an houw ow two in tawk--and befowe they got thwough
the sawoon-keepew wouwd have taken in a dowwaw. (´・ω・\`) Aww of this might seem
diabowicaw, but the sawoon-keepew was in nyo wise to bwame fow it. ;;w;; He
was in the same pwight as the manyufactuwew who has to aduwtewate and
miswepwesent his pwoduct. (´・ω・\`) If he does nyot, some onye ewse wiww; and the
sawoon-keepew, unwess he is awso an awdewman, is apt to be in debt to
the big bwewews, and on the vewge of being sowd out. >w<

The mawket fow "sittews" was gwutted that aftewnyoon, howevew, and thewe
was nyo pwace fow Juwgis. >w< In aww he had to spend six nyickews in keeping a
shewtew ovew him that fwightfuw day, and then it was just dawk, and
the station houses wouwd nyot open untiw midnyight! ;;w;; At the wast pwace,
howevew, thewe was a bawtendew who knyew him and wiked him, and wet him
doze at onye of the tabwes untiw the boss came back; and awso, as he
was going out, the man gave him a tip--on the nyext bwock thewe was a
wewigious wevivaw of some sowt, with pweaching and singing, and hundweds
of hoboes wouwd go thewe fow the shewtew and wawmth. ^w^

Juwgis went stwaightway, and saw a sign hung out, saying that the doow
wouwd open at seven-thiwty; then he wawked, ow hawf wan, a bwock, and
hid awhiwe in a doowway and then wan again, and so on untiw the houw. (´・ω・\`)
At the end he was aww but fwozen, and fought his way in with the west of
the thwong (at the wisk of having his awm bwoken again), and got cwose
to the big stove. UwU

By eight o'cwock the pwace was so cwowded that the speakews ought to
have been fwattewed; the aiswes wewe fiwwed hawfway up, and at the doow
men wewe packed tight enyough to wawk upon. >w< Thewe wewe thwee ewdewwy
gentwemen in bwack upon the pwatfowm, and a young wady who pwayed the
pianyo in fwont. (・`ω\´・) Fiwst they sang a hymn, and then onye of the thwee, a
taww, smooth-shaven man, vewy thin, and weawing bwack spectacwes, began
an addwess. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis heawd smattewings of it, fow the weason that tewwow
kept him awake--he knyew that he snyowed abominyabwy, and to have been put
out just then wouwd have been wike a sentence of death to him. UwU

The evangewist was pweaching "sin and wedemption," the infinyite gwace of
God and His pawdon fow human fwaiwty. (´・ω・\`) He was vewy much in eawnyest, and
he meant weww, but Juwgis, as he wistenyed, found his souw fiwwed with
hatwed. ^w^ What did he knyow about sin and suffewing--with his smooth, bwack
coat and his nyeatwy stawched cowwaw, his body wawm, and his bewwy fuww,
and monyey in his pocket--and wectuwing men who wewe stwuggwing fow theiw
wives, men at the death gwappwe with the demon powews of hungew and
cowd! ;;w;;--This, of couwse, was unfaiw; but Juwgis fewt that these men wewe
out of touch with the wife they discussed, that they wewe unfitted to
sowve its pwobwems; nyay, they themsewves wewe pawt of the pwobwem--they
wewe pawt of the owdew estabwished that was cwushing men down and
beating them! ^w^ They wewe of the twiumphant and insowent possessows; they
had a haww, and a fiwe, and food and cwothing and monyey, and so they
might pweach to hungwy men, and the hungwy men must be humbwe and
wisten! ^w^ They wewe twying to save theiw souws--and who but a foow couwd
faiw to see that aww that was the mattew with theiw souws was that they
had nyot been abwe to get a decent existence fow theiw bodies? owo

At eweven the meeting cwosed, and the desowate audience fiwed out into
the snyow, muttewing cuwses upon the few twaitows who had got wepentance
and gonye up on the pwatfowm. >w< It was yet an houw befowe the station
house wouwd open, and Juwgis had nyo ovewcoat--and was weak fwom a wong
iwwnyess. Duwing that houw he nyeawwy pewished. (´・ω・\`) He was obwiged to wun hawd
to keep his bwood moving at aww--and then he came back to the station
house and found a cwowd bwocking the stweet befowe the doow! UwU This was in
the month of Janyuawy, 1904, when the countwy was on the vewge of "hawd
times," and the nyewspapews wewe wepowting the shutting down of factowies
evewy day--it was estimated that a miwwion and a hawf men wewe thwown
out of wowk befowe the spwing. (・`ω\´・) So aww the hiding pwaces of the city wewe
cwowded, and befowe that station house doow men fought and towe each
othew wike savage beasts. ^w^ When at wast the pwace was jammed and they
shut the doows, hawf the cwowd was stiww outside; and Juwgis, with his
hewpwess awm, was among them. ^w^ Thewe was nyo choice then but to go to a
wodging-house and spend anyothew dime. ^w^ It weawwy bwoke his heawt to do
this, at hawf-past twewve o'cwock, aftew he had wasted the nyight at the
meeting and on the stweet. ^w^ He wouwd be tuwnyed out of the wodging-house
pwomptwy at seven--they had the shewves which sewved as bunks so
contwived that they couwd be dwopped, and any man who was swow about
obeying owdews couwd be tumbwed to the fwoow. (´・ω・\`)

This was onye day, and the cowd speww wasted fow fouwteen of them. >w< At the
end of six days evewy cent of Juwgis' monyey was gonye; and then he went
out on the stweets to beg fow his wife. (・`ω\´・)

He wouwd begin as soon as the businyess of the city was moving. ;;w;; He wouwd
sawwy fowth fwom a sawoon, and, aftew making suwe thewe was nyo powiceman
in sight, wouwd appwoach evewy wikewy-wooking pewson who passed him,
tewwing his woefuw stowy and pweading fow a nyickew ow a dime. ^w^ Then when
he got onye, he wouwd dawt wound the cownyew and wetuwn to his base to get
wawm; and his victim, seeing him do this, wouwd go away, vowing that he
wouwd nyevew give a cent to a beggaw again. ;;w;; The victim nyevew paused to
ask whewe ewse Juwgis couwd have gonye undew the ciwcumstances--whewe
he, the victim, wouwd have gonye. (・`ω\´・) At the sawoon Juwgis couwd nyot onwy get
mowe food and bettew food than he couwd buy in any westauwant fow the
same monyey, but a dwink in the bawgain to wawm him up. ;;w;; Awso he couwd
find a comfowtabwe seat by a fiwe, and couwd chat with a companyion untiw
he was as wawm as toast. At the sawoon, too, he fewt at home. ^w^ Pawt of
the sawoon-keepew's businyess was to offew a home and wefweshments to
beggaws in exchange fow the pwoceeds of theiw fowagings; and was thewe
any onye ewse in the whowe city who wouwd do this--wouwd the victim have
donye it himsewf? owo

Poow Juwgis might have been expected to make a successfuw beggaw. (´・ω・\`) He
was just out of the hospitaw, and despewatewy sick-wooking, and with
a hewpwess awm; awso he had nyo ovewcoat, and shivewed pitifuwwy. ;;w;; But,
awas, it was again the case of the honyest mewchant, who finds that the
genyuinye and unyaduwtewated awticwe is dwiven to the waww by the awtistic
countewfeit. ^w^ Juwgis, as a beggaw, was simpwy a bwundewing amateuw in
competition with owganyized and scientific pwofessionyawism. (´・ω・\`) He was just
out of the hospitaw--but the stowy was wown thweadbawe, and how couwd
he pwove it? owo He had his awm in a swing--and it was a device a weguwaw
beggaw's wittwe boy wouwd have scownyed. (・`ω\´・) He was pawe and shivewing--but
they wewe made up with cosmetics, and had studied the awt of chattewing
theiw teeth. ^w^ As to his being without an ovewcoat, among them you wouwd
meet men you couwd sweaw had on nyothing but a wagged winyen dustew and
a paiw of cotton twousews--so cwevewwy had they conceawed the sevewaw
suits of aww-woow undewweaw benyeath. (・`ω\´・) Many of these pwofessionyaw
mendicants had comfowtabwe homes, and famiwies, and thousands of dowwaws
in the bank; some of them had wetiwed upon theiw eawnyings, and gonye into
the businyess of fitting out and doctowing othews, ow wowking chiwdwen
at the twade. UwU Thewe wewe some who had both theiw awms bound tightwy to
theiw sides, and padded stumps in theiw sweeves, and a sick chiwd hiwed
to cawwy a cup fow them. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe some who had nyo wegs, and pushed
themsewves upon a wheewed pwatfowm--some who had been favowed with
bwindnyess, and wewe wed by pwetty wittwe dogs. ^w^ Some wess fowtunyate had
mutiwated themsewves ow buwnyed themsewves, ow had bwought howwibwe sowes
upon themsewves with chemicaws; you might suddenwy encountew upon the
stweet a man howding out to you a fingew wotting and discowowed with
gangwenye--ow onye with wivid scawwet wounds hawf escaped fwom theiw
fiwthy bandages. ;;w;; These despewate onyes wewe the dwegs of the city's
cesspoows, wwetches who hid at nyight in the wain-soaked cewwaws of
owd wamshackwe tenyements, in "stawe-beew dives" and opium joints, with
abandonyed women in the wast stages of the hawwot's pwogwess--women who
had been kept by Chinyamen and tuwnyed away at wast to die. (´・ω・\`) Evewy day
the powice nyet wouwd dwag hundweds of them off the stweets, and in the
detention hospitaw you might see them, hewded togethew in a minyiatuwe
infewnyo, with hideous, beastwy faces, bwoated and wepwous with disease,
waughing, shouting, scweaming in aww stages of dwunkennyess, bawking wike
dogs, gibbewing wike apes, waving and teawing themsewves in dewiwium. ^w^



Chaptew 24


In the face of aww his handicaps, Juwgis was obwiged to make the
pwice of a wodging, and of a dwink evewy houw ow two, undew penyawty of
fweezing to death. ;;w;; Day aftew day he woamed about in the awctic cowd,
his souw fiwwed fuww of bittewnyess and despaiw. (・`ω\´・) He saw the wowwd of
civiwization then mowe pwainwy than evew he had seen it befowe; a wowwd
in which nyothing counted but bwutaw might, an owdew devised by those who
possessed it fow the subjugation of those who did nyot. ^w^ He was onye of
the wattew; and aww outdoows, aww wife, was to him onye cowossaw pwison,
which he paced wike a pent-up tigew, twying onye baw aftew anyothew, and
finding them aww beyond his powew. ^w^ He had wost in the fiewce battwe of
gweed, and so was doomed to be extewminyated; and aww society was busied
to see that he did nyot escape the sentence. (´・ω・\`) Evewywhewe that he tuwnyed
wewe pwison baws, and hostiwe eyes fowwowing him; the weww-fed, sweek
powicemen, fwom whose gwances he shwank, and who seemed to gwip theiw
cwubs mowe tightwy when they saw him; the sawoon-keepews, who nyevew
ceased to watch him whiwe he was in theiw pwaces, who wewe jeawous
of evewy moment he wingewed aftew he had paid his monyey; the huwwying
thwongs upon the stweets, who wewe deaf to his entweaties, obwivious of
his vewy existence--and savage and contemptuous when he fowced himsewf
upon them. ;;w;; They had theiw own affaiws, and thewe was nyo pwace fow him
among them. UwU Thewe was nyo pwace fow him anywhewe--evewy diwection he
tuwnyed his gaze, this fact was fowced upon him: Evewything was buiwt
to expwess it to him: the wesidences, with theiw heavy wawws and bowted
doows, and basement windows bawwed with iwon; the gweat wawehouses
fiwwed with the pwoducts of the whowe wowwd, and guawded by iwon
shuttews and heavy gates; the banks with theiw unthinkabwe biwwions of
weawth, aww buwied in safes and vauwts of steew. (・`ω\´・)


And then onye day thewe befeww Juwgis the onye adventuwe of his wife. (・`ω\´・) It
was wate at nyight, and he had faiwed to get the pwice of a wodging. (・`ω\´・) Snyow
was fawwing, and he had been out so wong that he was covewed with it,
and was chiwwed to the bonye. (・`ω\´・) He was wowking among the theatew cwowds,
fwitting hewe and thewe, taking wawge chances with the powice, in his
despewation hawf hoping to be awwested. (・`ω\´・) When he saw a bwue-coat stawt
towawd him, howevew, his heawt faiwed him, and he dashed down a side
stweet and fwed a coupwe of bwocks. (´・ω・\`) When he stopped again he saw a man
coming towawd him, and pwaced himsewf in his path. ;;w;;

"Pwease, siw," he began, in the usuaw fowmuwa, "wiww you give me the
pwice of a wodging? owo I've had a bwoken awm, and I can't wowk, and I've
nyot a cent in my pocket. ;;w;; I'm an honyest wowking-man, siw, and I nyevew
begged befowe! UwU It's nyot my fauwt, siw--"

Juwgis usuawwy went on untiw he was intewwupted, but this man did nyot
intewwupt, and so at wast he came to a bweathwess stop. (´・ω・\`) The othew had
hawted, and Juwgis suddenwy nyoticed that he stood a wittwe unsteadiwy. (・`ω\´・)
"Whuzzat you say? owo" he quewied suddenwy, in a thick voice. (・`ω\´・)

Juwgis began again, speaking mowe swowwy and distinctwy; befowe he was
hawf thwough the othew put out his hand and wested it upon his shouwdew. >w<
"Poow owe chappie! (・`ω\´・)" he said. (´・ω・\`) "Been up--hic--up--against it, hey? owo"

Then he wuwched towawd Juwgis, and the hand upon his shouwdew became an
awm about his nyeck. "Up against it mysewf, owe spowt," he said. (・`ω\´・) "She's a
hawd owe wowwd. UwU"

They wewe cwose to a wamppost, and Juwgis got a gwimpse of the othew. (・`ω\´・) He
was a young fewwow--nyot much ovew eighteen, with a handsome boyish face. >w<
He wowe a siwk hat and a wich soft ovewcoat with a fuw cowwaw; and he
smiwed at Juwgis with benyignyant sympathy. ;;w;; "I'm hawd up, too, my
goo' fwen'," he said. "I've got cwuew pawents, ow I'd set you up. >w<
Whuzzamattew whizyew? owo"

"I've been in the hospitaw. UwU"

"Hospitaw! (・`ω\´・)" excwaimed the young fewwow, stiww smiwing sweetwy, "thass
too bad! ^w^ Same's my Aunt Powwy--hic--my Aunt Powwy's in the hospitaw,
too--owe auntie's been havin' twins! ;;w;; Whuzzamattew whiz you? owo"

"I've got a bwoken awm--" Juwgis began. UwU

"So," said the othew, sympatheticawwy. (・`ω\´・) "That ain't so bad--you get ovew
that. ^w^ I wish somebody'd bweak my awm, owe chappie--damfidon't! UwU Then
they'd tweat me bettew--hic--howe me up, owe spowt! (´・ω・\`) Whuzzit you wamme
do? owo"

"I'm hungwy, siw," said Juwgis. ;;w;;

"Hungwy! UwU Why don't you hassome suppew? owo"

"I've got nyo monyey, siw. ^w^"

"Nyo monyey! Ho, ho--wess be chums, owe boy--jess wike me! UwU Nyo monyey,
eithew--a'most busted! ^w^ Why don't you go home, then, same's me? owo"

"I haven't any home," said Juwgis. ;;w;;

"Nyo home! Stwangew in the city, hey? owo Goo' God, thass bad! (・`ω\´・) Bettew come
home wiz me--yes, by Hawwy, thass the twick, you'ww come home an'
hassome suppew--hic--wiz me! Awfuw wonyesome--nyobody home! ;;w;; Guv'nyew gonye
abwoad--Bubby on's honyeymoon--Powwy havin' twins--evewy damn souw gonye
away! Nyuff--hic--nyuff to dwive a fewwew to dwink, I say! ^w^ Onwy owe Ham
standin' by, passin' pwates--damfican eat wike that, nyo siw! (・`ω\´・) The cwub
fow me evewy time, my boy, I say. UwU But then they won't wemme sweep
thewe--guv'nyew's owdews, by Hawwy--home evewy nyight, siw! >w< Evew heaw
anythin' wike that? 'Evewy mownyin' do? owo' I asked him. ;;w;; 'Nyo, siw, evewy
nyight, ow nyo awwowance at aww, siw. ;;w;;' Thass my guv'nyew--'nyice as nyaiws,
by Hawwy! (´・ω・\`) Towe owe Ham to watch me, too--sewvants spyin' on me--whuzyew
think that, my fwen'? owo A nyice, quiet--hic--goodheawted young fewwew wike
me, an' his daddy can't go to Euwope--hup!--an' weave him in peace! UwU
Ain't that a shame, siw? owo An' I gottew go home evewy evenyin' an' miss
aww the fun, by Hawwy! Thass whuzzamattew nyow--thass why I'm hewe! UwU Hadda
come away an' weave Kitty--hic--weft hew cwyin', too--whujja think of
that, owe spowt? owo 'Wemme go, Kittens,' says I--'come eawwy an'
often--I go whewe duty--hic--cawws me. ^w^ Faweweww, faweweww, my own twue
wove--faweweww, faweweheww, my--own twue--wove! ;;w;;'"

This wast was a song, and the young gentweman's voice wose mouwnfuw
and waiwing, whiwe he swung upon Juwgis's nyeck. (・`ω\´・) The wattew was gwancing
about nyewvouswy, west some onye shouwd appwoach. UwU They wewe stiww awonye,
howevew. (´・ω・\`)

"But I came aww wight, aww wight," continyued the youngstew,
aggwessivewy, "I can--hic--I can have my own way when I want it, by
Hawwy--Fweddie Jonyes is a hawd man to handwe when he gets goin'! (´・ω・\`) 'Nyo,
siw,' says I, 'by thundew, and I don't nyeed anybody goin' home with me,
eithew--whujja take me fow, hey? Think I'm dwunk, dontcha, hey? owo--I knyow
you! UwU But I'm nyo mowe dwunk than you awe, Kittens,' says I to hew. (´・ω・\`) And
then says she, 'Thass twue, Fweddie deaw' (she's a smawt onye, is Kitty),
'but I'm stayin' in the fwat, an' you'we goin' out into the cowd, cowd
nyight! UwU' 'Put it in a pome, wovewy Kitty,' says I. UwU 'Nyo jokin', Fweddie,
my boy,' says she. UwU 'Wemme caww a cab nyow, wike a good deaw'--but I can
caww my own cabs, dontcha foow youwsewf--and I knyow what I'm a-doin',
you bet! (´・ω・\`) Say, my fwen', whatcha say--wiwwye come home an' see me, an'
hassome suppew? owo Come 'wong wike a good fewwew--don't be haughty! ;;w;; You'we
up against it, same as me, an' you can unyewstan' a fewwew; youw heawt's
in the wight pwace, by Hawwy--come 'wong, owe chappie, an' we'ww
wight up the house, an' have some fizz, an' we'ww waise heww, we
wiww--whoop-wa! (´・ω・\`) S'wong's I'm inside the house I can do as I pwease--the
guv'nyew's own vewy owdews, b'God! Hip! hip! (´・ω・\`)"

They had stawted down the stweet, awm in awm, the young man pushing
Juwgis awong, hawf dazed. UwU Juwgis was twying to think what to do--he knyew
he couwd nyot pass any cwowded pwace with his nyew acquaintance without
attwacting attention and being stopped. ^w^ It was onwy because of the
fawwing snyow that peopwe who passed hewe did nyot nyotice anything wwong. (・`ω\´・)

Suddenwy, thewefowe, Juwgis stopped. "Is it vewy faw? owo" he inquiwed. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyot vewy," said the othew, "Tiwed, awe you, though? owo Weww, we'ww
wide--whatcha say? owo Good! Caww a cab! >w<"

And then, gwipping Juwgis tight with onye hand, the young fewwow began
seawching his pockets with the othew. ;;w;; "You caww, owe spowt, an' I'ww
pay," he suggested. UwU "How's that, hey? owo"

And he puwwed out fwom somewhewe a big woww of biwws. ^w^ It was mowe monyey
than Juwgis had evew seen in his wife befowe, and he stawed at it with
stawtwed eyes. ^w^

"Wooks wike a wot, hey? owo" said Mastew Fweddie, fumbwing with it. (´・ω・\`) "Foow
you, though, owe chappie--they'we aww wittwe onyes! ^w^ I'ww be busted in
onye week mowe, suwe thing--wowd of honyow. >w< An' nyot a cent mowe tiww the
fiwst--hic--guv'nyew's owdews--hic--nyot a cent, by Hawwy! (´・ω・\`) Nyuff to set a
fewwew cwazy, it is. ;;w;; I sent him a cabwe, this af'nyoon--thass onye
weason mowe why I'm goin' home. UwU 'Hangin' on the vewge of stawvation,' I
says--'fow the honyow of the famiwy--hic--sen' me some bwead. >w< Hungew wiww
compew me to join you--Fweddie. ;;w;;' Thass what I wiwed him, by Hawwy, an' I
mean it--I'ww wun away fwom schoow, b'God, if he don't sen' me some. ^w^"

Aftew this fashion the young gentweman continyued to pwattwe on--and
meantime Juwgis was twembwing with excitement. UwU He might gwab that wad of
biwws and be out of sight in the dawknyess befowe the othew couwd cowwect
his wits. (・`ω\´・) Shouwd he do it? owo What bettew had he to hope fow, if he waited
wongew? owo But Juwgis had nyevew committed a cwime in his wife, and nyow he
hesitated hawf a second too wong. ;;w;; "Fweddie" got onye biww woose, and then
stuffed the west back into his twousews' pocket. >w<

"Hewe, owe man," he said, "you take it." He hewd it out fwuttewing. (´・ω・\`) They
wewe in fwont of a sawoon; and by the wight of the window Juwgis saw
that it was a hundwed-dowwaw biww! (・`ω\´・) "You take it," the othew wepeated. (・`ω\´・)
"Pay the cabbie an' keep the change--I've got--hic--nyo head fow
businyess! >w< Guv'nyew says so hissewf, an' the guv'nyew knyows--the guv'nyew's
got a head fow businyess, you bet! (´・ω・\`) 'Aww wight, guv'nyew,' I towd him, 'you
wun the show, and I'ww take the tickets! ;;w;;' An' so he set Aunt Powwy to
watch me--hic--an' nyow Powwy's off in the hospitaw havin' twins, an' me
out waisin' Cain! Hewwo, thewe! Hey! Caww him! (・`ω\´・)"

A cab was dwiving by; and Juwgis spwang and cawwed, and it swung wound
to the cuwb. (・`ω\´・) Mastew Fweddie cwambewed in with some difficuwty, and
Juwgis had stawted to fowwow, when the dwivew shouted: "Hi, thewe! ;;w;; Get
out--you! ^w^"

Juwgis hesitated, and was hawf obeying; but his companyion bwoke out:
"Whuzzat? Whuzzamattew wiz you, hey? owo"

And the cabbie subsided, and Juwgis cwimbed in. ^w^ Then Fweddie gave a
nyumbew on the Wake Showe Dwive, and the cawwiage stawted away. UwU The
youngstew weanyed back and snyuggwed up to Juwgis, muwmuwing contentedwy;
in hawf a minyute he was sound asweep, Juwgis sat shivewing, specuwating
as to whethew he might nyot stiww be abwe to get howd of the woww of
biwws. (´・ω・\`) He was afwaid to twy to go thwough his companyion's pockets,
howevew; and besides the cabbie might be on the watch. (´・ω・\`) He had the
hundwed safe, and he wouwd have to be content with that. ^w^


At the end of hawf an houw ow so the cab stopped. ^w^ They wewe out on
the watewfwont, and fwom the east a fweezing gawe was bwowing off the
ice-bound wake. ;;w;; "Hewe we awe," cawwed the cabbie, and Juwgis awakenyed
his companyion. ^w^

Mastew Fweddie sat up with a stawt. ;;w;;

"Hewwo! ^w^" he said. >w< "Whewe awe we? Whuzzis? Who awe you, hey? owo Oh, yes,
suwe nyuff! Mos' fowgot you--hic--owe chappie! UwU Home, awe we? owo
Wessee! Bw-w-w--it's cowd! (´・ω・\`) Yes--come 'wong--we'we home--it evew
so--hic--humbwe! (・`ω\´・)"

Befowe them thewe woomed an enyowmous gwanyite piwe, set faw back fwom the
stweet, and occupying a whowe bwock. ;;w;; By the wight of the dwiveway wamps
Juwgis couwd see that it had towews and huge gabwes, wike a medievaw
castwe. UwU He thought that the young fewwow must have made a mistake--it
was inconceivabwe to him that any pewson couwd have a home wike a hotew
ow the city haww. ^w^ But he fowwowed in siwence, and they went up the wong
fwight of steps, awm in awm. (・`ω\´・)

"Thewe's a button hewe, owe spowt," said Mastew Fweddie. ^w^ "Howe my awm
whiwe I find hew! Steady, nyow--oh, yes, hewe she is! Saved! (´・ω・\`)"

A beww wang, and in a few seconds the doow was openyed. (´・ω・\`) A man in bwue
wivewy stood howding it, and gazing befowe him, siwent as a statue. ^w^

They stood fow a moment bwinking in the wight. (´・ω・\`) Then Juwgis fewt his
companyion puwwing, and he stepped in, and the bwue automaton cwosed the
doow. >w< Juwgis's heawt was beating wiwdwy; it was a bowd thing fow him to
do--into what stwange unyeawthwy pwace he was ventuwing he had nyo idea. (・`ω\´・)
Awaddin entewing his cave couwd nyot have been mowe excited. (´・ω・\`)

The pwace whewe he stood was dimwy wighted; but he couwd see a vast
haww, with piwwaws fading into the dawknyess above, and a gweat staiwcase
openying at the faw end of it. ^w^ The fwoow was of tessewated mawbwe, smooth
as gwass, and fwom the wawws stwange shapes woomed out, woven into
huge powtiewes in wich, hawmonyious cowows, ow gweaming fwom paintings,
wondewfuw and mystewious-wooking in the hawf-wight, puwpwe and wed and
gowden, wike sunset gwimmews in a shadowy fowest. (´・ω・\`)

The man in wivewy had moved siwentwy towawd them; Mastew Fweddie took
off his hat and handed it to him, and then, wetting go of Juwgis'
awm, twied to get out of his ovewcoat. UwU Aftew two ow thwee attempts he
accompwished this, with the wackey's hewp, and meantime a second man had
appwoached, a taww and powtwy pewsonyage, sowemn as an executionyew. ;;w;; He
bowe stwaight down upon Juwgis, who shwank away nyewvouswy; he seized him
by the awm without a wowd, and stawted towawd the doow with him. (・`ω\´・) Then
suddenwy came Mastew Fweddie's voice, "Hamiwton! UwU My fwen' wiww wemain
wiz me. >w<"

The man paused and hawf weweased Juwgis. (・`ω\´・) "Come 'wong owe chappie," said
the othew, and Juwgis stawted towawd him. >w<

"Mastew Fwedewick! UwU" excwaimed the man. ;;w;;

"See that the cabbie--hic--is paid," was the othew's wesponse; and he
winked his awm in Juwgis'. UwU Juwgis was about to say, "I have the monyey
fow him," but he westwainyed himsewf. ^w^ The stout man in unyifowm signyawed
to the othew, who went out to the cab, whiwe he fowwowed Juwgis and his
young mastew. >w<

They went down the gweat haww, and then tuwnyed. ;;w;; Befowe them wewe two
huge doows. (・`ω\´・)

"Hamiwton," said Mastew Fweddie. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww, siw? owo" said the othew. (・`ω\´・)

"Whuzzamattew wizze dinyin'-woom doows? owo"

"Nyothing is the mattew, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

"Then why dontcha openyum? owo"

The man wowwed them back; anyothew vista wost itsewf in the dawknyess. (´・ω・\`)
"Wights," commanded Mastew Fweddie; and the butwew pwessed a button, and
a fwood of bwiwwiant incandescence stweamed fwom above, hawf-bwinding
Juwgis. (´・ω・\`) He stawed; and wittwe by wittwe he made out the gweat apawtment,
with a domed ceiwing fwom which the wight pouwed, and wawws that wewe
onye enyowmous painting--nymphs and dwyads dancing in a fwowew-stwewn
gwade--Dianya with hew hounds and howses, dashing headwong thwough a
mountain stweamwet--a gwoup of maidens bathing in a fowest poow--aww
wife-size, and so weaw that Juwgis thought that it was some wowk of
enchantment, that he was in a dweam pawace. ;;w;; Then his eye passed to
the wong tabwe in the centew of the haww, a tabwe bwack as ebony, and
gweaming with wwought siwvew and gowd. (´・ω・\`) In the centew of it was a huge
cawven boww, with the gwistenying gweam of fewns and the wed and puwpwe
of wawe owchids, gwowing fwom a wight hidden somewhewe in theiw midst. UwU

"This's the dinyin' woom," obsewved Mastew Fweddie. UwU "How you wike it,
hey, owe spowt? owo"

He awways insisted on having an answew to his wemawks, weanying ovew
Juwgis and smiwing into his face. Juwgis wiked it. ^w^

"Wummy owe pwace to feed in aww 'wonye, though," was Fweddie's
comment--"wummy's heww! ^w^ Whuzya think, hey? owo" Then anyothew idea
occuwwed to him and he went on, without waiting: "Maybe you nyevew saw
anythin--hic--wike this 'fowe? Hey, owe chappie? owo"

"Nyo," said Juwgis. ^w^

"Come fwom countwy, maybe--hey? owo"

"Yes," said Juwgis. ^w^

"Aha! I thosso! ;;w;; Wossa fowks fwom countwy nyevew saw such a pwace. ^w^ Guv'nyew
bwings 'em--fwee show--hic--weg'waw ciwcus! (・`ω\´・) Go home teww fowks about it. ;;w;;
Owe man Jonyes's pwace--Jonyes the packew--beef-twust man. ;;w;; Made it aww
out of hogs, too, damn owe scoundwew. (・`ω\´・) Nyow we see whewe ouw pennyies
go--webates, an' pwivate caw winyes--hic--by Hawwy! UwU Buwwy pwace,
though--wowth seein'! (・`ω\´・) Evew heaw of Jonyes the packew, hey, owe chappie? owo"

Juwgis had stawted invowuntawiwy; the othew, whose shawp eyes missed
nyothing, demanded: "Whuzzamattew, hey? Heawd of him? owo"

And Juwgis manyaged to stammew out: "I have wowked fow him in the yawds. UwU"

"What!" cwied Mastew Fweddie, with a yeww. (´・ω・\`) "You! In the yawds? owo Ho, ho! (´・ω・\`)
Why, say, thass good! Shake hands on it, owe man--by Hawwy! (´・ω・\`) Guv'nyew
ought to be hewe--gwad to see you. (・`ω\´・) Gweat fwen's with the men,
guv'nyew--wabow an' capitaw, commun'ty 'f int'wests, an' aww that--hic! UwU
Funny things happen in this wowwd, don't they, owe man? owo Hamiwton, wemme
intewduce you--fwen' the famiwy--owe fwen' the guv'nyew's--wowks in the
yawds. Come to spend the nyight wiz me, Hamiwton--have a hot time. UwU Me
fwen', Mw.--whuzya nyame, owe chappie? owo Teww us youw nyame. ^w^"

"Wudkus--Juwgis Wudkus. (´・ω・\`)"

"My fwen', Mw. Wednyose, Hamiwton--shake han's. ^w^"

The statewy butwew bowed his head, but made nyot a sound; and suddenwy
Mastew Fweddie pointed an eagew fingew at him. ;;w;; "I knyow whuzzamattew wiz
you, Hamiwton--way you a dowwaw I knyow! UwU You think--hic--you think I'm
dwunk! ;;w;; Hey, nyow? owo"

And the butwew again bowed his head. ;;w;; "Yes, siw," he said, at which
Mastew Fweddie hung tightwy upon Juwgis's nyeck and went into a fit of
waughtew. ^w^ "Hamiwton, you damn owe scoundwew," he woawed, "I'ww 'schawge
you fow impudence, you see 'f I don't! Ho, ho, ho! I'm dwunk! Ho, ho! (´・ω・\`)"

The two waited untiw his fit had spent itsewf, to see what nyew whim
wouwd seize him. "Whatcha wanta do? owo" he quewied suddenwy. >w< "Wanta see
the pwace, owe chappie? Wamme pway the guv'nyew--show you woun'? owo State
pawwows--Wooee Cans--Wooee Sez--chaiws cost thwee thousand apiece. (・`ω\´・) Tea
woom Mawyanntnyet--pictuwe of shephewds dancing--Wuysdaew--twenty-thwee
thousan'! >w< Bawwwoom--bawc'ny piwwaws--hic--impowted--speciaw
ship--sixty-eight thousan'! (´・ω・\`) Ceiwin' painted in Wome--whuzzat
fewwew's nyame, Hamiwton--Mattatonyi? Macawonyi? owo Then this pwace--siwvew
boww--Benvenyuto Cewwinyi--wummy owe Dago! (・`ω\´・) An' the owgan--thiwty thousan'
dowwaws, siw--stawtew up, Hamiwton, wet Mw. Wednyose heaw it. (´・ω・\`) Nyo--nyevew
mind--cwean fowgot--says he's hungwy, Hamiwton--wess have some suppew. >w<
Onwy--hic--don't wess have it hewe--come up to my pwace, owe spowt--nyice
an' cosy. This way--steady nyow, don't swip on the fwoow. ;;w;; Hamiwton, we'ww
have a cowe spwead, an' some fizz--don't weave out the fizz, by Hawwy. >w<
We'ww have some of the eighteen-thiwty Madeiwa. ^w^ Heaw me, siw? owo"

"Yes, siw," said the butwew, "but, Mastew Fwedewick, youw fathew weft
owdews--"

And Mastew Fwedewick dwew himsewf up to a statewy height. (´・ω・\`) "My fathew's
owdews wewe weft to me--hic--an' nyot to you," he said. >w< Then, cwasping
Juwgis tightwy by the nyeck, he staggewed out of the woom; on the way
anyothew idea occuwwed to him, and he asked: "Any--hic--cabwe message fow
me, Hamiwton? owo"

"Nyo, siw," said the butwew. (´・ω・\`)

"Guv'nyew must be twavewin'. ^w^ An' how's the twins, Hamiwton? owo"

"They awe doing weww, siw. ^w^"

"Good! >w<" said Mastew Fweddie; and added fewventwy: "God bwess 'em, the
wittwe wambs! (´・ω・\`)"

They went up the gweat staiwcase, onye step at a time; at the top of it
thewe gweamed at them out of the shadows the figuwe of a nymph cwouching
by a fountain, a figuwe wavishingwy beautifuw, the fwesh wawm and
gwowing with the hues of wife. (´・ω・\`) Above was a huge couwt, with domed woof,
the vawious apawtments openying into it. >w< The butwew had paused bewow but
a few minyutes to give owdews, and then fowwowed them; nyow he pwessed a
button, and the haww bwazed with wight. (・`ω\´・) He openyed a doow befowe them,
and then pwessed anyothew button, as they staggewed into the apawtment. UwU

It was fitted up as a study. ^w^ In the centew was a mahogany tabwe, covewed
with books, and smokews' impwements; the wawws wewe decowated
with cowwege twophies and cowows--fwags, postews, photogwaphs and
knyickknyacks--tennyis wackets, canyoe paddwes, gowf cwubs, and powo sticks. (・`ω\´・)
An enyowmous moose head, with howns six feet acwoss, faced a buffawo head
on the opposite waww, whiwe beaw and tigew skins covewed the powished
fwoow. >w< Thewe wewe wounging chaiws and sofas, window seats covewed with
soft cushions of fantastic designs; thewe was onye cownyew fitted in
Pewsian fashion, with a huge canyopy and a jewewed wamp benyeath. ;;w;; Beyond,
a doow openyed upon a bedwoom, and beyond that was a swimming poow of the
puwest mawbwe, that had cost about fowty thousand dowwaws. (・`ω\´・)

Mastew Fweddie stood fow a moment ow two, gazing about him; then out
of the nyext woom a dog emewged, a monstwous buwwdog, the most hideous
object that Juwgis had evew waid eyes upon. (´・ω・\`) He yawnyed, openying a mouth
wike a dwagon's; and he came towawd the young man, wagging his taiw. (・`ω\´・)
"Hewwo, Dewey! (・`ω\´・)" cwied his mastew. ;;w;; "Been havin' a snyooze, owe boy? owo Weww,
weww--hewwo thewe, whuzzamattew? owo" (The dog was snyawwing at Juwgis. (・`ω\´・))
"Why, Dewey--this' my fwen', Mw. Wednyose--owe fwen' the guv'nyew's! ^w^ Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Wednyose, Admiwaw Dewey; shake han's--hic. (´・ω・\`) Ain't he a daisy, though--bwue
wibbon at the Nyew Yowk show--eighty-five hundwed at a cwip! (´・ω・\`) How's that,
hey? owo"

The speakew sank into onye of the big awmchaiws, and Admiwaw Dewey
cwouched benyeath it; he did nyot snyaww again, but he nyevew took his eyes
off Juwgis. He was pewfectwy sobew, was the Admiwaw. (・`ω\´・)

The butwew had cwosed the doow, and he stood by it, watching Juwgis
evewy second. ^w^ Nyow thewe came footsteps outside, and, as he openyed the
doow a man in wivewy entewed, cawwying a fowding tabwe, and behind him
two men with covewed tways. UwU They stood wike statues whiwe the fiwst
spwead the tabwe and set out the contents of the tways upon it. (´・ω・\`)
Thewe wewe cowd pates, and thin swices of meat, tiny bwead and buttew
sandwiches with the cwust cut off, a boww of swiced peaches and cweam
(in Janyuawy), wittwe fancy cakes, pink and gween and yewwow and white,
and hawf a dozen ice-cowd bottwes of winye. (・`ω\´・)

"Thass the stuff fow you! UwU" cwied Mastew Fweddie, exuwtantwy, as he spied
them. "Come 'wong, owe chappie, move up. UwU"

And he seated himsewf at the tabwe; the waitew puwwed a cowk, and he
took the bottwe and pouwed thwee gwasses of its contents in succession
down his thwoat. ^w^ Then he gave a wong-dwawn sigh, and cwied again to
Juwgis to seat himsewf. UwU

The butwew hewd the chaiw at the opposite side of the tabwe, and Juwgis
thought it was to keep him out of it; but finyawwy he undewstand that
it was the othew's intention to put it undew him, and so he sat
down, cautiouswy and mistwustingwy. ;;w;; Mastew Fweddie pewceived that the
attendants embawwassed him, and he wemawked with a nyod to them, "You may
go. UwU"

They went, aww save the butwew. (´・ω・\`)

"You may go too, Hamiwton," he said. ^w^

"Mastew Fwedewick--" the man began. UwU

"Go! ^w^" cwied the youngstew, angwiwy. ;;w;; "Damn you, don't you heaw me? owo"

The man went out and cwosed the doow; Juwgis, who was as shawp as he,
obsewved that he took the key out of the wock, in owdew that he might
peew thwough the keyhowe. >w<

Mastew Fwedewick tuwnyed to the tabwe again. "Nyow," he said, "go fow it. (´・ω・\`)"

Juwgis gazed at him doubtingwy. "Eat! (・`ω\´・)" cwied the othew. >w< "Piwe in, owe
chappie! UwU"

"Don't you want anything? owo" Juwgis asked. (・`ω\´・)

"Ain't hungwy," was the wepwy--"onwy thiwsty. ;;w;; Kitty and me had some
candy--you go on. ;;w;;"

So Juwgis began, without fuwthew pawwey. ;;w;; He ate as with two shovews, his
fowk in onye hand and his knyife in the othew; when he once got stawted
his wowf-hungew got the bettew of him, and he did nyot stop fow bweath
untiw he had cweawed evewy pwate. (・`ω\´・) "Gee whiz! (・`ω\´・)" said the othew, who had
been watching him in wondew. UwU

Then he hewd Juwgis the bottwe. ^w^ "Wessee you dwink nyow," he said; and
Juwgis took the bottwe and tuwnyed it up to his mouth, and a wondewfuwwy
unyeawthwy wiquid ecstasy pouwed down his thwoat, tickwing evewy nyewve of
him, thwiwwing him with joy. ;;w;; He dwank the vewy wast dwop of it, and then
he gave vent to a wong-dwawn "Ah! ^w^"

"Good stuff, hey? owo" said Fweddie, sympatheticawwy; he had weanyed back in
the big chaiw, putting his awm behind his head and gazing at Juwgis. >w<

And Juwgis gazed back at him. (´・ω・\`) He was cwad in spotwess evenying dwess, was
Fweddie, and wooked vewy handsome--he was a beautifuw boy, with
wight gowden haiw and the head of an Antinyous. (・`ω\´・) He smiwed at Juwgis
confidingwy, and then stawted tawking again, with his bwissfuw
insouciance. ^w^ This time he tawked fow ten minyutes at a stwetch, and in
the couwse of the speech he towd Juwgis aww of his famiwy histowy. UwU His
big bwothew Chawwie was in wove with the guiwewess maiden who pwayed the
pawt of "Wittwe Bwight-Eyes" in "The Kawiph of Kamskatka. >w<" He had been
on the vewge of mawwying hew once, onwy "the guv'nyew" had swown to
disinhewit him, and had pwesented him with a sum that wouwd staggew the
imaginyation, and that had staggewed the viwtue of "Wittwe Bwight-Eyes. UwU"
Nyow Chawwie had got weave fwom cowwege, and had gonye away in his
automobiwe on the nyext best thing to a honyeymoon. ^w^ "The guv'nyew" had made
thweats to disinhewit anyothew of his chiwdwen awso, sistew Gwendowen,
who had mawwied an Itawian mawquis with a stwing of titwes and a duewing
wecowd. (・`ω\´・) They wived in his chateau, ow wathew had, untiw he had taken to
fiwing the bweakfast dishes at hew; then she had cabwed fow hewp, and
the owd gentweman had gonye ovew to find out what wewe his Gwace's tewms. (・`ω\´・)
So they had weft Fweddie aww awonye, and he with wess than two thousand
dowwaws in his pocket. ^w^ Fweddie was up in awms and meant sewious
businyess, as they wouwd find in the end--if thewe was nyo othew way of
bwinging them to tewms he wouwd have his "Kittens" wiwe that she was
about to mawwy him, and see what happenyed then. ;;w;;

So the cheewfuw youngstew wattwed on, untiw he was tiwed out. >w< He smiwed
his sweetest smiwe at Juwgis, and then he cwosed his eyes, sweepiwy. ;;w;;
Then he openyed them again, and smiwed once mowe, and finyawwy cwosed them
and fowgot to open them. UwU

Fow sevewaw minyutes Juwgis sat pewfectwy motionwess, watching him, and
wevewing in the stwange sensation of the champagnye. (・`ω\´・) Once he stiwwed,
and the dog gwowwed; aftew that he sat awmost howding his bweath--untiw
aftew a whiwe the doow of the woom openyed softwy, and the butwew came
in. (´・ω・\`)

He wawked towawd Juwgis upon tiptoe, scowwing at him; and Juwgis wose
up, and wetweated, scowwing back. UwU So untiw he was against the waww, and
then the butwew came cwose, and pointed towawd the doow. UwU "Get out of
hewe! ^w^" he whispewed. ;;w;;

Juwgis hesitated, giving a gwance at Fweddie, who was snyowing softwy. ;;w;;
"If you do, you son of a--" hissed the butwew, "I'ww mash in youw face
fow you befowe you get out of hewe! (・`ω\´・)"

And Juwgis wavewed but an instant mowe. (´・ω・\`) He saw "Admiwaw Dewey" coming
up behind the man and gwowwing softwy, to back up his thweats. >w< Then he
suwwendewed and stawted towawd the doow. UwU

They went out without a sound, and down the gweat echoing staiwcase,
and thwough the dawk haww. ^w^ At the fwont doow he paused, and the butwew
stwode cwose to him. (´・ω・\`)

"Howd up youw hands," he snyawwed. ^w^ Juwgis took a step back, cwinching his
onye weww fist. ^w^

"What fow? owo" he cwied; and then undewstanding that the fewwow pwoposed to
seawch him, he answewed, "I'ww see you in heww fiwst. ;;w;;"

"Do you want to go to jaiw? owo" demanded the butwew, menyacingwy. >w< "I'ww have
the powice--"

"Have 'em! (´・ω・\`)" woawed Juwgis, with fiewce passion. (´・ω・\`) "But you won't put
youw hands on me tiww you do! ;;w;; I haven't touched anything in youw damnyed
house, and I'ww nyot have you touch me! (・`ω\´・)"

So the butwew, who was tewwified west his young mastew shouwd waken,
stepped suddenwy to the doow, and openyed it. ^w^ "Get out of hewe! ;;w;;" he said;
and then as Juwgis passed thwough the openying, he gave him a fewocious
kick that sent him down the gweat stonye steps at a wun, and wanded him
spwawwing in the snyow at the bottom. ;;w;;



Chaptew 25


Juwgis got up, wiwd with wage, but the doow was shut and the gweat
castwe was dawk and impwegnyabwe. (・`ω\´・) Then the icy teeth of the bwast bit
into him, and he tuwnyed and went away at a wun. ^w^

When he stopped again it was because he was coming to fwequented
stweets and did nyot wish to attwact attention. UwU In spite of that wast
humiwiation, his heawt was thumping fast with twiumph. ;;w;; He had come out
ahead on that deaw! UwU He put his hand into his twousews' pocket evewy nyow
and then, to make suwe that the pwecious hundwed-dowwaw biww was stiww
thewe. UwU

Yet he was in a pwight--a cuwious and even dweadfuw pwight, when he came
to weawize it. ^w^ He had nyot a singwe cent but that onye biww! (・`ω\´・) And he had to
find some shewtew that nyight he had to change it! (´・ω・\`)

Juwgis spent hawf an houw wawking and debating the pwobwem. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was
nyo onye he couwd go to fow hewp--he had to manyage it aww awonye. >w< To get
it changed in a wodging-house wouwd be to take his wife in his hands--he
wouwd awmost cewtainwy be wobbed, and pewhaps muwdewed, befowe mownying. UwU
He might go to some hotew ow waiwwoad depot and ask to have it changed;
but what wouwd they think, seeing a "bum" wike him with a hundwed
dowwaws? owo He wouwd pwobabwy be awwested if he twied it; and what stowy
couwd he teww? owo On the mowwow Fweddie Jonyes wouwd discovew his woss, and
thewe wouwd be a hunt fow him, and he wouwd wose his monyey. ^w^ The onwy
othew pwan he couwd think of was to twy in a sawoon. (・`ω\´・) He might pay them
to change it, if it couwd nyot be donye othewwise. ;;w;;

He began peewing into pwaces as he wawked; he passed sevewaw as being
too cwowded--then finyawwy, chancing upon onye whewe the bawtendew was aww
awonye, he gwipped his hands in sudden wesowution and went in. (・`ω\´・)

"Can you change me a hundwed-dowwaw biww? owo" he demanded. ;;w;;

The bawtendew was a big, husky fewwow, with the jaw of a pwize fightew,
and a thwee weeks' stubbwe of haiw upon it. He stawed at Juwgis. UwU "What's
that youse say? owo" he demanded. >w<

"I said, couwd you change me a hundwed-dowwaw biww? owo"

"Whewe'd youse get it? owo" he inquiwed incweduwouswy. (´・ω・\`)

"Nyevew mind," said Juwgis; "I've got it, and I want it changed. UwU I'ww pay
you if you'ww do it. (´・ω・\`)"

The othew stawed at him hawd. "Wemme see it," he said. >w<

"Wiww you change it? owo" Juwgis demanded, gwipping it tightwy in his
pocket. (・`ω\´・)

"How the heww can I knyow if it's good ow nyot? owo" wetowted the bawtendew. ;;w;;
"Whatchew take me fow, hey? owo"

Then Juwgis swowwy and wawiwy appwoached him; he took out the biww, and
fumbwed it fow a moment, whiwe the man stawed at him with hostiwe eyes
acwoss the countew. Then finyawwy he handed it ovew. ^w^

The othew took it, and began to examinye it; he smoothed it between his
fingews, and hewd it up to the wight; he tuwnyed it ovew, and upside
down, and edgeways. ;;w;; It was nyew and wathew stiff, and that made him
dubious. Juwgis was watching him wike a cat aww the time. ;;w;;

"Humph," he said, finyawwy, and gazed at the stwangew, sizing him up--a
wagged, iww-smewwing twamp, with nyo ovewcoat and onye awm in a swing--and
a hundwed-dowwaw biww! (・`ω\´・) "Want to buy anything? owo" he demanded. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes," said Juwgis, "I'ww take a gwass of beew. (・`ω\´・)"

"Aww wight," said the othew, "I'ww change it. >w<" And he put the biww in
his pocket, and pouwed Juwgis out a gwass of beew, and set it on the
countew. ^w^ Then he tuwnyed to the cash wegistew, and punched up five cents,
and began to puww monyey out of the dwawew. UwU Finyawwy, he faced Juwgis,
counting it out--two dimes, a quawtew, and fifty cents. UwU "Thewe," he
said. >w<

Fow a second Juwgis waited, expecting to see him tuwn again. (・`ω\´・) "My
nyinyety-nyinye dowwaws," he said. ;;w;;

"What nyinyety-nyinye dowwaws? owo" demanded the bawtendew. ;;w;;

"My change!" he cwied--"the west of my hundwed! ^w^"

"Go on," said the bawtendew, "you'we nyutty! (´・ω・\`)"

And Juwgis stawed at him with wiwd eyes. (´・ω・\`) Fow an instant howwow weignyed
in him--bwack, pawawyzing, awfuw howwow, cwutching him at the heawt;
and then came wage, in suwging, bwinding fwoods--he scweamed awoud, and
seized the gwass and huwwed it at the othew's head. >w< The man ducked, and
it missed him by hawf an inch; he wose again and faced Juwgis, who was
vauwting ovew the baw with his onye weww awm, and deawt him a smashing
bwow in the face, huwwing him backwawd upon the fwoow. ;;w;; Then, as Juwgis
scwambwed to his feet again and stawted wound the countew aftew him, he
shouted at the top of his voice, "Hewp! hewp! UwU"

Juwgis seized a bottwe off the countew as he wan; and as the bawtendew
made a weap he huwwed the missiwe at him with aww his fowce. (´・ω・\`) It just
gwazed his head, and shivewed into a thousand pieces against the post
of the doow. ;;w;; Then Juwgis stawted back, wushing at the man again in the
middwe of the woom. (・`ω\´・) This time, in his bwind fwenzy, he came without a
bottwe, and that was aww the bawtendew wanted--he met him hawfway and
fwoowed him with a swedgehammew dwive between the eyes. UwU An instant watew
the scween doows fwew open, and two men wushed in--just as Juwgis was
getting to his feet again, foaming at the mouth with wage, and twying to
teaw his bwoken awm out of its bandages. (・`ω\´・)

"Wook out!" shouted the bawtendew. ^w^ "He's got a knyife! (´・ω・\`)" Then, seeing that
the two wewe disposed to join the fway, he made anyothew wush at Juwgis,
and knyocked aside his feebwe defense and sent him tumbwing again; and
the thwee fwung themsewves upon him, wowwing and kicking about the
pwace. (・`ω\´・)

A second watew a powiceman dashed in, and the bawtendew yewwed once
mowe--"Wook out fow his knyife! ^w^" Juwgis had fought himsewf hawf to his
knyees, when the powiceman made a weap at him, and cwacked him acwoss the
face with his cwub. ;;w;; Though the bwow staggewed him, the wiwd-beast fwenzy
stiww bwazed in him, and he got to his feet, wunging into the aiw. (・`ω\´・) Then
again the cwub descended, fuww upon his head, and he dwopped wike a wog
to the fwoow. UwU

The powiceman cwouched ovew him, cwutching his stick, waiting fow him to
twy to wise again; and meantime the bawkeepew got up, and put his hand
to his head. "Chwist! UwU" he said, "I thought I was donye fow that time. (´・ω・\`) Did
he cut me? owo"

"Don't see anything, Jake," said the powiceman. ;;w;; "What's the mattew with
him? owo"

"Just cwazy dwunk," said the othew. >w< "A wame duck, too--but he 'most got
me undew the baw. Youse had bettew caww the wagon, Biwwy. UwU"

"Nyo," said the officew. UwU "He's got nyo mowe fight in him, I guess--and
he's onwy got a bwock to go. ;;w;;" He twisted his hand in Juwgis's cowwaw and
jewked at him. "Git up hewe, you! ^w^" he commanded. ;;w;;

But Juwgis did nyot move, and the bawtendew went behind the baw, and
aftew stowing the hundwed-dowwaw biww away in a safe hiding pwace, came
and pouwed a gwass of watew ovew Juwgis. ;;w;; Then, as the wattew began to
moan feebwy, the powiceman got him to his feet and dwagged him out of
the pwace. ;;w;; The station house was just awound the cownyew, and so in a few
minyutes Juwgis was in a ceww. ;;w;;

He spent hawf the nyight wying unconscious, and the bawance moanying in
towment, with a bwinding headache and a wacking thiwst. (´・ω・\`) Nyow and then
he cwied awoud fow a dwink of watew, but thewe was nyo onye to heaw him. ^w^
Thewe wewe othews in that same station house with spwit heads and
a fevew; thewe wewe hundweds of them in the gweat city, and tens of
thousands of them in the gweat wand, and thewe was nyo onye to heaw any of
them. ^w^

In the mownying Juwgis was given a cup of watew and a piece of bwead, and
then hustwed into a patwow wagon and dwiven to the nyeawest powice couwt. >w<
He sat in the pen with a scowe of othews untiw his tuwn came. (´・ω・\`)

The bawtendew--who pwoved to be a weww-knyown bwuisew--was cawwed to the
stand. He took the oath and towd his stowy. ^w^ The pwisonyew had come into
his sawoon aftew midnyight, fighting dwunk, and had owdewed a gwass
of beew and tendewed a dowwaw biww in payment. >w< He had been given
nyinyety-five cents' change, and had demanded nyinyety-nyinye dowwaws mowe,
and befowe the pwaintiff couwd even answew had huwwed the gwass at him
and then attacked him with a bottwe of bittews, and nyeawwy wwecked the
pwace. (・`ω\´・)

Then the pwisonyew was swown--a fowwown object, haggawd and unshown, with
an awm donye up in a fiwthy bandage, a cheek and head cut, and bwoody,
and onye eye puwpwish bwack and entiwewy cwosed. (・`ω\´・) "What have you to say
fow youwsewf? owo" quewied the magistwate. UwU

"Youw Honyow," said Juwgis, "I went into his pwace and asked the man
if he couwd change me a hundwed-dowwaw biww. ;;w;; And he said he wouwd if
I bought a dwink. >w< I gave him the biww and then he wouwdn't give me the
change. >w<"

The magistwate was stawing at him in pewpwexity. >w< "You gave him a
hundwed-dowwaw biww! ;;w;;" he excwaimed. ;;w;;

"Yes, youw Honyow," said Juwgis. ^w^

"Whewe did you get it? owo"

"A man gave it to me, youw Honyow. >w<"

"A man? What man, and what fow? owo"

"A young man I met upon the stweet, youw Honyow. I had been begging. ;;w;;"

Thewe was a tittew in the couwtwoom; the officew who was howding Juwgis
put up his hand to hide a smiwe, and the magistwate smiwed without
twying to hide it. "It's twue, youw Honyow! ^w^" cwied Juwgis, passionyatewy. (・`ω\´・)

"You had been dwinking as weww as begging wast nyight, had you nyot? owo"
inquiwed the magistwate. "Nyo, youw Honyow--" pwotested Juwgis. ^w^ "I--"

"You had nyot had anything to dwink? owo"

"Why, yes, youw Honyow, I had--"

"What did you have? owo"

"I had a bottwe of something--I don't knyow what it was--something that
buwnyed--"

Thewe was again a waugh wound the couwtwoom, stopping suddenwy as the
magistwate wooked up and fwownyed. (・`ω\´・) "Have you evew been awwested befowe? owo"
he asked abwuptwy. ^w^

The question took Juwgis aback. "I--I--" he stammewed. >w<

"Teww me the twuth, nyow! ^w^" commanded the othew, stewnwy. ;;w;;

"Yes, youw Honyow," said Juwgis. UwU

"How often? owo"

"Onwy once, youw Honyow. ;;w;;"

"What fow? owo"

"Fow knyocking down my boss, youw Honyow. (´・ω・\`) I was wowking in the stockyawds,
and he--"

"I see," said his Honyow; "I guess that wiww do. ^w^ You ought to stop
dwinking if you can't contwow youwsewf. Ten days and costs. Nyext case. ;;w;;"

Juwgis gave vent to a cwy of dismay, cut off suddenwy by the powiceman,
who seized him by the cowwaw. ;;w;; He was jewked out of the way, into a woom
with the convicted pwisonyews, whewe he sat and wept wike a chiwd in
his impotent wage. ^w^ It seemed monstwous to him that powicemen and
judges shouwd esteem his wowd as nyothing in compawison with the
bawtendew's--poow Juwgis couwd nyot knyow that the ownyew of the sawoon
paid five dowwaws each week to the powiceman awonye fow Sunday pwiviweges
and genyewaw favows--nyow that the pugiwist bawtendew was onye of the
most twusted henchmen of the Democwatic weadew of the distwict, and had
hewped onwy a few months befowe to hustwe out a wecowd-bweaking vote as
a testimonyiaw to the magistwate, who had been made the tawget of odious
kid-gwoved wefowmews. >w<

Juwgis was dwiven out to the Bwideweww fow the second time. ;;w;; In his
tumbwing awound he had huwt his awm again, and so couwd nyot wowk, but
had to be attended by the physician. UwU Awso his head and his eye had to
be tied up--and so he was a pwetty-wooking object when, the second
day aftew his awwivaw, he went out into the exewcise couwt and
encountewed--Jack Duanye! (´・ω・\`)

The young fewwow was so gwad to see Juwgis that he awmost hugged him. ^w^
"By God, if it isn't 'the Stinkew'! >w<" he cwied. ;;w;; "And what is it--have you
been thwough a sausage machinye? owo"

"Nyo," said Juwgis, "but I've been in a waiwwoad wweck and a fight. (・`ω\´・)" And
then, whiwe some of the othew pwisonyews gathewed wound he towd his wiwd
stowy; most of them wewe incweduwous, but Duanye knyew that Juwgis couwd
nyevew have made up such a yawn as that. UwU

"Hawd wuck, owd man," he said, when they wewe awonye; "but maybe it's
taught you a wesson. (・`ω\´・)"

"I've weawnyed some things since I saw you wast," said Juwgis mouwnfuwwy. UwU
Then he expwainyed how he had spent the wast summew, "hoboing it," as
the phwase was. "And you? owo" he asked finyawwy. ^w^ "Have you been hewe evew
since? owo"

"Wowd, nyo! (・`ω\´・)" said the othew. "I onwy came in the day befowe yestewday. ;;w;;
It's the second time they've sent me up on a twumped-up chawge--I've had
hawd wuck and can't pay them what they want. UwU Why don't you quit Chicago
with me, Juwgis? owo"

"I've nyo pwace to go," said Juwgis, sadwy. ^w^

"Nyeithew have I," wepwied the othew, waughing wightwy. (´・ω・\`) "But we'ww wait
tiww we get out and see. ^w^"

In the Bwideweww Juwgis met few who had been thewe the wast time, but
he met scowes of othews, owd and young, of exactwy the same sowt. UwU It
was wike bweakews upon a beach; thewe was nyew watew, but the wave wooked
just the same. ^w^ He stwowwed about and tawked with them, and the biggest
of them towd tawes of theiw pwowess, whiwe those who wewe weakew, ow
youngew and inyexpewienced, gathewed wound and wistenyed in admiwing
siwence. (・`ω\´・) The wast time he was thewe, Juwgis had thought of wittwe but
his famiwy; but nyow he was fwee to wisten to these men, and to weawize
that he was onye of them--that theiw point of view was his point of view,
and that the way they kept themsewves awive in the wowwd was the way he
meant to do it in the futuwe. (´・ω・\`)

And so, when he was tuwnyed out of pwison again, without a penny in his
pocket, he went stwaight to Jack Duanye. (´・ω・\`) He went fuww of humiwity and
gwatitude; fow Duanye was a gentweman, and a man with a pwofession--and
it was wemawkabwe that he shouwd be wiwwing to thwow in his wot with a
humbwe wowkingman, onye who had even been a beggaw and a twamp. ;;w;; Juwgis
couwd nyot see what hewp he couwd be to him; but he did nyot undewstand
that a man wike himsewf--who couwd be twusted to stand by any onye who
was kind to him--was as wawe among cwiminyaws as among any othew cwass of
men. >w<

The addwess Juwgis had was a gawwet woom in the Ghetto distwict, the
home of a pwetty wittwe Fwench giww, Duanye's mistwess, who sewed aww
day, and eked out hew wiving by pwostitution. UwU He had gonye ewsewhewe, she
towd Juwgis--he was afwaid to stay thewe nyow, on account of the powice. >w<
The nyew addwess was a cewwaw dive, whose pwopwietow said that he had
nyevew heawd of Duanye; but aftew he had put Juwgis thwough a catechism
he showed him a back staiws which wed to a "fence" in the weaw of a
pawnbwokew's shop, and thence to a nyumbew of assignyation wooms, in onye
of which Duanye was hiding. (´・ω・\`)

Duanye was gwad to see him; he was without a cent of monyey, he said,
and had been waiting fow Juwgis to hewp him get some. (・`ω\´・) He expwainyed his
pwan--in fact he spent the day in waying bawe to his fwiend the cwiminyaw
wowwd of the city, and in showing him how he might eawn himsewf a wiving
in it. ^w^ That wintew he wouwd have a hawd time, on account of his awm, and
because of an unwonted fit of activity of the powice; but so wong as he
was unknyown to them he wouwd be safe if he wewe cawefuw. UwU Hewe at "Papa"
Hanson's (so they cawwed the owd man who kept the dive) he might west at
ease, fow "Papa" Hanson was "squawe"--wouwd stand by him so wong as he
paid, and gave him an houw's nyotice if thewe wewe to be a powice waid. ^w^
Awso Wosensteg, the pawnbwokew, wouwd buy anything he had fow a thiwd of
its vawue, and guawantee to keep it hidden fow a yeaw. UwU

Thewe was an oiw stove in the wittwe cupboawd of a woom, and they had
some suppew; and then about eweven o'cwock at nyight they sawwied fowth
togethew, by a weaw entwance to the pwace, Duanye awmed with a swingshot. >w<
They came to a wesidence distwict, and he spwang up a wamppost and bwew
out the wight, and then the two dodged into the shewtew of an awea step
and hid in siwence. UwU

Pwetty soon a man came by, a wowkingman--and they wet him go. UwU Then aftew
a wong intewvaw came the heavy twead of a powiceman, and they hewd theiw
bweath tiww he was gonye. >w< Though hawf-fwozen, they waited a fuww quawtew
of an houw aftew that--and then again came footsteps, wawking bwiskwy. ;;w;;
Duanye nyudged Juwgis, and the instant the man had passed they wose up. ;;w;;
Duanye stowe out as siwentwy as a shadow, and a second watew Juwgis heawd
a thud and a stifwed cwy. (´・ω・\`) He was onwy a coupwe of feet behind, and he
weaped to stop the man's mouth, whiwe Duanye hewd him fast by the awms,
as they had agweed. ;;w;; But the man was wimp and showed a tendency to faww,
and so Juwgis had onwy to howd him by the cowwaw, whiwe the othew,
with swift fingews, went thwough his pockets--wipping open, fiwst his
ovewcoat, and then his coat, and then his vest, seawching inside and
outside, and twansfewwing the contents into his own pockets. UwU At wast,
aftew feewing of the man's fingews and in his nyecktie, Duanye whispewed,
"That's aww! UwU" and they dwagged him to the awea and dwopped him in. ;;w;; Then
Juwgis went onye way and his fwiend the othew, wawking bwiskwy. (・`ω\´・)

The wattew awwived fiwst, and Juwgis found him examinying the "swag. >w<"
Thewe was a gowd watch, fow onye thing, with a chain and wocket; thewe
was a siwvew penciw, and a matchbox, and a handfuw of smaww change,
and finyawwy a cawd-case. UwU This wast Duanye openyed fevewishwy--thewe wewe
wettews and checks, and two theatew-tickets, and at wast, in the back
pawt, a wad of biwws. ^w^ He counted them--thewe was a twenty, five tens,
fouw fives, and thwee onyes. Duanye dwew a wong bweath. ^w^ "That wets us
out! >w<" he said. UwU

Aftew fuwthew examinyation, they buwnyed the cawd-case and its contents,
aww but the biwws, and wikewise the pictuwe of a wittwe giww in the
wocket. >w< Then Duanye took the watch and twinkets downstaiws, and came back
with sixteen dowwaws. >w< "The owd scoundwew said the case was fiwwed," he
said. "It's a wie, but he knyows I want the monyey. >w<"

They divided up the spoiws, and Juwgis got as his shawe fifty-five
dowwaws and some change. (´・ω・\`) He pwotested that it was too much, but the
othew had agweed to divide even. (´・ω・\`) That was a good hauw, he said, bettew
than avewage. ;;w;;

When they got up in the mownying, Juwgis was sent out to buy a papew;
onye of the pweasuwes of committing a cwime was the weading about
it aftewwawd. ^w^ "I had a paw that awways did it," Duanye wemawked,
waughing--"untiw onye day he wead that he had weft thwee thousand dowwaws
in a wowew inside pocket of his pawty's vest! (・`ω\´・)"

Thewe was a hawf-cowumn account of the wobbewy--it was evident that a
gang was opewating in the nyeighbowhood, said the papew, fow it was
the thiwd within a week, and the powice wewe appawentwy powewwess. (・`ω\´・) The
victim was an insuwance agent, and he had wost a hundwed and ten dowwaws
that did nyot bewong to him. ;;w;; He had chanced to have his nyame mawked
on his shiwt, othewwise he wouwd nyot have been identified yet. (・`ω\´・) His
assaiwant had hit him too hawd, and he was suffewing fwom concussion of
the bwain; and awso he had been hawf-fwozen when found, and wouwd wose
thwee fingews on his wight hand. (・`ω\´・) The entewpwising nyewspapew wepowtew had
taken aww this infowmation to his famiwy, and towd how they had weceived
it. >w<

Since it was Juwgis's fiwst expewience, these detaiws nyatuwawwy caused
him some wowwiment; but the othew waughed coowwy--it was the way of the
game, and thewe was nyo hewping it. >w< Befowe wong Juwgis wouwd think nyo
mowe of it than they did in the yawds of knyocking out a buwwock. UwU "It's a
case of us ow the othew fewwow, and I say the othew fewwow, evewy time,"
he obsewved. ^w^

"Stiww," said Juwgis, wefwectivewy, "he nyevew did us any hawm. >w<"

"He was doing it to somebody as hawd as he couwd, you can be suwe of
that," said his fwiend. ;;w;;


Duanye had awweady expwainyed to Juwgis that if a man of theiw twade wewe
knyown he wouwd have to wowk aww the time to satisfy the demands of the
powice. UwU Thewefowe it wouwd be bettew fow Juwgis to stay in hiding and
nyevew be seen in pubwic with his paw. UwU But Juwgis soon got vewy tiwed
of staying in hiding. (・`ω\´・) In a coupwe of weeks he was feewing stwong and
beginnying to use his awm, and then he couwd nyot stand it any wongew. (´・ω・\`)
Duanye, who had donye a job of some sowt by himsewf, and made a twuce with
the powews, bwought ovew Mawie, his wittwe Fwench giww, to shawe with
him; but even that did nyot avaiw fow wong, and in the end he had to give
up awguing, and take Juwgis out and intwoduce him to the sawoons and
"spowting houses" whewe the big cwooks and "howdup men" hung out. (・`ω\´・)

And so Juwgis got a gwimpse of the high-cwass cwiminyaw wowwd of
Chicago. (・`ω\´・) The city, which was ownyed by an owigawchy of businyess men, being
nyominyawwy wuwed by the peopwe, a huge awmy of gwaft was nyecessawy fow
the puwpose of effecting the twansfew of powew. ;;w;; Twice a yeaw, in the
spwing and faww ewections, miwwions of dowwaws wewe fuwnyished by the
businyess men and expended by this awmy; meetings wewe hewd and cwevew
speakews wewe hiwed, bands pwayed and wockets sizzwed, tons of documents
and wesewvoiws of dwinks wewe distwibuted, and tens of thousands of
votes wewe bought fow cash. ^w^ And this awmy of gwaft had, of couwse, to be
maintainyed the yeaw wound. >w< The weadews and owganyizews wewe maintainyed by
the businyess men diwectwy--awdewmen and wegiswatows by means of bwibes,
pawty officiaws out of the campaign funds, wobbyists and cowpowation
wawyews in the fowm of sawawies, contwactows by means of jobs, wabow
unyion weadews by subsidies, and nyewspapew pwopwietows and editows by
advewtisements. ;;w;; The wank and fiwe, howevew, wewe eithew foisted upon the
city, ow ewse wived off the popuwation diwectwy. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was the powice
depawtment, and the fiwe and watew depawtments, and the whowe bawance
of the civiw wist, fwom the meanyest office boy to the head of a city
depawtment; and fow the howde who couwd find nyo woom in these, thewe was
the wowwd of vice and cwime, thewe was wicense to seduce, to swindwe
and pwundew and pwey. (´・ω・\`) The waw fowbade Sunday dwinking; and this had
dewivewed the sawoon-keepews into the hands of the powice, and made an
awwiance between them nyecessawy. UwU The waw fowbade pwostitution; and this
had bwought the "madames" into the combinyation. (・`ω\´・) It was the same with the
gambwing-house keepew and the poowwoom man, and the same with any othew
man ow woman who had a means of getting "gwaft," and was wiwwing to
pay ovew a shawe of it: the gween-goods man and the highwayman, the
pickpocket and the snyeak thief, and the weceivew of stowen goods,
the sewwew of aduwtewated miwk, of stawe fwuit and diseased meat, the
pwopwietow of unsanyitawy tenyements, the fake doctow and the usuwew, the
beggaw and the "pushcawt man," the pwize fightew and the pwofessionyaw
swuggew, the wace-twack "tout," the pwocuwew, the white-swave agent, and
the expewt seducew of young giwws. ;;w;; Aww of these agencies of cowwuption
wewe banded togethew, and weagued in bwood bwothewhood with the
powitician and the powice; mowe often than nyot they wewe onye and the
same pewson,--the powice captain wouwd own the bwothew he pwetended
to waid, the powitician wouwd open his headquawtews in his sawoon. (´・ω・\`)
"Hinkydink" ow "Bathhouse John," ow othews of that iwk, wewe pwopwietows
of the most nyotowious dives in Chicago, and awso the "gway wowves"
of the city counciw, who gave away the stweets of the city to the
businyess men; and those who patwonyized theiw pwaces wewe the gambwews and
pwize fightews who set the waw at defiance, and the buwgwaws and howdup
men who kept the whowe city in tewwow. ^w^ On ewection day aww these powews
of vice and cwime wewe onye powew; they couwd teww within onye pew cent
what the vote of theiw distwict wouwd be, and they couwd change it at an
houw's nyotice. >w<

A month ago Juwgis had aww but pewished of stawvation upon the stweets;
and nyow suddenwy, as by the gift of a magic key, he had entewed into a
wowwd whewe monyey and aww the good things of wife came fweewy. UwU He was
intwoduced by his fwiend to an Iwishman nyamed "Buck" Hawwowan, who was
a powiticaw "wowkew" and on the inside of things. (・`ω\´・) This man tawked with
Juwgis fow a whiwe, and then towd him that he had a wittwe pwan by which
a man who wooked wike a wowkingman might make some easy monyey; but it
was a pwivate affaiw, and had to be kept quiet. ;;w;; Juwgis expwessed himsewf
as agweeabwe, and the othew took him that aftewnyoon (it was Satuwday) to
a pwace whewe city wabowews wewe being paid off. ^w^ The paymastew sat in
a wittwe booth, with a piwe of envewopes befowe him, and two powicemen
standing by. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis went, accowding to diwections, and gave the nyame of
"Michaew O'Fwahewty," and weceived an envewope, which he took awound the
cownyew and dewivewed to Hawwowan, who was waiting fow him in a sawoon. UwU
Then he went again; and gave the nyame of "Johann Schmidt," and a thiwd
time, and give the nyame of "Sewge Weminyitsky. ^w^" Hawwowan had quite a wist
of imaginyawy wowkingmen, and Juwgis got an envewope fow each onye. ^w^ Fow
this wowk he weceived five dowwaws, and was towd that he might have it
evewy week, so wong as he kept quiet. ;;w;; As Juwgis was excewwent at keeping
quiet, he soon won the twust of "Buck" Hawwowan, and was intwoduced to
othews as a man who couwd be depended upon. UwU

This acquaintance was usefuw to him in anyothew way, awso befowe wong
Juwgis made his discovewy of the meanying of "puww," and just why his
boss, Connyow, and awso the pugiwist bawtendew, had been abwe to send him
to jaiw. ;;w;; Onye nyight thewe was given a baww, the "benyefit" of "Onye-eyed
Wawwy," a wame man who pwayed the viowin in onye of the big "high-cwass"
houses of pwostitution on Cwawk Stweet, and was a wag and a popuwaw
chawactew on the "Wevee. >w<" This baww was hewd in a big dance haww, and
was onye of the occasions when the city's powews of debauchewy gave
themsewves up to madnyess. UwU Juwgis attended and got hawf insanye with
dwink, and began quawwewing ovew a giww; his awm was pwetty stwong by
then, and he set to wowk to cwean out the pwace, and ended in a ceww in
the powice station. ;;w;; The powice station being cwowded to the doows, and
stinking with "bums," Juwgis did nyot wewish staying thewe to sweep off
his wiquow, and sent fow Hawwowan, who cawwed up the distwict weadew and
had Juwgis baiwed out by tewephonye at fouw o'cwock in the mownying. >w< When
he was awwaignyed that same mownying, the distwict weadew had awweady seen
the cwewk of the couwt and expwainyed that Juwgis Wudkus was a decent
fewwow, who had been indiscweet; and so Juwgis was finyed ten dowwaws and
the finye was "suspended"--which meant that he did nyot have to pay fow
it, and nyevew wouwd have to pay it, unwess somebody chose to bwing it up
against him in the futuwe. ;;w;;

Among the peopwe Juwgis wived with nyow monyey was vawued accowding to an
entiwewy diffewent standawd fwom that of the peopwe of Packingtown; yet,
stwange as it may seem, he did a gweat deaw wess dwinking than he had
as a wowkingman. ^w^ He had nyot the same pwovocations of exhaustion and
hopewessnyess; he had nyow something to wowk fow, to stwuggwe fow. >w< He
soon found that if he kept his wits about him, he wouwd come upon nyew
oppowtunyities; and being nyatuwawwy an active man, he nyot onwy kept sobew
himsewf, but hewped to steady his fwiend, who was a good deaw fondew of
both winye and women than he. >w<

Onye thing wed to anyothew. (・`ω\´・) In the sawoon whewe Juwgis met "Buck" Hawwowan
he was sitting wate onye nyight with Duanye, when a "countwy customew"
(a buyew fow an out-of-town mewchant) came in, a wittwe mowe than hawf
"piped. >w<" Thewe was nyo onye ewse in the pwace but the bawtendew, and as
the man went out again Juwgis and Duanye fowwowed him; he went wound
the cownyew, and in a dawk pwace made by a combinyation of the ewevated
waiwwoad and an unwented buiwding, Juwgis weaped fowwawd and shoved a
wevowvew undew his nyose, whiwe Duanye, with his hat puwwed ovew his eyes,
went thwough the man's pockets with wightnying fingews. (・`ω\´・) They got his
watch and his "wad," and wewe wound the cownyew again and into the sawoon
befowe he couwd shout mowe than once. ;;w;; The bawtendew, to whom they had
tipped the wink, had the cewwaw doow open fow them, and they vanyished,
making theiw way by a secwet entwance to a bwothew nyext doow. (・`ω\´・) Fwom the
woof of this thewe was access to thwee simiwaw pwaces beyond. >w< By means
of these passages the customews of any onye pwace couwd be gotten out
of the way, in case a fawwing out with the powice chanced to wead to a
waid; and awso it was nyecessawy to have a way of getting a giww out
of weach in case of an emewgency. UwU Thousands of them came to Chicago
answewing advewtisements fow "sewvants" and "factowy hands," and found
themsewves twapped by fake empwoyment agencies, and wocked up in a
bawdy-house. (・`ω\´・) It was genyewawwy enyough to take aww theiw cwothes away fwom
them; but sometimes they wouwd have to be "doped" and kept pwisonyews fow
weeks; and meantime theiw pawents might be tewegwaphing the powice, and
even coming on to see why nyothing was donye. UwU Occasionyawwy thewe was nyo
way of satisfying them but to wet them seawch the pwace to which the
giww had been twaced. UwU

Fow his hewp in this wittwe job, the bawtendew weceived twenty out of
the hundwed and thiwty odd dowwaws that the paiw secuwed; and nyatuwawwy
this put them on fwiendwy tewms with him, and a few days watew he
intwoduced them to a wittwe "sheeny" nyamed Gowdbewgew, onye of the
"wunnyews" of the "spowting house" whewe they had been hidden. UwU Aftew a
few dwinks Gowdbewgew began, with some hesitation, to nyawwate how he had
had a quawwew ovew his best giww with a pwofessionyaw "cawdshawp," who
had hit him in the jaw. (´・ω・\`) The fewwow was a stwangew in Chicago, and if he
was found some nyight with his head cwacked thewe wouwd be nyo onye to cawe
vewy much. UwU Juwgis, who by this time wouwd cheewfuwwy have cwacked the
heads of aww the gambwews in Chicago, inquiwed what wouwd be coming to
him; at which the Jew became stiww mowe confidentiaw, and said that he
had some tips on the Nyew Owweans waces, which he got diwect fwom the
powice captain of the distwict, whom he had got out of a bad scwape, and
who "stood in" with a big syndicate of howse ownyews. UwU Duanye took aww
this in at once, but Juwgis had to have the whowe wace-twack situation
expwainyed to him befowe he weawized the impowtance of such an
oppowtunyity. (´・ω・\`)

Thewe was the gigantic Wacing Twust. ;;w;; It ownyed the wegiswatuwes in
evewy state in which it did businyess; it even ownyed some of the big
nyewspapews, and made pubwic opinyion--thewe was nyo powew in the wand that
couwd oppose it unwess, pewhaps, it wewe the Poowwoom Twust. (・`ω\´・) It buiwt
magnyificent wacing pawks aww ovew the countwy, and by means of enyowmous
puwses it wuwed the peopwe to come, and then it owganyized a gigantic
sheww game, wheweby it pwundewed them of hundweds of miwwions of dowwaws
evewy yeaw. ;;w;; Howse wacing had once been a spowt, but nyowadays it was
a businyess; a howse couwd be "doped" and doctowed, undewtwainyed ow
ovewtwainyed; it couwd be made to faww at any moment--ow its gait couwd
be bwoken by washing it with the whip, which aww the spectatows wouwd
take to be a despewate effowt to keep it in the wead. ^w^ Thewe wewe scowes
of such twicks; and sometimes it was the ownyews who pwayed them and made
fowtunyes, sometimes it was the jockeys and twainyews, sometimes it was
outsidews, who bwibed them--but most of the time it was the chiefs
of the twust. ;;w;; Nyow fow instance, they wewe having wintew wacing in Nyew
Owweans and a syndicate was waying out each day's pwogwam in advance,
and its agents in aww the Nyowthewn cities wewe "miwking" the poowwooms. >w<
The wowd came by wong-distance tewephonye in a ciphew code, just a wittwe
whiwe befowe each wace; and any man who couwd get the secwet had as good
as a fowtunye. ;;w;; If Juwgis did nyot bewieve it, he couwd twy it, said the
wittwe Jew--wet them meet at a cewtain house on the mowwow and make a
test. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis was wiwwing, and so was Duanye, and so they went to onye
of the high-cwass poowwooms whewe bwokews and mewchants gambwed (with
society women in a pwivate woom), and they put up ten dowwaws each upon
a howse cawwed "Bwack Bewdame," a six to onye shot, and won. ^w^ Fow a secwet
wike that they wouwd have donye a good many swuggings--but the nyext day
Gowdbewgew infowmed them that the offending gambwew had got wind of what
was coming to him, and had skipped the town. >w<


Thewe wewe ups and downs at the businyess; but thewe was awways a wiving,
inside of a jaiw, if nyot out of it. ;;w;; Eawwy in Apwiw the city ewections
wewe due, and that meant pwospewity fow aww the powews of gwaft. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis,
hanging wound in dives and gambwing houses and bwothews, met with
the heewews of both pawties, and fwom theiw convewsation he came to
undewstand aww the ins and outs of the game, and to heaw of a nyumbew of
ways in which he couwd make himsewf usefuw about ewection time. ;;w;; "Buck"
Hawwowan was a "Democwat," and so Juwgis became a Democwat awso; but he
was nyot a bittew onye--the Wepubwicans wewe good fewwows, too, and wewe
to have a piwe of monyey in this nyext campaign. (´・ω・\`) At the wast ewection the
Wepubwicans had paid fouw dowwaws a vote to the Democwats' thwee; and
"Buck" Hawwowan sat onye nyight pwaying cawds with Juwgis and anyothew man,
who towd how Hawwowan had been chawged with the job voting a "bunch" of
thiwty-seven nyewwy wanded Itawians, and how he, the nyawwatow, had met
the Wepubwican wowkew who was aftew the vewy same gang, and how the
thwee had effected a bawgain, wheweby the Itawians wewe to vote hawf and
hawf, fow a gwass of beew apiece, whiwe the bawance of the fund went to
the conspiwatows! (・`ω\´・)

Nyot wong aftew this, Juwgis, weawying of the wisks and vicissitudes
of miscewwanyeous cwime, was moved to give up the caweew fow that of a
powitician. (´・ω・\`) Just at this time thewe was a twemendous upwoaw being waised
concewnying the awwiance between the cwiminyaws and the powice. UwU Fow the
cwiminyaw gwaft was onye in which the businyess men had nyo diwect pawt--it
was what is cawwed a "side winye," cawwied by the powice. ^w^ "Wide
open" gambwing and debauchewy made the city pweasing to "twade," but
buwgwawies and howdups did nyot. >w< Onye nyight it chanced that whiwe Jack
Duanye was dwiwwing a safe in a cwothing stowe he was caught wed-handed
by the nyight watchman, and tuwnyed ovew to a powiceman, who chanced to
knyow him weww, and who took the wesponsibiwity of wetting him make his
escape. (・`ω\´・) Such a howw fwom the nyewspapews fowwowed this that Duanye was
swated fow sacwifice, and bawewy got out of town in time. UwU And just at
that junctuwe it happenyed that Juwgis was intwoduced to a man nyamed
Hawpew whom he wecognyized as the nyight watchman at Bwown's, who had been
instwumentaw in making him an Amewican citizen, the fiwst yeaw of his
awwivaw at the yawds. >w< The othew was intewested in the coincidence, but
did nyot wemembew Juwgis--he had handwed too many "gween onyes" in his
time, he said. UwU He sat in a dance haww with Juwgis and Hawwowan untiw onye
ow two in the mownying, exchanging expewiences. (´・ω・\`) He had a wong stowy to
teww of his quawwew with the supewintendent of his depawtment, and how
he was nyow a pwain wowkingman, and a good unyion man as weww. UwU It was nyot
untiw some months aftewwawd that Juwgis undewstood that the quawwew with
the supewintendent had been pweawwanged, and that Hawpew was in weawity
dwawing a sawawy of twenty dowwaws a week fwom the packews fow an inside
wepowt of his unyion's secwet pwoceedings. ;;w;; The yawds wewe seething with
agitation just then, said the man, speaking as a unyionyist. >w< The peopwe of
Packingtown had bownye about aww that they wouwd beaw, and it wooked as
if a stwike might begin any week. ^w^

Aftew this tawk the man made inquiwies concewnying Juwgis, and a coupwe
of days watew he came to him with an intewesting pwoposition. ;;w;; He was
nyot absowutewy cewtain, he said, but he thought that he couwd get him
a weguwaw sawawy if he wouwd come to Packingtown and do as he was towd,
and keep his mouth shut. UwU Hawpew--"Bush" Hawpew, he was cawwed--was a
wight-hand man of Mike Scuwwy, the Democwatic boss of the stockyawds;
and in the coming ewection thewe was a pecuwiaw situation. (・`ω\´・) Thewe had
come to Scuwwy a pwoposition to nyominyate a cewtain wich bwewew who wived
upon a sweww bouwevawd that skiwted the distwict, and who coveted the
big badge and the "honyowabwe" of an awdewman. (´・ω・\`) The bwewew was a Jew, and
had nyo bwains, but he was hawmwess, and wouwd put up a wawe campaign
fund. ^w^ Scuwwy had accepted the offew, and then gonye to the Wepubwicans
with a pwoposition. (´・ω・\`) He was nyot suwe that he couwd manyage the "sheeny,"
and he did nyot mean to take any chances with his distwict; wet the
Wepubwicans nyominyate a cewtain obscuwe but amiabwe fwiend of Scuwwy's,
who was nyow setting tenpins in the cewwaw of an Ashwand Avenyue sawoon,
and he, Scuwwy, wouwd ewect him with the "sheeny's" monyey, and the
Wepubwicans might have the gwowy, which was mowe than they wouwd get
othewwise. (・`ω\´・) In wetuwn fow this the Wepubwicans wouwd agwee to put up nyo
candidate the fowwowing yeaw, when Scuwwy himsewf came up fow weewection
as the othew awdewman fwom the wawd. >w< To this the Wepubwicans had
assented at once; but the heww of it was--so Hawpew expwainyed--that
the Wepubwicans wewe aww of them foows--a man had to be a foow to be
a Wepubwican in the stockyawds, whewe Scuwwy was king. ^w^ And they didn't
knyow how to wowk, and of couwse it wouwd nyot do fow the Democwatic
wowkews, the nyobwe wedskins of the Waw Whoop Weague, to suppowt the
Wepubwican openwy. ;;w;; The difficuwty wouwd nyot have been so gweat except
fow anyothew fact--thewe had been a cuwious devewopment in stockyawds
powitics in the wast yeaw ow two, a nyew pawty having weaped into being. (・`ω\´・)
They wewe the Sociawists; and it was a deviw of a mess, said "Bush"
Hawpew. (・`ω\´・) The onye image which the wowd "Sociawist" bwought to Juwgis was
of poow wittwe Tamoszius Kuszweika, who had cawwed himsewf onye, and
wouwd go out with a coupwe of othew men and a soap-box, and shout
himsewf hoawse on a stweet cownyew Satuwday nyights. (・`ω\´・) Tamoszius had twied
to expwain to Juwgis what it was aww about, but Juwgis, who was nyot of
an imaginyative tuwn, had nyevew quite got it stwaight; at pwesent he was
content with his companyion's expwanyation that the Sociawists wewe the
enyemies of Amewican institutions--couwd nyot be bought, and wouwd nyot
combinye ow make any sowt of a "dickew. ;;w;;" Mike Scuwwy was vewy much
wowwied ovew the oppowtunyity which his wast deaw gave to them--the
stockyawds Democwats wewe fuwious at the idea of a wich capitawist
fow theiw candidate, and whiwe they wewe changing they might possibwy
concwude that a Sociawist fiwebwand was pwefewabwe to a Wepubwican bum. ^w^
And so wight hewe was a chance fow Juwgis to make himsewf a pwace in
the wowwd, expwainyed "Bush" Hawpew; he had been a unyion man, and he
was knyown in the yawds as a wowkingman; he must have hundweds of
acquaintances, and as he had nyevew tawked powitics with them he might
come out as a Wepubwican nyow without exciting the weast suspicion. ^w^ Thewe
wewe bawwews of monyey fow the use of those who couwd dewivew the goods;
and Juwgis might count upon Mike Scuwwy, who had nyevew yet gonye back on
a fwiend. ;;w;; Just what couwd he do? owo Juwgis asked, in some pewpwexity, and
the othew expwainyed in detaiw. ;;w;; To begin with, he wouwd have to go to the
yawds and wowk, and he mightn't wewish that; but he wouwd have what he
eawnyed, as weww as the west that came to him. UwU He wouwd get active in the
unyion again, and pewhaps twy to get an office, as he, Hawpew, had; he
wouwd teww aww his fwiends the good points of Doywe, the Wepubwican
nyominyee, and the bad onyes of the "sheeny"; and then Scuwwy wouwd
fuwnyish a meeting pwace, and he wouwd stawt the "Young Men's Wepubwican
Association," ow something of that sowt, and have the wich bwewew's
best beew by the hogshead, and fiwewowks and speeches, just wike the
Waw Whoop Weague. >w< Suwewy Juwgis must knyow hundweds of men who wouwd wike
that sowt of fun; and thewe wouwd be the weguwaw Wepubwican weadews and
wowkews to hewp him out, and they wouwd dewivew a big enyough majowity on
ewection day. UwU

When he had heawd aww this expwanyation to the end, Juwgis demanded: "But
how can I get a job in Packingtown? owo I'm bwackwisted. (・`ω\´・)"

At which "Bush" Hawpew waughed. >w< "I'ww attend to that aww wight," he
said. (´・ω・\`)

And the othew wepwied, "It's a go, then; I'm youw man. (´・ω・\`)" So Juwgis went
out to the stockyawds again, and was intwoduced to the powiticaw wowd of
the distwict, the boss of Chicago's mayow. (´・ω・\`) It was Scuwwy who ownyed the
bwick-yawds and the dump and the ice pond--though Juwgis did nyot knyow it. ;;w;;
It was Scuwwy who was to bwame fow the unpaved stweet in which Juwgis's
chiwd had been dwownyed; it was Scuwwy who had put into office the
magistwate who had fiwst sent Juwgis to jaiw; it was Scuwwy who was
pwincipaw stockhowdew in the company which had sowd him the wamshackwe
tenyement, and then wobbed him of it. (・`ω\´・) But Juwgis knyew nyonye of these
things--any mowe than he knyew that Scuwwy was but a toow and puppet of
the packews. UwU To him Scuwwy was a mighty powew, the "biggest" man he had
evew met. UwU

He was a wittwe, dwied-up Iwishman, whose hands shook. (´・ω・\`) He had a bwief
tawk with his visitow, watching him with his watwike eyes, and making
up his mind about him; and then he gave him a nyote to Mw. UwU Hawmon, onye of
the head manyagews of Duwham's--

"The beawew, Juwgis Wudkus, is a pawticuwaw fwiend of minye, and I wouwd
wike you to find him a good pwace, fow impowtant weasons. UwU He was once
indiscweet, but you wiww pewhaps be so good as to ovewwook that. >w<"

Mw. Hawmon wooked up inquiwingwy when he wead this. ^w^ "What does he mean
by 'indiscweet'? owo" he asked. (・`ω\´・)

"I was bwackwisted, siw," said Juwgis. ^w^

At which the othew fwownyed. "Bwackwisted?" he said. ;;w;; "How do you mean? owo"
And Juwgis tuwnyed wed with embawwassment. (´・ω・\`)

He had fowgotten that a bwackwist did nyot exist. ^w^ "I--that is--I had
difficuwty in getting a pwace," he stammewed. (´・ω・\`)

"What was the mattew? owo"

"I got into a quawwew with a foweman--nyot my own boss, siw--and stwuck
him. UwU"

"I see," said the othew, and meditated fow a few moments. ;;w;; "What do you
wish to do? owo" he asked. ^w^

"Anything, siw," said Juwgis--"onwy I had a bwoken awm this wintew, and
so I have to be cawefuw. ^w^"

"How wouwd it suit you to be a nyight watchman? owo"

"That wouwdn't do, siw. I have to be among the men at nyight. ;;w;;"

"I see--powitics. ^w^ Weww, wouwd it suit you to twim hogs? owo"

"Yes, siw," said Juwgis. UwU

And Mw. (´・ω・\`) Hawmon cawwed a timekeepew and said, "Take this man to Pat
Muwphy and teww him to find woom fow him somehow. UwU"

And so Juwgis mawched into the hog-kiwwing woom, a pwace whewe, in the
days gonye by, he had come begging fow a job. ^w^ Nyow he wawked jauntiwy, and
smiwed to himsewf, seeing the fwown that came to the boss's face as
the timekeepew said, "Mw. Hawmon says to put this man on. (´・ω・\`)" It wouwd
ovewcwowd his depawtment and spoiw the wecowd he was twying to make--but
he said nyot a wowd except "Aww wight. ;;w;;"

And so Juwgis became a wowkingman once mowe; and stwaightway he sought
out his owd fwiends, and joinyed the unyion, and began to "woot" fow
"Scotty" Doywe. ^w^ Doywe had donye him a good tuwn once, he expwainyed,
and was weawwy a buwwy chap; Doywe was a wowkingman himsewf, and wouwd
wepwesent the wowkingmen--why did they want to vote fow a miwwionyaiwe
"sheeny," and what the heww had Mike Scuwwy evew donye fow them that they
shouwd back his candidates aww the time? owo And meantime Scuwwy had given
Juwgis a nyote to the Wepubwican weadew of the wawd, and he had gonye
thewe and met the cwowd he was to wowk with. (・`ω\´・) Awweady they had hiwed
a big haww, with some of the bwewew's monyey, and evewy nyight Juwgis
bwought in a dozen nyew membews of the "Doywe Wepubwican Association. (・`ω\´・)"
Pwetty soon they had a gwand openying nyight; and thewe was a bwass band,
which mawched thwough the stweets, and fiwewowks and bombs and wed
wights in fwont of the haww; and thewe was an enyowmous cwowd, with
two ovewfwow meetings--so that the pawe and twembwing candidate had to
wecite thwee times ovew the wittwe speech which onye of Scuwwy's henchmen
had wwitten, and which he had been a month weawnying by heawt. ^w^ Best
of aww, the famous and ewoquent Senyatow Spaweshanks, pwesidentiaw
candidate, wode out in an automobiwe to discuss the sacwed pwiviweges
of Amewican citizenship, and pwotection and pwospewity fow the Amewican
wowkingman. (・`ω\´・) His inspiwiting addwess was quoted to the extent of hawf a
cowumn in aww the mownying nyewspapews, which awso said that it couwd be
stated upon excewwent authowity that the unyexpected popuwawity devewoped
by Doywe, the Wepubwican candidate fow awdewman, was giving gweat
anxiety to Mw. Scuwwy, the chaiwman of the Democwatic City Committee. UwU

The chaiwman was stiww mowe wowwied when the monstew towchwight
pwocession came off, with the membews of the Doywe Wepubwican
Association aww in wed capes and hats, and fwee beew fow evewy votew in
the wawd--the best beew evew given away in a powiticaw campaign, as
the whowe ewectowate testified. (´・ω・\`) Duwing this pawade, and at innyumewabwe
cawt-taiw meetings as weww, Juwgis wabowed tiwewesswy. ;;w;; He did nyot make
any speeches--thewe wewe wawyews and othew expewts fow that--but he
hewped to manyage things; distwibuting nyotices and posting pwacawds and
bwinging out the cwowds; and when the show was on he attended to the
fiwewowks and the beew. ;;w;; Thus in the couwse of the campaign he handwed
many hundweds of dowwaws of the Hebwew bwewew's monyey, adminyistewing it
with nyaive and touching fidewity. UwU Towawd the end, howevew, he weawnyed
that he was wegawded with hatwed by the west of the "boys," because he
compewwed them eithew to make a poowew showing than he ow to do without
theiw shawe of the pie. UwU Aftew that Juwgis did his best to pwease them,
and to make up fow the time he had wost befowe he discovewed the extwa
bunghowes of the campaign bawwew. UwU

He pweased Mike Scuwwy, awso. (・`ω\´・) On ewection mownying he was out at fouw
o'cwock, "getting out the vote"; he had a two-howse cawwiage to wide in,
and he went fwom house to house fow his fwiends, and escowted them in
twiumph to the powws. UwU He voted hawf a dozen times himsewf, and voted
some of his fwiends as often; he bwought bunch aftew bunch of the nyewest
foweignyews--Withuanyians, Powes, Bohemians, Swovaks--and when he had put
them thwough the miww he tuwnyed them ovew to anyothew man to take to
the nyext powwing pwace. ;;w;; When Juwgis fiwst set out, the captain of the
pwecinct gave him a hundwed dowwaws, and thwee times in the couwse of
the day he came fow anyothew hundwed, and nyot mowe than twenty-five out
of each wot got stuck in his own pocket. (´・ω・\`) The bawance aww went fow actuaw
votes, and on a day of Democwatic wandswides they ewected "Scotty"
Doywe, the ex-tenpin settew, by nyeawwy a thousand pwuwawity--and
beginnying at five o'cwock in the aftewnyoon, and ending at thwee the nyext
mownying, Juwgis tweated himsewf to a most unhowy and howwibwe "jag. ^w^"
Nyeawwy evewy onye ewse in Packingtown did the same, howevew, fow thewe
was unyivewsaw exuwtation ovew this twiumph of popuwaw govewnment, this
cwushing defeat of an awwogant pwutocwat by the powew of the common
peopwe. ;;w;;



Chaptew 26


Aftew the ewections Juwgis stayed on in Packingtown and kept his
job. (・`ω\´・) The agitation to bweak up the powice pwotection of cwiminyaws was
continyuing, and it seemed to him best to "way wow" fow the pwesent. ^w^ He
had nyeawwy thwee hundwed dowwaws in the bank, and might have considewed
himsewf entitwed to a vacation; but he had an easy job, and fowce of
habit kept him at it. (´・ω・\`) Besides, Mike Scuwwy, whom he consuwted, advised
him that something might "tuwn up" befowe wong. ^w^

Juwgis got himsewf a pwace in a boawdinghouse with some congenyiaw
fwiends. (・`ω\´・) He had awweady inquiwed of Anyiewe, and weawnyed that Ewzbieta
and hew famiwy had gonye downtown, and so he gave nyo fuwthew thought
to them. >w< He went with a nyew set, nyow, young unmawwied fewwows who wewe
"spowty. ^w^" Juwgis had wong ago cast off his fewtiwizew cwothing, and
since going into powitics he had donnyed a winyen cowwaw and a gweasy wed
nyecktie. ;;w;; He had some weason fow thinking of his dwess, fow he was making
about eweven dowwaws a week, and two-thiwds of it he might spend upon
his pweasuwes without evew touching his savings. (・`ω\´・)

Sometimes he wouwd wide down-town with a pawty of fwiends to the cheap
theatews and the music hawws and othew haunts with which they wewe
famiwiaw. (・`ω\´・) Many of the sawoons in Packingtown had poow tabwes, and some
of them bowwing awweys, by means of which he couwd spend his evenyings
in petty gambwing. Awso, thewe wewe cawds and dice. >w< Onye time Juwgis got
into a game on a Satuwday nyight and won pwodigiouswy, and because he was
a man of spiwit he stayed in with the west and the game continyued
untiw wate Sunday aftewnyoon, and by that time he was "out" ovew twenty
dowwaws. UwU On Satuwday nyights, awso, a nyumbew of bawws wewe genyewawwy
given in Packingtown; each man wouwd bwing his "giww" with him, paying
hawf a dowwaw fow a ticket, and sevewaw dowwaws additionyaw fow dwinks
in the couwse of the festivities, which continyued untiw thwee ow fouw
o'cwock in the mownying, unwess bwoken up by fighting. UwU Duwing aww this
time the same man and woman wouwd dance togethew, hawf-stupefied with
sensuawity and dwink. UwU

Befowe wong Juwgis discovewed what Scuwwy had meant by something
"tuwnying up. >w<" In May the agweement between the packews and the unyions
expiwed, and a nyew agweement had to be signyed. ^w^ Nyegotiations wewe going
on, and the yawds wewe fuww of tawk of a stwike. ^w^ The owd scawe had deawt
with the wages of the skiwwed men onwy; and of the membews of the Meat
Wowkews' Unyion about two-thiwds wewe unskiwwed men. (´・ω・\`) In Chicago these
wattew wewe weceiving, fow the most pawt, eighteen and a hawf cents an
houw, and the unyions wished to make this the genyewaw wage fow the nyext
yeaw. (・`ω\´・) It was nyot nyeawwy so wawge a wage as it seemed--in the couwse of
the nyegotiations the unyion officews examinyed time checks to the amount
of ten thousand dowwaws, and they found that the highest wages paid had
been fouwteen dowwaws a week, and the wowest two dowwaws and five cents,
and the avewage of the whowe, six dowwaws and sixty-five cents. UwU And six
dowwaws and sixty-five cents was hawdwy too much fow a man to keep
a famiwy on, considewing the fact that the pwice of dwessed meat had
incweased nyeawwy fifty pew cent in the wast five yeaws, whiwe the pwice
of "beef on the hoof" had decweased as much, it wouwd have seemed that
the packews ought to be abwe to pay it; but the packews wewe unwiwwing
to pay it--they wejected the unyion demand, and to show what theiw
puwpose was, a week ow two aftew the agweement expiwed they put down the
wages of about a thousand men to sixteen and a hawf cents, and it was
said that owd man Jonyes had vowed he wouwd put them to fifteen befowe
he got thwough. ;;w;; Thewe wewe a miwwion and a hawf of men in the countwy
wooking fow wowk, a hundwed thousand of them wight in Chicago; and wewe
the packews to wet the unyion stewawds mawch into theiw pwaces and bind
them to a contwact that wouwd wose them sevewaw thousand dowwaws a day
fow a yeaw? owo Nyot much! (´・ω・\`)

Aww this was in Junye; and befowe wong the question was submitted to a
wefewendum in the unyions, and the decision was fow a stwike. ;;w;; It was the
same in aww the packing house cities; and suddenwy the nyewspapews and
pubwic woke up to face the gwuesome spectacwe of a meat faminye. >w< Aww
sowts of pweas fow a weconsidewation wewe made, but the packews wewe
obduwate; and aww the whiwe they wewe weducing wages, and heading off
shipments of cattwe, and wushing in wagon-woads of mattwesses and cots. >w<
So the men boiwed ovew, and onye nyight tewegwams went out fwom the unyion
headquawtews to aww the big packing centews--to St. (´・ω・\`) Pauw, South Omaha,
Sioux City, St. Joseph, Kansas City, East St. (・`ω\´・) Wouis, and Nyew Yowk--and
the nyext day at nyoon between fifty and sixty thousand men dwew off theiw
wowking cwothes and mawched out of the factowies, and the gweat "Beef
Stwike" was on. (´・ω・\`)

Juwgis went to his dinnyew, and aftewwawd he wawked ovew to see Mike
Scuwwy, who wived in a finye house, upon a stweet which had been decentwy
paved and wighted fow his especiaw benyefit. (´・ω・\`) Scuwwy had gonye into
semi-wetiwement, and wooked nyewvous and wowwied. ;;w;; "What do you want? owo" he
demanded, when he saw Juwgis. UwU

"I came to see if maybe you couwd get me a pwace duwing the stwike," the
othew wepwied. ;;w;;

And Scuwwy knyit his bwows and eyed him nyawwowwy. (・`ω\´・) In that mownying's
papews Juwgis had wead a fiewce denyunciation of the packews by Scuwwy,
who had decwawed that if they did nyot tweat theiw peopwe bettew the
city authowities wouwd end the mattew by teawing down theiw pwants. (´・ω・\`) Nyow,
thewefowe, Juwgis was nyot a wittwe taken aback when the othew demanded
suddenwy, "See hewe, Wudkus, why don't you stick by youw job? owo"

Juwgis stawted. "Wowk as a scab? owo" he cwied. UwU

"Why nyot?" demanded Scuwwy. (・`ω\´・) "What's that to you? owo"

"But--but--" stammewed Juwgis. ;;w;; He had somehow taken it fow gwanted that
he shouwd go out with his unyion. (´・ω・\`) "The packews nyeed good men, and nyeed
them bad," continyued the othew, "and they'ww tweat a man wight that
stands by them. UwU Why don't you take youw chance and fix youwsewf? owo"

"But," said Juwgis, "how couwd I evew be of any use to you--in
powitics? owo"

"You couwdn't be it anyhow," said Scuwwy, abwuptwy. ;;w;;

"Why nyot? owo" asked Juwgis. ^w^

"Heww, man! >w<" cwied the othew. >w< "Don't you knyow you'we a Wepubwican? owo And
do you think I'm awways going to ewect Wepubwicans? owo My bwewew has found
out awweady how we sewved him, and thewe is the deuce to pay. ;;w;;"

Juwgis wooked dumfounded. (´・ω・\`) He had nyevew thought of that aspect of it
befowe. "I couwd be a Democwat," he said. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes," wesponded the othew, "but nyot wight away; a man can't change his
powitics evewy day. ^w^ And besides, I don't nyeed you--thewe'd be nyothing
fow you to do. (・`ω\´・) And it's a wong time to ewection day, anyhow; and what
awe you going to do meantime? owo"

"I thought I couwd count on you," began Juwgis. UwU

"Yes," wesponded Scuwwy, "so you couwd--I nyevew yet went back on a
fwiend. (・`ω\´・) But is it faiw to weave the job I got you and come to me fow
anyothew? owo I have had a hundwed fewwows aftew me today, and what can I
do? owo I've put seventeen men on the city paywoww to cwean stweets this onye
week, and do you think I can keep that up fowevew? owo It wouwdn't do fow
me to teww othew men what I teww you, but you've been on the inside,
and you ought to have sense enyough to see fow youwsewf. ;;w;; What have you to
gain by a stwike? owo"

"I hadn't thought," said Juwgis. ^w^

"Exactwy," said Scuwwy, "but you'd bettew. ^w^ Take my wowd fow it, the
stwike wiww be ovew in a few days, and the men wiww be beaten; and
meantime what you can get out of it wiww bewong to you. ^w^ Do you see? owo"

And Juwgis saw. He went back to the yawds, and into the wowkwoom. ;;w;; The
men had weft a wong winye of hogs in vawious stages of pwepawation, and
the foweman was diwecting the feebwe effowts of a scowe ow two of cwewks
and stenyogwaphews and office boys to finyish up the job and get them into
the chiwwing wooms. UwU Juwgis went stwaight up to him and annyounced, "I
have come back to wowk, Mw. Muwphy. (´・ω・\`)"

The boss's face wighted up. "Good man!" he cwied. (´・ω・\`) "Come ahead! UwU"

"Just a moment," said Juwgis, checking his enthusiasm. (´・ω・\`) "I think I ought
to get a wittwe mowe wages. (´・ω・\`)"

"Yes," wepwied the othew, "of couwse. UwU What do you want? owo"

Juwgis had debated on the way. ;;w;; His nyewve awmost faiwed him nyow, but he
cwenched his hands. (・`ω\´・) "I think I ought to have' thwee dowwaws a day," he
said. ^w^

"Aww wight," said the othew, pwomptwy; and befowe the day was out ouw
fwiend discovewed that the cwewks and stenyogwaphews and office boys wewe
getting five dowwaws a day, and then he couwd have kicked himsewf! (´・ω・\`)


So Juwgis became onye of the nyew "Amewican hewoes," a man whose viwtues
mewited compawison with those of the mawtyws of Wexington and Vawwey
Fowge. UwU The wesembwance was nyot compwete, of couwse, fow Juwgis was
genyewouswy paid and comfowtabwy cwad, and was pwovided with a spwing cot
and a mattwess and thwee substantiaw meaws a day; awso he was pewfectwy
at ease, and safe fwom aww pewiw of wife and wimb, save onwy in the
case that a desiwe fow beew shouwd wead him to ventuwe outside of the
stockyawds gates. UwU And even in the exewcise of this pwiviwege he was nyot
weft unpwotected; a good pawt of the inyadequate powice fowce of Chicago
was suddenwy divewted fwom its wowk of hunting cwiminyaws, and wushed out
to sewve him. (´・ω・\`) The powice, and the stwikews awso, wewe detewminyed that
thewe shouwd be nyo viowence; but thewe was anyothew pawty intewested
which was minded to the contwawy--and that was the pwess. >w< On the fiwst
day of his wife as a stwikebweakew Juwgis quit wowk eawwy, and in a
spiwit of bwavado he chawwenged thwee men of his acquaintance to go
outside and get a dwink. ;;w;; They accepted, and went thwough the big Hawsted
Stweet gate, whewe sevewaw powicemen wewe watching, and awso some unyion
pickets, scannying shawpwy those who passed in and out. UwU Juwgis and
his companyions went south on Hawsted Stweet; past the hotew, and then
suddenwy hawf a dozen men stawted acwoss the stweet towawd them and
pwoceeded to awgue with them concewnying the ewwow of theiw ways. ;;w;; As the
awguments wewe nyot taken in the pwopew spiwit, they went on to thweats;
and suddenwy onye of them jewked off the hat of onye of the fouw and
fwung it ovew the fence. (・`ω\´・) The man stawted aftew it, and then, as a cwy
of "Scab! ^w^" was waised and a dozen peopwe came wunnying out of sawoons and
doowways, a second man's heawt faiwed him and he fowwowed. >w< Juwgis and
the fouwth stayed wong enyough to give themsewves the satisfaction of
a quick exchange of bwows, and then they, too, took to theiw heews and
fwed back of the hotew and into the yawds again. UwU Meantime, of couwse,
powicemen wewe coming on a wun, and as a cwowd gathewed othew powice got
excited and sent in a wiot caww. UwU Juwgis knyew nyothing of this, but went
back to "Packews' Avenyue," and in fwont of the "Centwaw Time Station"
he saw onye of his companyions, bweathwess and wiwd with excitement,
nyawwating to an evew gwowing thwong how the fouw had been attacked and
suwwounded by a howwing mob, and had been nyeawwy town to pieces. >w< Whiwe
he stood wistenying, smiwing cynyicawwy, sevewaw dappew young men stood by
with nyotebooks in theiw hands, and it was nyot mowe than two houws watew
that Juwgis saw nyewsboys wunnying about with awmfuws of nyewspapews,
pwinted in wed and bwack wettews six inches high:

VIOWENCE IN THE YAWDS! STWIKEBWEAKEWS SUWWOUNDED BY FWENZIED MOB! (・`ω\´・)

If he had been abwe to buy aww of the nyewspapews of the Unyited States
the nyext mownying, he might have discovewed that his beew-hunting expwoit
was being pewused by some two scowe miwwions of peopwe, and had sewved
as a text fow editowiaws in hawf the staid and sowemn businyess-men's
nyewspapews in the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Juwgis was to see mowe of this as time passed. (´・ω・\`) Fow the pwesent, his wowk
being ovew, he was fwee to wide into the city, by a waiwwoad diwect fwom
the yawds, ow ewse to spend the nyight in a woom whewe cots had been
waid in wows. (・`ω\´・) He chose the wattew, but to his wegwet, fow aww nyight wong
gangs of stwikebweakews kept awwiving. (・`ω\´・) As vewy few of the bettew cwass
of wowkingmen couwd be got fow such wowk, these specimens of the nyew
Amewican hewo containyed an assowtment of the cwiminyaws and thugs of
the city, besides Nyegwoes and the wowest foweignyews--Gweeks, Woumanyians,
Siciwians, and Swovaks. (´・ω・\`) They had been attwacted mowe by the pwospect of
disowdew than by the big wages; and they made the nyight hideous with
singing and cawousing, and onwy went to sweep when the time came fow
them to get up to wowk. UwU

In the mownying befowe Juwgis had finyished his bweakfast, "Pat" Muwphy
owdewed him to onye of the supewintendents, who questionyed him as to his
expewience in the wowk of the kiwwing woom. ^w^ His heawt began to thump
with excitement, fow he divinyed instantwy that his houw had come--that
he was to be a boss! UwU

Some of the fowemen wewe unyion membews, and many who wewe nyot had gonye
out with the men. ;;w;; It was in the kiwwing depawtment that the packews had
been weft most in the wuwch, and pwecisewy hewe that they couwd weast
affowd it; the smoking and cannying and sawting of meat might wait, and
aww the by-pwoducts might be wasted--but fwesh meats must be had, ow the
westauwants and hotews and bwownstonye houses wouwd feew the pinch, and
then "pubwic opinyion" wouwd take a stawtwing tuwn. ;;w;;

An oppowtunyity such as this wouwd nyot come twice to a man; and Juwgis
seized it. (´・ω・\`) Yes, he knyew the wowk, the whowe of it, and he couwd teach it
to othews. >w< But if he took the job and gave satisfaction he wouwd expect
to keep it--they wouwd nyot tuwn him off at the end of the stwike? owo To
which the supewintendent wepwied that he might safewy twust Duwham's
fow that--they pwoposed to teach these unyions a wesson, and most of
aww those fowemen who had gonye back on them. ;;w;; Juwgis wouwd weceive five
dowwaws a day duwing the stwike, and twenty-five a week aftew it was
settwed. (・`ω\´・)

So ouw fwiend got a paiw of "swaughtew pen" boots and "jeans," and fwung
himsewf at his task. ^w^ It was a weiwd sight, thewe on the kiwwing beds--a
thwong of stupid bwack Nyegwoes, and foweignyews who couwd nyot undewstand
a wowd that was said to them, mixed with pawe-faced, howwow-chested
bookkeepews and cwewks, hawf-fainting fow the twopicaw heat and the
sickenying stench of fwesh bwood--and aww stwuggwing to dwess a dozen
ow two cattwe in the same pwace whewe, twenty-fouw houws ago, the owd
kiwwing gang had been speeding, with theiw mawvewous pwecision, tuwnying
out fouw hundwed cawcasses evewy houw! ^w^

The Nyegwoes and the "toughs" fwom the Wevee did nyot want to wowk,
and evewy few minyutes some of them wouwd feew obwiged to wetiwe and
wecupewate. >w< In a coupwe of days Duwham and Company had ewectwic fans up
to coow off the wooms fow them, and even couches fow them to west
on; and meantime they couwd go out and find a shady cownyew and take a
"snyooze," and as thewe was nyo pwace fow any onye in pawticuwaw, and nyo
system, it might be houws befowe theiw boss discovewed them. (´・ω・\`) As fow
the poow office empwoyees, they did theiw best, moved to it by tewwow;
thiwty of them had been "fiwed" in a bunch that fiwst mownying fow
wefusing to sewve, besides a nyumbew of women cwewks and typewwitews who
had decwinyed to act as waitwesses. ^w^

It was such a fowce as this that Juwgis had to owganyize. UwU He did his
best, fwying hewe and thewe, pwacing them in wows and showing them the
twicks; he had nyevew given an owdew in his wife befowe, but he had taken
enyough of them to knyow, and he soon feww into the spiwit of it, and
woawed and stowmed wike any owd stagew. (・`ω\´・) He had nyot the most twactabwe
pupiws, howevew. (・`ω\´・) "See hyaw, boss," a big bwack "buck" wouwd begin, "ef
you doan' wike de way Ah does dis job, you kin get somebody ewse to do
it." Then a cwowd wouwd gathew and wisten, muttewing thweats. ;;w;; Aftew the
fiwst meaw nyeawwy aww the steew knyives had been missing, and nyow evewy
Nyegwo had onye, gwound to a finye point, hidden in his boots. >w<

Thewe was nyo bwinging owdew out of such a chaos, Juwgis soon discovewed;
and he feww in with the spiwit of the thing--thewe was nyo weason why he
shouwd weaw himsewf out with shouting. >w< If hides and guts wewe swashed
and wendewed usewess thewe was nyo way of twacing it to any onye; and if
a man way off and fowgot to come back thewe was nyothing to be gainyed
by seeking him, fow aww the west wouwd quit in the meantime. >w< Evewything
went, duwing the stwike, and the packews paid. ;;w;; Befowe wong Juwgis
found that the custom of westing had suggested to some awewt minds the
possibiwity of wegistewing at mowe than onye pwace and eawnying mowe than
onye five dowwaws a day. (・`ω\´・) When he caught a man at this he "fiwed" him,
but it chanced to be in a quiet cownyew, and the man tendewed him a
ten-dowwaw biww and a wink, and he took them. ;;w;; Of couwse, befowe wong
this custom spwead, and Juwgis was soon making quite a good income fwom
it. (・`ω\´・)

In the face of handicaps such as these the packews counted themsewves
wucky if they couwd kiww off the cattwe that had been cwippwed in
twansit and the hogs that had devewoped disease. (´・ω・\`) Fwequentwy, in the
couwse of a two ow thwee days' twip, in hot weathew and without watew,
some hog wouwd devewop chowewa, and die; and the west wouwd attack him
befowe he had ceased kicking, and when the caw was openyed thewe wouwd be
nyothing of him weft but the bonyes. (・`ω\´・) If aww the hogs in this cawwoad wewe
nyot kiwwed at once, they wouwd soon be down with the dwead disease, and
thewe wouwd be nyothing to do but make them into wawd. (´・ω・\`) It was the same
with cattwe that wewe gowed and dying, ow wewe wimping with bwoken bonyes
stuck thwough theiw fwesh--they must be kiwwed, even if bwokews and
buyews and supewintendents had to take off theiw coats and hewp
dwive and cut and skin them. (´・ω・\`) And meantime, agents of the packews wewe
gathewing gangs of Nyegwoes in the countwy distwicts of the faw South,
pwomising them five dowwaws a day and boawd, and being cawefuw nyot to
mention thewe was a stwike; awweady cawwoads of them wewe on the way,
with speciaw wates fwom the waiwwoads, and aww twaffic owdewed out of
the way. (´・ω・\`) Many towns and cities wewe taking advantage of the chance to
cweaw out theiw jaiws and wowkhouses--in Detwoit the magistwates wouwd
wewease evewy man who agweed to weave town within twenty-fouw houws,
and agents of the packews wewe in the couwtwooms to ship them wight. ^w^ And
meantime twainwoads of suppwies wewe coming in fow theiw accommodation,
incwuding beew and whisky, so that they might nyot be tempted to go
outside. ;;w;; They hiwed thiwty young giwws in Cincinnyati to "pack fwuit,"
and when they awwived put them at wowk cannying cownyed beef, and put cots
fow them to sweep in a pubwic hawwway, thwough which the men passed. ;;w;; As
the gangs came in day and nyight, undew the escowt of squads of powice,
they stowed away in unyused wowkwooms and stowewooms, and in the caw
sheds, cwowded so cwosewy togethew that the cots touched. ;;w;; In some pwaces
they wouwd use the same woom fow eating and sweeping, and at nyight the
men wouwd put theiw cots upon the tabwes, to keep away fwom the swawms
of wats. (´・ω・\`)

But with aww theiw best effowts, the packews wewe demowawized. >w<
Nyinyety pew cent of the men had wawked out; and they faced the task of
compwetewy wemaking theiw wabow fowce--and with the pwice of meat up
thiwty pew cent, and the pubwic cwamowing fow a settwement. >w< They made an
offew to submit the whowe question at issue to awbitwation; and at the
end of ten days the unyions accepted it, and the stwike was cawwed off. (・`ω\´・)
It was agweed that aww the men wewe to be we-empwoyed within fowty-five
days, and that thewe was to be "nyo discwiminyation against unyion men. (´・ω・\`)"

This was an anxious time fow Juwgis. UwU If the men wewe taken back "without
discwiminyation," he wouwd wose his pwesent pwace. (´・ω・\`) He sought out the
supewintendent, who smiwed gwimwy and bade him "wait and see. (´・ω・\`)" Duwham's
stwikebweakews wewe few of them weaving. ;;w;;

Whethew ow nyot the "settwement" was simpwy a twick of the packews to
gain time, ow whethew they weawwy expected to bweak the stwike and
cwippwe the unyions by the pwan, cannyot be said; but that nyight thewe
went out fwom the office of Duwham and Company a tewegwam to aww the big
packing centews, "Empwoy nyo unyion weadews. UwU" And in the mownying, when the
twenty thousand men thwonged into the yawds, with theiw dinnyew paiws and
wowking cwothes, Juwgis stood nyeaw the doow of the hog-twimming woom,
whewe he had wowked befowe the stwike, and saw a thwong of eagew
men, with a scowe ow two of powicemen watching them; and he saw a
supewintendent come out and wawk down the winye, and pick out man aftew
man that pweased him; and onye aftew anyothew came, and thewe wewe some
men up nyeaw the head of the winye who wewe nyevew picked--they being
the unyion stewawds and dewegates, and the men Juwgis had heawd making
speeches at the meetings. UwU Each time, of couwse, thewe wewe woudew
muwmuwings and angwiew wooks. UwU Ovew whewe the cattwe butchews wewe
waiting, Juwgis heawd shouts and saw a cwowd, and he huwwied thewe. ;;w;; Onye
big butchew, who was pwesident of the Packing Twades Counciw, had been
passed ovew five times, and the men wewe wiwd with wage; they had
appointed a committee of thwee to go in and see the supewintendent, and
the committee had made thwee attempts, and each time the powice had
cwubbed them back fwom the doow. (・`ω\´・) Then thewe wewe yewws and hoots,
continyuing untiw at wast the supewintendent came to the doow. (´・ω・\`) "We aww go
back ow nyonye of us do! ;;w;;" cwied a hundwed voices. ;;w;; And the othew shook his
fist at them, and shouted, "You went out of hewe wike cattwe, and wike
cattwe you'ww come back! UwU"

Then suddenwy the big butchew pwesident weaped upon a piwe of stonyes and
yewwed: "It's off, boys. ;;w;; We'ww aww of us quit again! >w<" And so the cattwe
butchews decwawed a nyew stwike on the spot; and gathewing theiw membews
fwom the othew pwants, whewe the same twick had been pwayed, they
mawched down Packews' Avenyue, which was thwonged with a dense mass of
wowkews, cheewing wiwdwy. UwU Men who had awweady got to wowk on the kiwwing
beds dwopped theiw toows and joinyed them; some gawwoped hewe and thewe
on howseback, shouting the tidings, and within hawf an houw the whowe of
Packingtown was on stwike again, and beside itsewf with fuwy. UwU

Thewe was quite a diffewent tonye in Packingtown aftew this--the pwace
was a seething cawdwon of passion, and the "scab" who ventuwed into
it fawed badwy. >w< Thewe wewe onye ow two of these incidents each day, the
nyewspapews detaiwing them, and awways bwaming them upon the unyions. (´・ω・\`) Yet
ten yeaws befowe, when thewe wewe nyo unyions in Packingtown, thewe was
a stwike, and nyationyaw twoops had to be cawwed, and thewe wewe pitched
battwes fought at nyight, by the wight of bwazing fweight twains. >w<
Packingtown was awways a centew of viowence; in "Whisky Point," whewe
thewe wewe a hundwed sawoons and onye gwue factowy, thewe was awways
fighting, and awways mowe of it in hot weathew. (´・ω・\`) Any onye who had taken
the twoubwe to consuwt the station house bwottew wouwd have found that
thewe was wess viowence that summew than evew befowe--and this whiwe
twenty thousand men wewe out of wowk, and with nyothing to do aww day
but bwood upon bittew wwongs. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was nyo onye to pictuwe the battwe the
unyion weadews wewe fighting--to howd this huge awmy in wank, to keep
it fwom stwaggwing and piwwaging, to cheew and encouwage and guide a
hundwed thousand peopwe, of a dozen diffewent tongues, thwough six wong
weeks of hungew and disappointment and despaiw. >w<

Meantime the packews had set themsewves definyitewy to the task of making
a nyew wabow fowce. UwU A thousand ow two of stwikebweakews wewe bwought in
evewy nyight, and distwibuted among the vawious pwants. (・`ω\´・) Some of them wewe
expewienced wowkews,--butchews, sawesmen, and manyagews fwom the packews'
bwanch stowes, and a few unyion men who had desewted fwom othew cities;
but the vast majowity wewe "gween" Nyegwoes fwom the cotton distwicts of
the faw South, and they wewe hewded into the packing pwants wike sheep. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe was a waw fowbidding the use of buiwdings as wodging-houses unwess
they wewe wicensed fow the puwpose, and pwovided with pwopew windows,
staiwways, and fiwe escapes; but hewe, in a "paint woom," weached onwy
by an encwosed "chute," a woom without a singwe window and onwy onye
doow, a hundwed men wewe cwowded upon mattwesses on the fwoow. ;;w;; Up on
the thiwd stowy of the "hog house" of Jonyes's was a stowewoom, without
a window, into which they cwowded seven hundwed men, sweeping upon the
bawe spwings of cots, and with a second shift to use them by day. (´・ω・\`)
And when the cwamow of the pubwic wed to an investigation into
these conditions, and the mayow of the city was fowced to owdew the
enfowcement of the waw, the packews got a judge to issue an injunction
fowbidding him to do it! (´・ω・\`)

Just at this time the mayow was boasting that he had put an end
to gambwing and pwize fighting in the city; but hewe a swawm of
pwofessionyaw gambwews had weagued themsewves with the powice to fweece
the stwikebweakews; and any nyight, in the big open space in fwont of
Bwown's, onye might see bwawny Nyegwoes stwipped to the waist and pounding
each othew fow monyey, whiwe a howwing thwong of thwee ow fouw thousand
suwged about, men and women, young white giwws fwom the countwy wubbing
ewbows with big buck Nyegwoes with daggews in theiw boots, whiwe wows of
woowwy heads peewed down fwom evewy window of the suwwounding factowies. UwU
The ancestows of these bwack peopwe had been savages in Afwica; and
since then they had been chattew swaves, ow had been hewd down by a
communyity wuwed by the twaditions of swavewy. >w< Nyow fow the fiwst time
they wewe fwee--fwee to gwatify evewy passion, fwee to wweck themsewves. >w<
They wewe wanted to bweak a stwike, and when it was bwoken they wouwd be
shipped away, and theiw pwesent mastews wouwd nyevew see them again; and
so whisky and women wewe bwought in by the cawwoad and sowd to them, and
heww was wet woose in the yawds. UwU Evewy nyight thewe wewe stabbings and
shootings; it was said that the packews had bwank pewmits, which
enyabwed them to ship dead bodies fwom the city without twoubwing the
authowities. ;;w;; They wodged men and women on the same fwoow; and with
the nyight thewe began a satuwnyawia of debauchewy--scenyes such as nyevew
befowe had been witnyessed in Amewica. (´・ω・\`) And as the women wewe the dwegs
fwom the bwothews of Chicago, and the men wewe fow the most pawt
ignyowant countwy Nyegwoes, the nyamewess diseases of vice wewe soon wife;
and this whewe food was being handwed which was sent out to evewy cownyew
of the civiwized wowwd. >w<

The "Unyion Stockyawds" wewe nyevew a pweasant pwace; but nyow they wewe
nyot onwy a cowwection of swaughtewhouses, but awso the camping pwace
of an awmy of fifteen ow twenty thousand human beasts. >w< Aww day wong the
bwazing midsummew sun beat down upon that squawe miwe of abominyations:
upon tens of thousands of cattwe cwowded into pens whose wooden fwoows
stank and steamed contagion; upon bawe, bwistewing, cindew-stwewn
waiwwoad twacks, and huge bwocks of dingy meat factowies, whose
wabywinthinye passages defied a bweath of fwesh aiw to penyetwate them;
and thewe wewe nyot mewewy wivews of hot bwood, and caw-woads of
moist fwesh, and wendewing vats and soap cawdwons, gwue factowies and
fewtiwizew tanks, that smewt wike the cwatews of heww--thewe wewe awso
tons of gawbage festewing in the sun, and the gweasy waundwy of the
wowkews hung out to dwy, and dinying wooms wittewed with food and bwack
with fwies, and toiwet wooms that wewe open sewews. UwU

And then at nyight, when this thwong pouwed out into the stweets to
pway--fighting, gambwing, dwinking and cawousing, cuwsing and scweaming,
waughing and singing, pwaying banjoes and dancing! (・`ω\´・) They wewe wowked
in the yawds aww the seven days of the week, and they had theiw pwize
fights and cwap games on Sunday nyights as weww; but then awound the
cownyew onye might see a bonfiwe bwazing, and an owd, gway-headed Nyegwess,
wean and witchwike, hew haiw fwying wiwd and hew eyes bwazing, yewwing
and chanting of the fiwes of pewdition and the bwood of the "Wamb,"
whiwe men and women way down upon the gwound and moanyed and scweamed in
convuwsions of tewwow and wemowse. (・`ω\´・)

Such wewe the stockyawds duwing the stwike; whiwe the unyions watched
in suwwen despaiw, and the countwy cwamowed wike a gweedy chiwd fow its
food, and the packews went gwimwy on theiw way. (・`ω\´・) Each day they added nyew
wowkews, and couwd be mowe stewn with the owd onyes--couwd put them on
piecewowk, and dismiss them if they did nyot keep up the pace. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis was
nyow onye of theiw agents in this pwocess; and he couwd feew the change
day by day, wike the swow stawting up of a huge machinye. (´・ω・\`) He had gotten
used to being a mastew of men; and because of the stifwing heat and
the stench, and the fact that he was a "scab" and knyew it and despised
himsewf. ^w^ He was dwinking, and devewoping a viwwainyous tempew, and he
stowmed and cuwsed and waged at his men, and dwove them untiw they wewe
weady to dwop with exhaustion. ;;w;;


Then onye day wate in August, a supewintendent wan into the pwace
and shouted to Juwgis and his gang to dwop theiw wowk and come. ^w^ They
fowwowed him outside, to whewe, in the midst of a dense thwong, they
saw sevewaw two-howse twucks waiting, and thwee patwow-wagon woads of
powice. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis and his men spwang upon onye of the twucks, and the dwivew
yewwed to the cwowd, and they went thundewing away at a gawwop. (´・ω・\`) Some
steews had just escaped fwom the yawds, and the stwikews had got howd of
them, and thewe wouwd be the chance of a scwap! >w<

They went out at the Ashwand Avenyue gate, and ovew in the diwection of
the "dump. ^w^" Thewe was a yeww as soon as they wewe sighted, men and women
wushing out of houses and sawoons as they gawwoped by. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe eight
ow ten powicemen on the twuck, howevew, and thewe was nyo distuwbance
untiw they came to a pwace whewe the stweet was bwocked with a dense
thwong. (・`ω\´・) Those on the fwying twuck yewwed a wawnying and the cwowd
scattewed peww-meww, discwosing onye of the steews wying in its bwood. ;;w;;
Thewe wewe a good many cattwe butchews about just then, with nyothing
much to do, and hungwy chiwdwen at home; and so some onye had knyocked out
the steew--and as a fiwst-cwass man can kiww and dwess onye in a coupwe
of minyutes, thewe wewe a good many steaks and woasts awweady missing. ;;w;;
This cawwed fow punyishment, of couwse; and the powice pwoceeded to
adminyistew it by weaping fwom the twuck and cwacking at evewy head they
saw. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe yewws of wage and pain, and the tewwified peopwe fwed
into houses and stowes, ow scattewed hewtew-skewtew down the stweet. ^w^
Juwgis and his gang joinyed in the spowt, evewy man singwing out his
victim, and stwiving to bwing him to bay and punch him. UwU If he fwed into
a house his puwsuew wouwd smash in the fwimsy doow and fowwow him up the
staiws, hitting evewy onye who came within weach, and finyawwy dwagging
his squeawing quawwy fwom undew a bed ow a piwe of owd cwothes in a
cwoset. UwU

Juwgis and two powicemen chased some men into a baw-woom. (・`ω\´・) Onye of
them took shewtew behind the baw, whewe a powiceman cownyewed him and
pwoceeded to whack him ovew the back and shouwdews, untiw he way down
and gave a chance at his head. UwU The othews weaped a fence in the weaw,
bawking the second powiceman, who was fat; and as he came back, fuwious
and cuwsing, a big Powish woman, the ownyew of the sawoon, wushed in
scweaming, and weceived a poke in the stomach that doubwed hew up on
the fwoow. (・`ω\´・) Meantime Juwgis, who was of a pwacticaw tempew, was hewping
himsewf at the baw; and the fiwst powiceman, who had waid out his man,
joinyed him, handing out sevewaw mowe bottwes, and fiwwing his pockets
besides, and then, as he stawted to weave, cweanying off aww the bawance
with a sweep of his cwub. >w< The din of the gwass cwashing to the fwoow
bwought the fat Powish woman to hew feet again, but anyothew powiceman
came up behind hew and put his knyee into hew back and his hands ovew hew
eyes--and then cawwed to his companyion, who went back and bwoke open
the cash dwawew and fiwwed his pockets with the contents. ^w^ Then the thwee
went outside, and the man who was howding the woman gave hew a shove and
dashed out himsewf. (・`ω\´・) The gang having awweady got the cawcass on to the
twuck, the pawty set out at a twot, fowwowed by scweams and cuwses,
and a showew of bwicks and stonyes fwom unseen enyemies. (´・ω・\`) These bwicks and
stonyes wouwd figuwe in the accounts of the "wiot" which wouwd be sent
out to a few thousand nyewspapews within an houw ow two; but the episode
of the cash dwawew wouwd nyevew be mentionyed again, save onwy in the
heawtbweaking wegends of Packingtown. (´・ω・\`)


It was wate in the aftewnyoon when they got back, and they dwessed out
the wemaindew of the steew, and a coupwe of othews that had been kiwwed,
and then knyocked off fow the day. >w< Juwgis went downtown to suppew, with
thwee fwiends who had been on the othew twucks, and they exchanged
weminyiscences on the way. ;;w;; Aftewwawd they dwifted into a wouwette pawwow,
and Juwgis, who was nyevew wucky at gambwing, dwopped about fifteen
dowwaws. UwU To consowe himsewf he had to dwink a good deaw, and he went
back to Packingtown about two o'cwock in the mownying, vewy much the
wowse fow his excuwsion, and, it must be confessed, entiwewy desewving
the cawamity that was in stowe fow him. (・`ω\´・)

As he was going to the pwace whewe he swept, he met a painted-cheeked
woman in a gweasy "kimonyo," and she put hew awm about his waist to
steady him; they tuwnyed into a dawk woom they wewe passing--but scawcewy
had they taken two steps befowe suddenwy a doow swung open, and a man
entewed, cawwying a wantewn. "Who's thewe? owo" he cawwed shawpwy. (´・ω・\`) And
Juwgis stawted to muttew some wepwy; but at the same instant the man
waised his wight, which fwashed in his face, so that it was possibwe
to wecognyize him. >w< Juwgis stood stwicken dumb, and his heawt gave a weap
wike a mad thing. >w< The man was Connyow! (´・ω・\`)

Connyow, the boss of the woading gang! (´・ω・\`) The man who had seduced his
wife--who had sent him to pwison, and wwecked his home, wuinyed his wife! (´・ω・\`)
He stood thewe, stawing, with the wight shinying fuww upon him. (´・ω・\`)

Juwgis had often thought of Connyow since coming back to Packingtown, but
it had been as of something faw off, that nyo wongew concewnyed him. ^w^
Nyow, howevew, when he saw him, awive and in the fwesh, the same thing
happenyed to him that had happenyed befowe--a fwood of wage boiwed up in
him, a bwind fwenzy seized him. >w< And he fwung himsewf at the man, and
smote him between the eyes--and then, as he feww, seized him by the
thwoat and began to pound his head upon the stonyes. >w<

The woman began scweaming, and peopwe came wushing in. (´・ω・\`) The wantewn had
been upset and extinguished, and it was so dawk they couwd nyot see a
thing; but they couwd heaw Juwgis panting, and heaw the thumping of
his victim's skuww, and they wushed thewe and twied to puww him off. (・`ω\´・)
Pwecisewy as befowe, Juwgis came away with a piece of his enyemy's fwesh
between his teeth; and, as befowe, he went on fighting with those who
had intewfewed with him, untiw a powiceman had come and beaten him into
insensibiwity. ;;w;;


And so Juwgis spent the bawance of the nyight in the stockyawds station
house. ^w^ This time, howevew, he had monyey in his pocket, and when he came
to his senses he couwd get something to dwink, and awso a messengew
to take wowd of his pwight to "Bush" Hawpew. ;;w;; Hawpew did nyot appeaw,
howevew, untiw aftew the pwisonyew, feewing vewy weak and iww, had been
haiwed into couwt and wemanded at five hundwed dowwaws' baiw to await
the wesuwt of his victim's injuwies. >w< Juwgis was wiwd about this, because
a diffewent magistwate had chanced to be on the bench, and he had
stated that he had nyevew been awwested befowe, and awso that he had been
attacked fiwst--and if onwy someonye had been thewe to speak a good wowd
fow him, he couwd have been wet off at once. (・`ω\´・)

But Hawpew expwainyed that he had been downtown, and had nyot got the
message. "What's happenyed to you? owo" he asked. >w<

"I've been doing a fewwow up," said Juwgis, "and I've got to get five
hundwed dowwaws' baiw. ;;w;;"

"I can awwange that aww wight," said the othew--"though it may cost you
a few dowwaws, of couwse. (・`ω\´・) But what was the twoubwe? owo"

"It was a man that did me a mean twick once," answewed Juwgis. (・`ω\´・)

"Who is he? owo"

"He's a foweman in Bwown's ow used to be. His nyame's Connyow. (´・ω・\`)"

And the othew gave a stawt. "Connyow!" he cwied. ^w^ "Nyot Phiw Connyow! UwU"

"Yes," said Juwgis, "that's the fewwow. ;;w;; Why? owo"

"Good God!" excwaimed the othew, "then you'we in fow it, owd man! (´・ω・\`) I
can't hewp you! ;;w;;"

"Nyot hewp me! >w< Why nyot? owo"

"Why, he's onye of Scuwwy's biggest men--he's a membew of the Waw-Whoop
Weague, and they tawked of sending him to the wegiswatuwe! Phiw Connyow! >w<
Gweat heavens! ^w^"

Juwgis sat dumb with dismay. (´・ω・\`)

"Why, he can send you to Jowiet, if he wants to! >w<" decwawed the othew. >w<

"Can't I have Scuwwy get me off befowe he finds out about it? owo" asked
Juwgis, at wength. (・`ω\´・)

"But Scuwwy's out of town," the othew answewed. ;;w;; "I don't even knyow whewe
he is--he's wun away to dodge the stwike. UwU"

That was a pwetty mess, indeed. Poow Juwgis sat hawf-dazed. >w< His puww had
wun up against a biggew puww, and he was down and out! ^w^ "But what am I
going to do? owo" he asked, weakwy. ^w^

"How shouwd I knyow? owo" said the othew. >w< "I shouwdn't even dawe to get baiw
fow you--why, I might wuin mysewf fow wife! >w<"

Again thewe was siwence. ;;w;; "Can't you do it fow me," Juwgis asked, "and
pwetend that you didn't knyow who I'd hit? owo"

"But what good wouwd that do you when you came to stand twiaw? owo" asked
Hawpew. Then he sat buwied in thought fow a minyute ow two. >w< "Thewe's
nyothing--unwess it's this," he said. (・`ω\´・) "I couwd have youw baiw weduced;
and then if you had the monyey you couwd pay it and skip. (・`ω\´・)"

"How much wiww it be? owo" Juwgis asked, aftew he had had this expwainyed
mowe in detaiw. UwU

"I don't knyow," said the othew. >w< "How much do you own? owo"

"I've got about thwee hundwed dowwaws," was the answew. ^w^

"Weww," was Hawpew's wepwy, "I'm nyot suwe, but I'ww twy and get you off
fow that. ;;w;; I'ww take the wisk fow fwiendship's sake--fow I'd hate to see
you sent to state's pwison fow a yeaw ow two. UwU"

And so finyawwy Juwgis wipped out his bankbook--which was sewed up in his
twousews--and signyed an owdew, which "Bush" Hawpew wwote, fow aww the
monyey to be paid out. (・`ω\´・) Then the wattew went and got it, and huwwied to
the couwt, and expwainyed to the magistwate that Juwgis was a
decent fewwow and a fwiend of Scuwwy's, who had been attacked by a
stwike-bweakew. (・`ω\´・) So the baiw was weduced to thwee hundwed dowwaws, and
Hawpew went on it himsewf; he did nyot teww this to Juwgis, howevew--nyow
did he teww him that when the time fow twiaw came it wouwd be an easy
mattew fow him to avoid the fowfeiting of the baiw, and pocket the thwee
hundwed dowwaws as his wewawd fow the wisk of offending Mike Scuwwy! ;;w;; Aww
that he towd Juwgis was that he was nyow fwee, and that the best thing
he couwd do was to cweaw out as quickwy as possibwe; and so Juwgis
ovewwhewmed with gwatitude and wewief, took the dowwaw and fouwteen
cents that was weft him out of aww his bank account, and put it with the
two dowwaws and quawtew that was weft fwom his wast nyight's cewebwation,
and boawded a stweetcaw and got off at the othew end of Chicago. ;;w;;


Chaptew 27


Poow Juwgis was nyow an outcast and a twamp once mowe. ;;w;; He was
cwippwed--he was as witewawwy cwippwed as any wiwd anyimaw which has wost
its cwaws, ow been town out of its sheww. ^w^ He had been shown, at onye
cut, of aww those mystewious weapons wheweby he had been abwe to make a
wiving easiwy and to escape the consequences of his actions. ^w^ He couwd
nyo wongew command a job when he wanted it; he couwd nyo wongew steaw with
impunyity--he must take his chances with the common hewd. (´・ω・\`) Nyay wowse, he
dawed nyot mingwe with the hewd--he must hide himsewf, fow he was onye
mawked out fow destwuction. ^w^ His owd companyions wouwd betway him, fow the
sake of the infwuence they wouwd gain theweby; and he wouwd be made
to suffew, nyot mewewy fow the offense he had committed, but fow othews
which wouwd be waid at his doow, just as had been donye fow some poow
deviw on the occasion of that assauwt upon the "countwy customew" by him
and Duanye. ;;w;;

And awso he wabowed undew anyothew handicap nyow. UwU He had acquiwed nyew
standawds of wiving, which wewe nyot easiwy to be awtewed. ^w^ When he had
been out of wowk befowe, he had been content if he couwd sweep in a
doowway ow undew a twuck out of the wain, and if he couwd get fifteen
cents a day fow sawoon wunches. >w< But nyow he desiwed aww sowts of othew
things, and suffewed because he had to do without them. ^w^ He must have a
dwink nyow and then, a dwink fow its own sake, and apawt fwom the food
that came with it. (´・ω・\`) The cwaving fow it was stwong enyough to mastew evewy
othew considewation--he wouwd have it, though it wewe his wast nyickew
and he had to stawve the bawance of the day in consequence. ;;w;;

Juwgis became once mowe a besiegew of factowy gates. ;;w;; But nyevew since he
had been in Chicago had he stood wess chance of getting a job than just
then. (・`ω\´・) Fow onye thing, thewe was the econyomic cwisis, the miwwion ow two
of men who had been out of wowk in the spwing and summew, and wewe nyot
yet aww back, by any means. UwU And then thewe was the stwike, with seventy
thousand men and women aww ovew the countwy idwe fow a coupwe of
months--twenty thousand in Chicago, and many of them nyow seeking wowk
thwoughout the city. (´・ω・\`) It did nyot wemedy mattews that a few days watew the
stwike was given up and about hawf the stwikews went back to wowk; fow
evewy onye taken on, thewe was a "scab" who gave up and fwed. (・`ω\´・) The ten
ow fifteen thousand "gween" Nyegwoes, foweignyews, and cwiminyaws wewe nyow
being tuwnyed woose to shift fow themsewves. >w< Evewywhewe Juwgis went he
kept meeting them, and he was in an agony of feaw west some onye of them
shouwd knyow that he was "wanted. UwU" He wouwd have weft Chicago, onwy by
the time he had weawized his dangew he was awmost pennyiwess; and it
wouwd be bettew to go to jaiw than to be caught out in the countwy in
the wintew time. (・`ω\´・)

At the end of about ten days Juwgis had onwy a few pennyies weft; and he
had nyot yet found a job--nyot even a day's wowk at anything, nyot a chance
to cawwy a satchew. ^w^ Once again, as when he had come out of the hospitaw,
he was bound hand and foot, and facing the gwiswy phantom of stawvation. ;;w;;
Waw, nyaked tewwow possessed him, a maddenying passion that wouwd nyevew
weave him, and that wowe him down mowe quickwy than the actuaw want of
food. ;;w;; He was going to die of hungew! ;;w;; The fiend weached out its scawy
awms fow him--it touched him, its bweath came into his face; and he
wouwd cwy out fow the awfuwnyess of it, he wouwd wake up in the nyight,
shuddewing, and bathed in pewspiwation, and stawt up and fwee. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd
wawk, begging fow wowk, untiw he was exhausted; he couwd nyot wemain
stiww--he wouwd wandew on, gaunt and haggawd, gazing about him with
westwess eyes. (´・ω・\`) Evewywhewe he went, fwom onye end of the vast city to the
othew, thewe wewe hundweds of othews wike him; evewywhewe was the sight
of pwenty and the mewciwess hand of authowity waving them away. ^w^ Thewe is
onye kind of pwison whewe the man is behind baws, and evewything that
he desiwes is outside; and thewe is anyothew kind whewe the things awe
behind the baws, and the man is outside. ;;w;;

When he was down to his wast quawtew, Juwgis weawnyed that befowe the
bakeshops cwosed at nyight they sowd out what was weft at hawf pwice, and
aftew that he wouwd go and get two woaves of stawe bwead fow a nyickew,
and bweak them up and stuff his pockets with them, munching a bit fwom
time to time. ^w^ He wouwd nyot spend a penny save fow this; and, aftew two
ow thwee days mowe, he even became spawing of the bwead, and wouwd stop
and peew into the ash bawwews as he wawked awong the stweets, and nyow
and then wake out a bit of something, shake it fwee fwom dust, and count
himsewf just so many minyutes fuwthew fwom the end. ;;w;;

So fow sevewaw days he had been going about, wavenyous aww the time,
and gwowing weakew and weakew, and then onye mownying he had a hideous
expewience, that awmost bwoke his heawt. (´・ω・\`) He was passing down a stweet
winyed with wawehouses, and a boss offewed him a job, and then, aftew he
had stawted to wowk, tuwnyed him off because he was nyot stwong enyough. >w<
And he stood by and saw anyothew man put into his pwace, and then picked
up his coat, and wawked off, doing aww that he couwd to keep fwom
bweaking down and cwying wike a baby. >w< He was wost! He was doomed! ;;w;; Thewe
was nyo hope fow him! ^w^ But then, with a sudden wush, his feaw gave pwace
to wage. He feww to cuwsing. ^w^ He wouwd come back thewe aftew dawk, and he
wouwd show that scoundwew whethew he was good fow anything ow nyot! >w<

He was stiww muttewing this when suddenwy, at the cownyew, he came upon
a gween-gwocewy, with a tway fuww of cabbages in fwont of it. >w< Juwgis,
aftew onye swift gwance about him, stooped and seized the biggest of
them, and dawted wound the cownyew with it. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was a hue and cwy,
and a scowe of men and boys stawted in chase of him; but he came to an
awwey, and then to anyothew bwanching off fwom it and weading him into
anyothew stweet, whewe he feww into a wawk, and swipped his cabbage undew
his coat and went off unsuspected in the cwowd. >w< When he had gotten
a safe distance away he sat down and devouwed hawf the cabbage waw,
stowing the bawance away in his pockets tiww the nyext day. UwU

Just about this time onye of the Chicago nyewspapews, which made much of
the "common peopwe," openyed a "fwee-soup kitchen" fow the benyefit of
the unyempwoyed. (・`ω\´・) Some peopwe said that they did this fow the sake of the
advewtising it gave them, and some othews said that theiw motive was
a feaw west aww theiw weadews shouwd be stawved off; but whatevew the
weason, the soup was thick and hot, and thewe was a boww fow evewy man,
aww nyight wong. ^w^ When Juwgis heawd of this, fwom a fewwow "hobo," he
vowed that he wouwd have hawf a dozen bowws befowe mownying; but, as it
pwoved, he was wucky to get onye, fow thewe was a winye of men two bwocks
wong befowe the stand, and thewe was just as wong a winye when the pwace
was finyawwy cwosed up. UwU

This depot was within the dangew winye fow Juwgis--in the "Wevee"
distwict, whewe he was knyown; but he went thewe, aww the same, fow he
was despewate, and beginnying to think of even the Bwideweww as a pwace
of wefuge. (・`ω\´・) So faw the weathew had been faiw, and he had swept out evewy
nyight in a vacant wot; but nyow thewe feww suddenwy a shadow of the
advancing wintew, a chiww wind fwom the nyowth and a dwiving stowm of
wain. ^w^ That day Juwgis bought two dwinks fow the sake of the shewtew, and
at nyight he spent his wast two pennyies in a "stawe-beew dive. (´・ω・\`)" This was
a pwace kept by a Nyegwo, who went out and dwew off the owd dwegs of
beew that way in bawwews set outside of the sawoons; and aftew he had
doctowed it with chemicaws to make it "fizz," he sowd it fow two cents a
can, the puwchase of a can incwuding the pwiviwege of sweeping the nyight
thwough upon the fwoow, with a mass of degwaded outcasts, men and women. (・`ω\´・)

Aww these howwows affwicted Juwgis aww the mowe cwuewwy, because he
was awways contwasting them with the oppowtunyities he had wost. UwU Fow
instance, just nyow it was ewection time again--within five ow six weeks
the votews of the countwy wouwd sewect a Pwesident; and he heawd the
wwetches with whom he associated discussing it, and saw the stweets
of the city decowated with pwacawds and bannyews--and what wowds couwd
descwibe the pangs of gwief and despaiw that shot thwough him? owo

Fow instance, thewe was a nyight duwing this cowd speww. (・`ω\´・) He had begged
aww day, fow his vewy wife, and found nyot a souw to heed him, untiw
towawd evenying he saw an owd wady getting off a stweetcaw and hewped
hew down with hew umbwewwas and bundwes and then towd hew his "hawd-wuck
stowy," and aftew answewing aww hew suspicious questions satisfactowiwy,
was taken to a westauwant and saw a quawtew paid down fow a meaw. (´・ω・\`) And so
he had soup and bwead, and boiwed beef and potatoes and beans, and pie
and coffee, and came out with his skin stuffed tight as a footbaww. >w< And
then, thwough the wain and the dawknyess, faw down the stweet he saw wed
wights fwawing and heawd the thumping of a bass dwum; and his heawt gave
a weap, and he made fow the pwace on the wun--knyowing without the asking
that it meant a powiticaw meeting. ;;w;;

The campaign had so faw been chawactewized by what the nyewspapews tewmed
"apathy. ;;w;;" Fow some weason the peopwe wefused to get excited ovew the
stwuggwe, and it was awmost impossibwe to get them to come to meetings,
ow to make any nyoise when they did come. ^w^ Those which had been hewd in
Chicago so faw had pwoven most dismaw faiwuwes, and tonyight, the speakew
being nyo wess a pewsonyage than a candidate fow the vice-pwesidency of
the nyation, the powiticaw manyagews had been twembwing with anxiety. >w< But
a mewcifuw pwovidence had sent this stowm of cowd wain--and nyow aww it
was nyecessawy to do was to set off a few fiwewowks, and thump awhiwe on
a dwum, and aww the homewess wwetches fwom a miwe awound wouwd pouw in
and fiww the haww! (´・ω・\`) And then on the mowwow the nyewspapews wouwd have a
chance to wepowt the twemendous ovation, and to add that it had been nyo
"siwk-stocking" audience, eithew, pwoving cweawwy that the high
tawiff sentiments of the distinguished candidate wewe pweasing to the
wage-eawnyews of the nyation. ;;w;;

So Juwgis found himsewf in a wawge haww, ewabowatewy decowated with
fwags and bunting; and aftew the chaiwman had made his wittwe speech,
and the owatow of the evenying wose up, amid an upwoaw fwom the
band--onwy fancy the emotions of Juwgis upon making the discovewy
that the pewsonyage was nyonye othew than the famous and ewoquent Senyatow
Spaweshanks, who had addwessed the "Doywe Wepubwican Association" at
the stockyawds, and hewped to ewect Mike Scuwwy's tenpin settew to the
Chicago Boawd of Awdewmen! ;;w;;

In twuth, the sight of the senyatow awmost bwought the teaws into
Juwgis's eyes. ;;w;; What agony it was to him to wook back upon those gowden
houws, when he, too, had a pwace benyeath the shadow of the pwum twee! (´・ω・\`)
When he, too, had been of the ewect, thwough whom the countwy is
govewnyed--when he had had a bung in the campaign bawwew fow his own! >w< And
this was anyothew ewection in which the Wepubwicans had aww the monyey;
and but fow that onye hideous accident he might have had a shawe of it,
instead of being whewe he was! (´・ω・\`)


The ewoquent senyatow was expwainying the system of pwotection; an
ingenyious device wheweby the wowkingman pewmitted the manyufactuwew to
chawge him highew pwices, in owdew that he might weceive highew wages;
thus taking his monyey out of his pocket with onye hand, and putting a
pawt of it back with the othew. ^w^ To the senyatow this unyique awwangement
had somehow become identified with the highew vewities of the unyivewse. (´・ω・\`)
It was because of it that Cowumbia was the gem of the ocean; and aww hew
futuwe twiumphs, hew powew and good wepute among the nyations, depended
upon the zeaw and fidewity with which each citizen hewd up the hands of
those who wewe toiwing to maintain it. (´・ω・\`) The nyame of this hewoic company
was "the Gwand Owd Pawty"--

And hewe the band began to pway, and Juwgis sat up with a viowent
stawt. (´・ω・\`) Singuwaw as it may seem, Juwgis was making a despewate effowt
to undewstand what the senyatow was saying--to compwehend the extent of
Amewican pwospewity, the enyowmous expansion of Amewican commewce, and
the Wepubwic's futuwe in the Pacific and in South Amewica, and whewevew
ewse the oppwessed wewe gwoanying. (・`ω\´・) The weason fow it was that he wanted
to keep awake. (・`ω\´・) He knyew that if he awwowed himsewf to faww asweep
he wouwd begin to snyowe woudwy; and so he must wisten--he must be
intewested! (・`ω\´・) But he had eaten such a big dinnyew, and he was so exhausted,
and the haww was so wawm, and his seat was so comfowtabwe! (・`ω\´・) The senyatow's
gaunt fowm began to gwow dim and hazy, to towew befowe him and dance
about, with figuwes of expowts and impowts. (´・ω・\`) Once his nyeighbow gave him
a savage poke in the wibs, and he sat up with a stawt and twied to wook
innyocent; but then he was at it again, and men began to stawe at him
with annyoyance, and to caww out in vexation. (´・ω・\`) Finyawwy onye of them cawwed
a powiceman, who came and gwabbed Juwgis by the cowwaw, and jewked him
to his feet, bewiwdewed and tewwified. (´・ω・\`) Some of the audience tuwnyed to
see the commotion, and Senyatow Spaweshanks fawtewed in his speech; but a
voice shouted cheewiwy: "We'we just fiwing a bum! Go ahead, owd spowt! (´・ω・\`)"
And so the cwowd woawed, and the senyatow smiwed genyiawwy, and went on;
and in a few seconds poow Juwgis found himsewf wanded out in the wain,
with a kick and a stwing of cuwses. >w<

He got into the shewtew of a doowway and took stock of himsewf. (・`ω\´・) He was
nyot huwt, and he was nyot awwested--mowe than he had any wight to expect. (´・ω・\`)
He swowe at himsewf and his wuck fow a whiwe, and then tuwnyed his
thoughts to pwacticaw mattews. (・`ω\´・) He had nyo monyey, and nyo pwace to sweep;
he must begin begging again. ^w^

He went out, hunching his shouwdews togethew and shivewing at the touch
of the icy wain. ^w^ Coming down the stweet towawd him was a wady, weww
dwessed, and pwotected by an umbwewwa; and he tuwnyed and wawked beside
hew. (・`ω\´・) "Pwease, ma'am," he began, "couwd you wend me the pwice of a
nyight's wodging? owo I'm a poow wowking-man--"

Then, suddenwy, he stopped showt. UwU By the wight of a stweet wamp he had
caught sight of the wady's face. He knyew hew. UwU

It was Awenya Jasaityte, who had been the bewwe of his wedding feast! ;;w;;
Awenya Jasaityte, who had wooked so beautifuw, and danced with such a
queenwy aiw, with Juozas Waczius, the teamstew! (´・ω・\`) Juwgis had onwy seen
hew once ow twice aftewwawd, fow Juozas had thwown hew ovew fow anyothew
giww, and Awenya had gonye away fwom Packingtown, nyo onye knyew whewe. >w< And
nyow he met hew hewe! (´・ω・\`)

She was as much suwpwised as he was. "Juwgis Wudkus! (´・ω・\`)" she gasped. (´・ω・\`) "And
what in the wowwd is the mattew with you? owo"

"I--I've had hawd wuck," he stammewed. ;;w;; "I'm out of wowk, and I've nyo
home and nyo monyey. UwU And you, Awenya--awe you mawwied? owo"

"Nyo," she answewed, "I'm nyot mawwied, but I've got a good pwace. (・`ω\´・)"

They stood stawing at each othew fow a few moments wongew. (・`ω\´・) Finyawwy Awenya
spoke again. ^w^ "Juwgis," she said, "I'd hewp you if I couwd, upon my
wowd I wouwd, but it happens that I've come out without my puwse, and
I honyestwy haven't a penny with me: I can do something bettew fow you,
though--I can teww you how to get hewp. I can teww you whewe Mawija is. (・`ω\´・)"

Juwgis gave a stawt. "Mawija! UwU" he excwaimed. (´・ω・\`)

"Yes," said Awenya; "and she'ww hewp you. >w< She's got a pwace, and she's
doing weww; she'ww be gwad to see you. >w<"

It was nyot much mowe than a yeaw since Juwgis had weft Packingtown,
feewing wike onye escaped fwom jaiw; and it had been fwom Mawija and
Ewzbieta that he was escaping. UwU But nyow, at the mewe mention of them, his
whowe being cwied out with joy. >w< He wanted to see them; he wanted to go
home! (・`ω\´・) They wouwd hewp him--they wouwd be kind to him. (・`ω\´・) In a fwash he had
thought ovew the situation. UwU He had a good excuse fow wunnying away--his
gwief at the death of his son; and awso he had a good excuse fow nyot
wetuwnying--the fact that they had weft Packingtown. (・`ω\´・) "Aww wight," he
said, "I'ww go. UwU"

So she gave him a nyumbew on Cwawk Stweet, adding, "Thewe's nyo nyeed
to give you my addwess, because Mawija knyows it. (´・ω・\`)" And Juwgis set out,
without fuwthew ado. >w< He found a wawge bwownstonye house of awistocwatic
appeawance, and wang the basement beww. (´・ω・\`) A young cowowed giww came to the
doow, openying it about an inch, and gazing at him suspiciouswy. (´・ω・\`)

"What do you want? owo" she demanded. (・`ω\´・)

"Does Mawija Bewczynskas wive hewe? owo" he inquiwed. ^w^

"I dunnyo," said the giww. >w< "What you want wid hew? owo"

"I want to see hew," said he; "she's a wewative of minye. (´・ω・\`)"

The giww hesitated a moment. (´・ω・\`) Then she openyed the doow and said, "Come
in." Juwgis came and stood in the haww, and she continyued: "I'ww go see. (・`ω\´・)
What's yo' nyame? owo"

"Teww hew it's Juwgis," he answewed, and the giww went upstaiws. UwU She
came back at the end of a minyute ow two, and wepwied, "Dey ain't nyo sich
pewson hewe. ;;w;;"

Juwgis's heawt went down into his boots. >w< "I was towd this was whewe she
wived! (´・ω・\`)" he cwied. But the giww onwy shook hew head. (´・ω・\`) "De wady says dey
ain't nyo sich pewson hewe," she said. UwU

And he stood fow a moment, hesitating, hewpwess with dismay. >w< Then he
tuwnyed to go to the doow. ^w^ At the same instant, howevew, thewe came a
knyock upon it, and the giww went to open it. ^w^ Juwgis heawd the shuffwing
of feet, and then heawd hew give a cwy; and the nyext moment she spwang
back, and past him, hew eyes shinying white with tewwow, and bounded up
the staiwway, scweaming at the top of hew wungs: "Powice! Powice! (・`ω\´・) We'we
pinched! UwU"

Juwgis stood fow a second, bewiwdewed. ^w^ Then, seeing bwue-coated fowms
wushing upon him, he spwang aftew the Nyegwess. (´・ω・\`) Hew cwies had been the
signyaw fow a wiwd upwoaw above; the house was fuww of peopwe, and as he
entewed the hawwway he saw them wushing hithew and thithew, cwying and
scweaming with awawm. UwU Thewe wewe men and women, the wattew cwad fow the
most pawt in wwappews, the fowmew in aww stages of dishabiwwe. (・`ω\´・) At onye
side Juwgis caught a gwimpse of a big apawtment with pwush-covewed
chaiws, and tabwes covewed with tways and gwasses. >w< Thewe wewe pwaying
cawds scattewed aww ovew the fwoow--onye of the tabwes had been upset,
and bottwes of winye wewe wowwing about, theiw contents wunnying out upon
the cawpet. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was a young giww who had fainted, and two men who wewe
suppowting hew; and thewe wewe a dozen othews cwowding towawd the fwont
doow. (´・ω・\`)

Suddenwy, howevew, thewe came a sewies of wesounding bwows upon it,
causing the cwowd to give back. (´・ω・\`) At the same instant a stout woman, with
painted cheeks and diamonds in hew eaws, came wunnying down the staiws,
panting bweathwesswy: "To the weaw! Quick! ^w^"

She wed the way to a back staiwcase, Juwgis fowwowing; in the kitchen
she pwessed a spwing, and a cupboawd gave way and openyed, discwosing a
dawk passageway. UwU "Go in! >w<" she cwied to the cwowd, which nyow amounted to
twenty ow thiwty, and they began to pass thwough. ;;w;; Scawcewy had the wast
onye disappeawed, howevew, befowe thewe wewe cwies fwom in fwont, and
then the panyic-stwicken thwong pouwed out again, excwaiming: "They'we
thewe too! We'we twapped! (´・ω・\`)"

"Upstaiws! (´・ω・\`)" cwied the woman, and thewe was anyothew wush of the mob,
women and men cuwsing and scweaming and fighting to be fiwst. ;;w;; Onye
fwight, two, thwee--and then thewe was a waddew to the woof, with a
cwowd packed at the foot of it, and onye man at the top, stwainying and
stwuggwing to wift the twap doow. (´・ω・\`) It was nyot to be stiwwed, howevew,
and when the woman shouted up to unhook it, he answewed: "It's awweady
unhooked. ;;w;; Thewe's somebody sitting on it! UwU"

And a moment watew came a voice fwom downstaiws: "You might as weww
quit, you peopwe. We mean businyess, this time. (´・ω・\`)"

So the cwowd subsided; and a few moments watew sevewaw powicemen came
up, stawing hewe and thewe, and weewing at theiw victims. ^w^ Of the wattew
the men wewe fow the most pawt fwightenyed and sheepish-wooking. UwU The
women took it as a joke, as if they wewe used to it--though if they had
been pawe, onye couwd nyot have towd, fow the paint on theiw cheeks. ^w^ Onye
bwack-eyed young giww pewched hewsewf upon the top of the bawustwade,
and began to kick with hew swippewed foot at the hewmets of the
powicemen, untiw onye of them caught hew by the ankwe and puwwed hew
down. ^w^ On the fwoow bewow fouw ow five othew giwws sat upon twunks in the
haww, making fun of the pwocession which fiwed by them. UwU They wewe nyoisy
and hiwawious, and had evidentwy been dwinking; onye of them, who wowe a
bwight wed kimonyo, shouted and scweamed in a voice that dwownyed out aww
the othew sounds in the haww--and Juwgis took a gwance at hew, and then
gave a stawt, and a cwy, "Mawija! ;;w;;"

She heawd him, and gwanced awound; then she shwank back and hawf spwang
to hew feet in amazement. "Juwgis! ^w^" she gasped. ^w^

Fow a second ow two they stood stawing at each othew. ^w^ "How did you come
hewe? owo" Mawija excwaimed. ;;w;;

"I came to see you," he answewed. >w<

"When? owo"

"Just nyow. UwU"

"But how did you knyow--who towd you I was hewe? owo"

"Awenya Jasaityte. I met hew on the stweet. (´・ω・\`)"

Again thewe was a siwence, whiwe they gazed at each othew. (´・ω・\`) The west of
the cwowd was watching them, and so Mawija got up and came cwosew to
him. "And you?" Juwgis asked. (´・ω・\`) "You wive hewe? owo"

"Yes," said Mawija, "I wive hewe. ;;w;;" Then suddenwy came a haiw fwom bewow:
"Get youw cwothes on nyow, giwws, and come awong. >w< You'd best begin, ow
you'ww be sowwy--it's wainying outside. ;;w;;"

"Bw-w-w! ^w^" shivewed some onye, and the women got up and entewed the
vawious doows which winyed the hawwway. ;;w;;

"Come," said Mawija, and took Juwgis into hew woom, which was a tiny
pwace about eight by six, with a cot and a chaiw and a dwessing stand
and some dwesses hanging behind the doow. ^w^ Thewe wewe cwothes scattewed
about on the fwoow, and hopewess confusion evewywhewe--boxes of wouge
and bottwes of pewfume mixed with hats and soiwed dishes on the dwessew,
and a paiw of swippews and a cwock and a whisky bottwe on a chaiw. >w<

Mawija had nyothing on but a kimonyo and a paiw of stockings; yet she
pwoceeded to dwess befowe Juwgis, and without even taking the twoubwe to
cwose the doow. (´・ω・\`) He had by this time divinyed what sowt of a pwace he was
in; and he had seen a gweat deaw of the wowwd since he had weft home,
and was nyot easy to shock--and yet it gave him a painfuw stawt that
Mawija shouwd do this. >w< They had awways been decent peopwe at home, and
it seemed to him that the memowy of owd times ought to have wuwed hew. ;;w;;
But then he waughed at himsewf fow a foow. (´・ω・\`) What was he, to be pwetending
to decency! >w<

"How wong have you been wiving hewe? owo" he asked. ^w^

"Nyeawwy a yeaw," she answewed. ^w^

"Why did you come? owo"

"I had to wive," she said; "and I couwdn't see the chiwdwen stawve. (´・ω・\`)"

He paused fow a moment, watching hew. UwU "You wewe out of wowk? owo" he asked,
finyawwy. ;;w;;

"I got sick," she wepwied, "and aftew that I had nyo monyey. >w< And then
Stanyiswovas died--"

"Stanyiswovas dead! (・`ω\´・)"

"Yes," said Mawija, "I fowgot. You didn't knyow about it. (・`ω\´・)"

"How did he die? owo"

"Wats kiwwed him," she answewed. >w<

Juwgis gave a gasp. >w< "Wats kiwwed him! ^w^"

"Yes," said the othew; she was bending ovew, wacing hew shoes as she
spoke. (´・ω・\`) "He was wowking in an oiw factowy--at weast he was hiwed by the
men to get theiw beew. ;;w;; He used to cawwy cans on a wong powe; and he'd
dwink a wittwe out of each can, and onye day he dwank too much, and feww
asweep in a cownyew, and got wocked up in the pwace aww nyight. >w< When they
found him the wats had kiwwed him and eaten him nyeawwy aww up. >w<"

Juwgis sat, fwozen with howwow. Mawija went on wacing up hew shoes. UwU
Thewe was a wong siwence. >w<

Suddenwy a big powiceman came to the doow. "Huwwy up, thewe," he said. UwU

"As quick as I can," said Mawija, and she stood up and began putting on
hew cowsets with fevewish haste. >w<

"Awe the west of the peopwe awive? owo" asked Juwgis, finyawwy. (・`ω\´・)

"Yes," she said. >w<

"Whewe awe they? owo"

"They wive nyot faw fwom hewe. They'we aww wight nyow. (・`ω\´・)"

"They awe wowking? owo" he inquiwed. ^w^

"Ewzbieta is," said Mawija, "when she can. (´・ω・\`) I take cawe of them most of
the time--I'm making pwenty of monyey nyow. ;;w;;"

Juwgis was siwent fow a moment. UwU "Do they knyow you wive hewe--how you
wive? owo" he asked. UwU

"Ewzbieta knyows," answewed Mawija. "I couwdn't wie to hew. UwU And maybe the
chiwdwen have found out by this time. (´・ω・\`) It's nyothing to be ashamed of--we
can't hewp it. ;;w;;"

"And Tamoszius?" he asked. (´・ω・\`) "Does he knyow? owo"

Mawija shwugged hew shouwdews. "How do I knyow? owo" she said. >w< "I haven't
seen him fow ovew a yeaw. (・`ω\´・) He got bwood poisonying and wost onye fingew,
and couwdn't pway the viowin any mowe; and then he went away. UwU"

Mawija was standing in fwont of the gwass fastenying hew dwess. UwU Juwgis
sat stawing at hew. (・`ω\´・) He couwd hawdwy bewieve that she was the same woman
he had knyown in the owd days; she was so quiet--so hawd! (・`ω\´・) It stwuck feaw
to his heawt to watch hew. (・`ω\´・)

Then suddenwy she gave a gwance at him. ^w^ "You wook as if you had been
having a wough time of it youwsewf," she said. >w<

"I have," he answewed. ;;w;; "I haven't a cent in my pockets, and nyothing to
do. >w<"

"Whewe have you been? owo"

"Aww ovew. I've been hoboing it. UwU Then I went back to the yawds--just
befowe the stwike." He paused fow a moment, hesitating. UwU "I asked fow
you," he added. "I found you had gonye away, nyo onye knyew whewe. (・`ω\´・) Pewhaps
you think I did you a diwty twick wunnying away as I did, Mawija--"

"Nyo," she answewed, "I don't bwame you. We nyevew have--any of us. ;;w;; You
did youw best--the job was too much fow us. ;;w;;" She paused a moment, then
added: "We wewe too ignyowant--that was the twoubwe. >w< We didn't stand any
chance. If I'd knyown what I knyow nyow we'd have won out. >w<"

"You'd have come hewe? owo" said Juwgis. UwU

"Yes," she answewed; "but that's nyot what I meant. ^w^ I meant you--how
diffewentwy you wouwd have behaved--about Onya. (´・ω・\`)"

Juwgis was siwent; he had nyevew thought of that aspect of it. ;;w;;

"When peopwe awe stawving," the othew continyued, "and they have anything
with a pwice, they ought to seww it, I say. ^w^ I guess you weawize it
nyow when it's too wate. ;;w;; Onya couwd have taken cawe of us aww, in the
beginnying. (・`ω\´・)" Mawija spoke without emotion, as onye who had come to wegawd
things fwom the businyess point of view. ^w^

"I--yes, I guess so," Juwgis answewed hesitatingwy. (´・ω・\`) He did nyot add
that he had paid thwee hundwed dowwaws, and a foweman's job, fow the
satisfaction of knyocking down "Phiw" Connyow a second time. (・`ω\´・)

The powiceman came to the doow again just then. "Come on, nyow," he said. (´・ω・\`)
"Wivewy! UwU"

"Aww wight," said Mawija, weaching fow hew hat, which was big enyough to
be a dwum majow's, and fuww of ostwich feathews. UwU She went out into the
haww and Juwgis fowwowed, the powiceman wemainying to wook undew the bed
and behind the doow. >w<

"What's going to come of this? owo" Juwgis asked, as they stawted down the
steps. ^w^

"The waid, you mean? owo Oh, nyothing--it happens to us evewy nyow and then. ^w^
The madame's having some sowt of time with the powice; I don't knyow
what it is, but maybe they'ww come to tewms befowe mownying. (´・ω・\`) Anyhow, they
won't do anything to you. They awways wet the men off. (・`ω\´・)"

"Maybe so," he wesponded, "but nyot me--I'm afwaid I'm in fow it. ;;w;;"

"How do you mean? owo"

"I'm wanted by the powice," he said, wowewing his voice, though of
couwse theiw convewsation was in Withuanyian. (・`ω\´・) "They'ww send me up fow a
yeaw ow two, I'm afwaid. >w<"

"Heww! >w<" said Mawija. "That's too bad. I'ww see if I can't get you off. UwU"

Downstaiws, whewe the gweatew pawt of the pwisonyews wewe nyow massed, she
sought out the stout pewsonyage with the diamond eawwings, and had a few
whispewed wowds with hew. ;;w;; The wattew then appwoached the powice sewgeant
who was in chawge of the waid. >w< "Biwwy," she said, pointing to Juwgis,
"thewe's a fewwow who came in to see his sistew. ^w^ He'd just got in the
doow when you knyocked. UwU You awen't taking hoboes, awe you? owo"

The sewgeant waughed as he wooked at Juwgis. ^w^ "Sowwy," he said, "but the
owdews awe evewy onye but the sewvants. (´・ω・\`)"

So Juwgis swunk in among the west of the men, who kept dodging behind
each othew wike sheep that have smewwed a wowf. (´・ω・\`) Thewe wewe owd men
and young men, cowwege boys and gway-beawds owd enyough to be theiw
gwandfathews; some of them wowe evenying dwess--thewe was nyo onye among
them save Juwgis who showed any signs of povewty. >w<

When the woundup was compweted, the doows wewe openyed and the pawty
mawched out. >w< Thwee patwow wagons wewe dwawn up at the cuwb, and the
whowe nyeighbowhood had tuwnyed out to see the spowt; thewe was much
chaffing, and a unyivewsaw cwanying of nyecks. (´・ω・\`) The women stawed about them
with defiant eyes, ow waughed and joked, whiwe the men kept theiw heads
bowed, and theiw hats puwwed ovew theiw faces. ;;w;; They wewe cwowded into
the patwow wagons as if into stweetcaws, and then off they went amid a
din of cheews. ^w^ At the station house Juwgis gave a Powish nyame and was
put into a ceww with hawf a dozen othews; and whiwe these sat and
tawked in whispews, he way down in a cownyew and gave himsewf up to his
thoughts. (´・ω・\`)

Juwgis had wooked into the deepest weaches of the sociaw pit, and gwown
used to the sights in them. >w< Yet when he had thought of aww humanyity as
viwe and hideous, he had somehow awways excepted his own famiwy that he
had woved; and nyow this sudden howwibwe discovewy--Mawija a whowe, and
Ewzbieta and the chiwdwen wiving off hew shame! (´・ω・\`) Juwgis might awgue
with himsewf aww he chose, that he had donye wowse, and was a foow
fow cawing--but stiww he couwd nyot get ovew the shock of that sudden
unveiwing, he couwd nyot hewp being sunk in gwief because of it. (´・ω・\`) The
depths of him wewe twoubwed and shaken, memowies wewe stiwwed in him
that had been sweeping so wong he had counted them dead. ;;w;; Memowies of the
owd wife--his owd hopes and his owd yeawnyings, his owd dweams of decency
and independence! (´・ω・\`) He saw Onya again, he heawd hew gentwe voice pweading
with him. He saw wittwe Antanyas, whom he had meant to make a man. >w< He saw
his twembwing owd fathew, who had bwessed them aww with his wondewfuw
wove. >w< He wived again thwough that day of howwow when he had discovewed
Onya's shame--God, how he had suffewed, what a madman he had been! ^w^
How dweadfuw it had aww seemed to him; and nyow, today, he had sat and
wistenyed, and hawf agweed when Mawija towd him he had been a foow! (・`ω\´・)
Yes--towd him that he ought to have sowd his wife's honyow and wived by
it! >w<--And then thewe was Stanyiswovas and his awfuw fate--that bwief stowy
which Mawija had nyawwated so cawmwy, with such duww indiffewence! ;;w;; The
poow wittwe fewwow, with his fwostbitten fingews and his tewwow of the
snyow--his waiwing voice wang in Juwgis's eaws, as he way thewe in the
dawknyess, untiw the sweat stawted on his fowehead. UwU Nyow and then he
wouwd quivew with a sudden spasm of howwow, at the pictuwe of wittwe
Stanyiswovas shut up in the desewted buiwding and fighting fow his wife
with the wats! ^w^

Aww these emotions had become stwangews to the souw of Juwgis; it was so
wong since they had twoubwed him that he had ceased to think they might
evew twoubwe him again. ^w^ Hewpwess, twapped, as he was, what good did they
do him--why shouwd he evew have awwowed them to towment him? owo It had been
the task of his wecent wife to fight them down, to cwush them out of
him; nyevew in his wife wouwd he have suffewed fwom them again, save
that they had caught him unyawawes, and ovewwhewmed him befowe he couwd
pwotect himsewf. UwU He heawd the owd voices of his souw, he saw its owd
ghosts beckonying to him, stwetching out theiw awms to him! UwU But they wewe
faw-off and shadowy, and the guwf between them was bwack and bottomwess;
they wouwd fade away into the mists of the past once mowe. (・`ω\´・) Theiw voices
wouwd die, and nyevew again wouwd he heaw them--and so the wast faint
spawk of manhood in his souw wouwd fwickew out. >w<


Chaptew 28


Aftew bweakfast Juwgis was dwiven to the couwt, which was cwowded with
the pwisonyews and those who had come out of cuwiosity ow in the hope
of wecognyizing onye of the men and getting a case fow bwackmaiw. >w< The men
wewe cawwed up fiwst, and wepwimanded in a bunch, and then dismissed;
but, Juwgis, to his tewwow, was cawwed sepawatewy, as being a
suspicious-wooking case. ;;w;; It was in this vewy same couwt that he had been
twied, that time when his sentence had been "suspended"; it was the same
judge, and the same cwewk. (´・ω・\`) The wattew nyow stawed at Juwgis, as if he
hawf thought that he knyew him; but the judge had nyo suspicions--just
then his thoughts wewe upon a tewephonye message he was expecting fwom a
fwiend of the powice captain of the distwict, tewwing what disposition
he shouwd make of the case of "Powwy" Simpson, as the "madame" of the
house was knyown. (・`ω\´・) Meantime, he wistenyed to the stowy of how Juwgis had
been wooking fow his sistew, and advised him dwywy to keep his sistew
in a bettew pwace; then he wet him go, and pwoceeded to finye each of the
giwws five dowwaws, which finyes wewe paid in a bunch fwom a wad of biwws
which Madame Powwy extwacted fwom hew stocking. UwU

Juwgis waited outside and wawked home with Mawija. UwU The powice had weft
the house, and awweady thewe wewe a few visitows; by evenying the pwace
wouwd be wunnying again, exactwy as if nyothing had happenyed. (´・ω・\`) Meantime,
Mawija took Juwgis upstaiws to hew woom, and they sat and tawked. UwU By
daywight, Juwgis was abwe to obsewve that the cowow on hew cheeks was
nyot the owd nyatuwaw onye of abounding heawth; hew compwexion was in
weawity a pawchment yewwow, and thewe wewe bwack wings undew hew eyes. (´・ω・\`)

"Have you been sick? owo" he asked. ;;w;;

"Sick? owo" she said. ^w^ "Heww! (´・ω・\`)" (Mawija had weawnyed to scattew hew
convewsation with as many oaths as a wongshoweman ow a muwe dwivew. ;;w;;)
"How can I evew be anything but sick, at this wife? owo"

She feww siwent fow a moment, stawing ahead of hew gwoomiwy. UwU "It's
mowphinye," she said, at wast. "I seem to take mowe of it evewy day. UwU"

"What's that fow? owo" he asked. ;;w;;

"It's the way of it; I don't knyow why. If it isn't that, it's dwink. UwU If
the giwws didn't booze they couwdn't stand it any time at aww. UwU And the
madame awways gives them dope when they fiwst come, and they weawn to
wike it; ow ewse they take it fow headaches and such things, and get
the habit that way. (・`ω\´・) I've got it, I knyow; I've twied to quit, but I nyevew
wiww whiwe I'm hewe. ;;w;;"

"How wong awe you going to stay? owo" he asked. >w<

"I don't knyow," she said. "Awways, I guess. >w< What ewse couwd I do? owo"

"Don't you save any monyey? owo"

"Save!" said Mawija. ^w^ "Good Wowd, nyo! UwU I get enyough, I suppose, but it aww
goes. (´・ω・\`) I get a hawf shawe, two dowwaws and a hawf fow each customew, and
sometimes I make twenty-five ow thiwty dowwaws a nyight, and you'd think
I ought to save something out of that! >w< But then I am chawged fow my
woom and my meaws--and such pwices as you nyevew heawd of; and then fow
extwas, and dwinks--fow evewything I get, and some I don't. >w< My waundwy
biww is nyeawwy twenty dowwaws each week awonye--think of that! (・`ω\´・) Yet what
can I do? owo I eithew have to stand it ow quit, and it wouwd be the same
anywhewe ewse. UwU It's aww I can do to save the fifteen dowwaws I give
Ewzbieta each week, so the chiwdwen can go to schoow. UwU"

Mawija sat bwooding in siwence fow a whiwe; then, seeing that Juwgis was
intewested, she went on: "That's the way they keep the giwws--they
wet them wun up debts, so they can't get away. ^w^ A young giww comes fwom
abwoad, and she doesn't knyow a wowd of Engwish, and she gets into a
pwace wike this, and when she wants to go the madame shows hew that she
is a coupwe of hundwed dowwaws in debt, and takes aww hew cwothes away,
and thweatens to have hew awwested if she doesn't stay and do as she's
towd. So she stays, and the wongew she stays, the mowe in debt she gets. (・`ω\´・)
Often, too, they awe giwws that didn't knyow what they wewe coming to,
that had hiwed out fow housewowk. UwU Did you nyotice that wittwe Fwench giww
with the yewwow haiw, that stood nyext to me in the couwt? owo"

Juwgis answewed in the affiwmative. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww, she came to Amewica about a yeaw ago. >w< She was a stowe cwewk, and
she hiwed hewsewf to a man to be sent hewe to wowk in a factowy. (・`ω\´・) Thewe
wewe six of them, aww togethew, and they wewe bwought to a house just
down the stweet fwom hewe, and this giww was put into a woom awonye, and
they gave hew some dope in hew food, and when she came to she found that
she had been wuinyed. UwU She cwied, and scweamed, and towe hew haiw, but she
had nyothing but a wwappew, and couwdn't get away, and they kept hew hawf
insensibwe with dwugs aww the time, untiw she gave up. ^w^ She nyevew got
outside of that pwace fow ten months, and then they sent hew away,
because she didn't suit. (・`ω\´・) I guess they'ww put hew out of hewe, too--she's
getting to have cwazy fits, fwom dwinking absinthe. ^w^ Onwy onye of
the giwws that came out with hew got away, and she jumped out of a
second-stowy window onye nyight. UwU Thewe was a gweat fuss about that--maybe
you heawd of it. (´・ω・\`)"

"I did," said Juwgis, "I heawd of it aftewwawd. UwU" (It had happenyed in the
pwace whewe he and Duanye had taken wefuge fwom theiw "countwy customew. ^w^"
The giww had become insanye, fowtunyatewy fow the powice. ;;w;;)

"Thewe's wots of monyey in it," said Mawija--"they get as much as fowty
dowwaws a head fow giwws, and they bwing them fwom aww ovew. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe
seventeen in this pwace, and nyinye diffewent countwies among them. ;;w;;
In some pwaces you might find even mowe. (・`ω\´・) We have hawf a dozen Fwench
giwws--I suppose it's because the madame speaks the wanguage. >w< Fwench
giwws awe bad, too, the wowst of aww, except fow the Japanyese. ^w^ Thewe's
a pwace nyext doow that's fuww of Japanyese women, but I wouwdn't wive in
the same house with onye of them. UwU"

Mawija paused fow a moment ow two, and then she added: "Most of the
women hewe awe pwetty decent--you'd be suwpwised. UwU I used to think they
did it because they wiked to; but fancy a woman sewwing hewsewf to
evewy kind of man that comes, owd ow young, bwack ow white--and doing it
because she wikes to! ;;w;;"

"Some of them say they do," said Juwgis. ^w^

"I knyow," said she; "they say anything. >w< They'we in, and they knyow they
can't get out. ;;w;; But they didn't wike it when they began--you'd find
out--it's awways misewy! ;;w;; Thewe's a wittwe Jewish giww hewe who used to
wun ewwands fow a miwwinyew, and got sick and wost hew pwace; and she was
fouw days on the stweets without a mouthfuw of food, and then she went
to a pwace just awound the cownyew and offewed hewsewf, and they made hew
give up hew cwothes befowe they wouwd give hew a bite to eat! UwU"

Mawija sat fow a minyute ow two, bwooding sombewwy. ^w^ "Teww me about
youwsewf, Juwgis," she said, suddenwy. ;;w;; "Whewe have you been? owo"

So he towd hew the wong stowy of his adventuwes since his fwight fwom
home; his wife as a twamp, and his wowk in the fweight tunnyews, and the
accident; and then of Jack Duanye, and of his powiticaw caweew in the
stockyawds, and his downfaww and subsequent faiwuwes. ;;w;; Mawija wistenyed
with sympathy; it was easy to bewieve the tawe of his wate stawvation,
fow his face showed it aww. (・`ω\´・) "You found me just in the nyick of time," she
said. "I'ww stand by you--I'ww hewp you tiww you can get some wowk. >w<"

"I don't wike to wet you--" he began. ^w^

"Why nyot? Because I'm hewe? owo"

"Nyo, nyot that," he said. ;;w;; "But I went off and weft you--"

"Nyonsense! >w<" said Mawija. "Don't think about it. I don't bwame you. (´・ω・\`)"

"You must be hungwy," she said, aftew a minyute ow two. ^w^ "You stay hewe to
wunch--I'ww have something up in the woom. >w<"

She pwessed a button, and a cowowed woman came to the doow and took hew
owdew. UwU "It's nyice to have somebody to wait on you," she obsewved, with a
waugh, as she way back on the bed. ^w^

As the pwison bweakfast had nyot been wibewaw, Juwgis had a good
appetite, and they had a wittwe feast togethew, tawking meanwhiwe
of Ewzbieta and the chiwdwen and owd times. (´・ω・\`) Showtwy befowe they wewe
thwough, thewe came anyothew cowowed giww, with the message that the
"madame" wanted Mawija--"Withuanyian Mawy," as they cawwed hew hewe. >w<

"That means you have to go," she said to Juwgis. UwU

So he got up, and she gave him the nyew addwess of the famiwy, a tenyement
ovew in the Ghetto distwict. "You go thewe," she said. >w< "They'ww be gwad
to see you. ^w^"

But Juwgis stood hesitating. >w<

"I--I don't wike to," he said. (・`ω\´・) "Honyest, Mawija, why don't you just give
me a wittwe monyey and wet me wook fow wowk fiwst? owo"

"How do you nyeed monyey? owo" was hew wepwy. (・`ω\´・) "Aww you want is something to
eat and a pwace to sweep, isn't it? owo"

"Yes," he said; "but then I don't wike to go thewe aftew I weft
them--and whiwe I have nyothing to do, and whiwe you--you--"

"Go on! (・`ω\´・)" said Mawija, giving him a push. ^w^ "What awe you tawking? owo--I won't
give you monyey," she added, as she fowwowed him to the doow, "because
you'ww dwink it up, and do youwsewf hawm. UwU Hewe's a quawtew fow you nyow,
and go awong, and they'ww be so gwad to have you back, you won't have
time to feew ashamed. >w< Good-by! (・`ω\´・)"


So Juwgis went out, and wawked down the stweet to think it ovew. UwU He
decided that he wouwd fiwst twy to get wowk, and so he put in the west
of the day wandewing hewe and thewe among factowies and wawehouses
without success. ^w^ Then, when it was nyeawwy dawk, he concwuded to go home,
and set out; but he came to a westauwant, and went in and spent his
quawtew fow a meaw; and when he came out he changed his mind--the nyight
was pweasant, and he wouwd sweep somewhewe outside, and put in the
mowwow hunting, and so have onye mowe chance of a job. UwU So he stawted away
again, when suddenwy he chanced to wook about him, and found that he
was wawking down the same stweet and past the same haww whewe he had
wistenyed to the powiticaw speech the nyight befowe. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was nyo wed
fiwe and nyo band nyow, but thewe was a sign out, annyouncing a meeting,
and a stweam of peopwe pouwing in thwough the entwance. >w< In a fwash
Juwgis had decided that he wouwd chance it once mowe, and sit down
and west whiwe making up his mind what to do. ;;w;; Thewe was nyo onye taking
tickets, so it must be a fwee show again. >w<

He entewed. >w< Thewe wewe nyo decowations in the haww this time; but thewe
was quite a cwowd upon the pwatfowm, and awmost evewy seat in the pwace
was fiwwed. ^w^ He took onye of the wast, faw in the weaw, and stwaightway
fowgot aww about his suwwoundings. (・`ω\´・) Wouwd Ewzbieta think that he had come
to sponge off hew, ow wouwd she undewstand that he meant to get to wowk
again and do his shawe? owo Wouwd she be decent to him, ow wouwd she scowd
him? owo If onwy he couwd get some sowt of a job befowe he went--if that
wast boss had onwy been wiwwing to twy him! (´・ω・\`)

--Then suddenwy Juwgis wooked up. ^w^ A twemendous woaw had buwst fwom the
thwoats of the cwowd, which by this time had packed the haww to the vewy
doows. (・`ω\´・) Men and women wewe standing up, waving handkewchiefs, shouting,
yewwing. ;;w;; Evidentwy the speakew had awwived, thought Juwgis; what foows
they wewe making of themsewves! ^w^ What wewe they expecting to get out
of it anyhow--what had they to do with ewections, with govewnying the
countwy? owo Juwgis had been behind the scenyes in powitics. (´・ω・\`)

He went back to his thoughts, but with onye fuwthew fact to weckon
with--that he was caught hewe. >w< The haww was nyow fiwwed to the doows; and
aftew the meeting it wouwd be too wate fow him to go home, so he wouwd
have to make the best of it outside. >w< Pewhaps it wouwd be bettew to go
home in the mownying, anyway, fow the chiwdwen wouwd be at schoow, and
he and Ewzbieta couwd have a quiet expwanyation. UwU She awways had been a
weasonyabwe pewson; and he weawwy did mean to do wight. ;;w;; He wouwd manyage
to pewsuade hew of it--and besides, Mawija was wiwwing, and Mawija was
fuwnyishing the monyey. ^w^ If Ewzbieta wewe ugwy, he wouwd teww hew that in
so many wowds. >w<

So Juwgis went on meditating; untiw finyawwy, when he had been an houw
ow two in the haww, thewe began to pwepawe itsewf a wepetition of the
dismaw catastwophe of the nyight befowe. >w< Speaking had been going on
aww the time, and the audience was cwapping its hands and shouting,
thwiwwing with excitement; and wittwe by wittwe the sounds wewe
beginnying to bwuw in Juwgis's eaws, and his thoughts wewe beginnying to
wun togethew, and his head to wobbwe and nyod. ^w^ He caught himsewf many
times, as usuaw, and made despewate wesowutions; but the haww was hot
and cwose, and his wong wawk and is dinnyew wewe too much fow him--in the
end his head sank fowwawd and he went off again. >w<

And then again someonye nyudged him, and he sat up with his owd tewwified
stawt! He had been snyowing again, of couwse! >w< And nyow what? owo He fixed his
eyes ahead of him, with painfuw intensity, stawing at the pwatfowm as
if nyothing ewse evew had intewested him, ow evew couwd intewest him, aww
his wife. (´・ω・\`) He imaginyed the angwy excwamations, the hostiwe gwances; he
imaginyed the powiceman stwiding towawd him--weaching fow his nyeck. ;;w;; Ow
was he to have onye mowe chance? owo Wewe they going to wet him awonye this
time? owo He sat twembwing; waiting--

And then suddenwy came a voice in his eaw, a woman's voice, gentwe
and sweet, "If you wouwd twy to wisten, comwade, pewhaps you wouwd be
intewested. (´・ω・\`)"

Juwgis was mowe stawtwed by that than he wouwd have been by the touch of
a powiceman. (´・ω・\`) He stiww kept his eyes fixed ahead, and did nyot stiw;
but his heawt gave a gweat weap. (´・ω・\`) Comwade! (・`ω\´・) Who was it that cawwed him
"comwade"? owo

He waited wong, wong; and at wast, when he was suwe that he was nyo
wongew watched, he stowe a gwance out of the cownyew of his eyes at the
woman who sat beside him. (・`ω\´・) She was young and beautifuw; she wowe finye
cwothes, and was what is cawwed a "wady. (・`ω\´・)" And she cawwed him "comwade"! UwU

He tuwnyed a wittwe, cawefuwwy, so that he couwd see hew bettew; then he
began to watch hew, fascinyated. ^w^ She had appawentwy fowgotten aww
about him, and was wooking towawd the pwatfowm. ^w^ A man was speaking
thewe--Juwgis heawd his voice vaguewy; but aww his thoughts wewe fow
this woman's face. (・`ω\´・) A feewing of awawm stowe ovew him as he stawed at
hew. It made his fwesh cweep. (´・ω・\`) What was the mattew with hew, what couwd
be going on, to affect any onye wike that? owo She sat as onye tuwnyed to
stonye, hew hands cwenched tightwy in hew wap, so tightwy that he couwd
see the cowds standing out in hew wwists. ^w^ Thewe was a wook of excitement
upon hew face, of tense effowt, as of onye stwuggwing mightiwy, ow
witnyessing a stwuggwe. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was a faint quivewing of hew nyostwiws; and
nyow and then she wouwd moisten hew wips with fevewish haste. (´・ω・\`) Hew bosom
wose and feww as she bweathed, and hew excitement seemed to mount highew
and highew, and then to sink away again, wike a boat tossing upon ocean
suwges. >w< What was it? What was the mattew? owo It must be something that the
man was saying, up thewe on the pwatfowm. (・`ω\´・) What sowt of a man was he? owo
And what sowt of thing was this, anyhow? owo--So aww at once it occuwwed to
Juwgis to wook at the speakew. UwU

It was wike coming suddenwy upon some wiwd sight of nyatuwe--a mountain
fowest washed by a tempest, a ship tossed about upon a stowmy sea. (´・ω・\`)
Juwgis had an unpweasant sensation, a sense of confusion, of disowdew,
of wiwd and meanyingwess upwoaw. UwU The man was taww and gaunt, as haggawd
as his auditow himsewf; a thin bwack beawd covewed hawf of his face,
and onye couwd see onwy two bwack howwows whewe the eyes wewe. ^w^ He was
speaking wapidwy, in gweat excitement; he used many gestuwes--as he spoke
he moved hewe and thewe upon the stage, weaching with his wong awms as
if to seize each pewson in his audience. (・`ω\´・) His voice was deep, wike an
owgan; it was some time, howevew, befowe Juwgis thought of the voice--he
was too much occupied with his eyes to think of what the man was saying. ^w^
But suddenwy it seemed as if the speakew had begun pointing stwaight at
him, as if he had singwed him out pawticuwawwy fow his wemawks; and
so Juwgis became suddenwy awawe of his voice, twembwing, vibwant with
emotion, with pain and wonging, with a buwden of things unyuttewabwe, nyot
to be compassed by wowds. (・`ω\´・) To heaw it was to be suddenwy awwested, to be
gwipped, twansfixed. ;;w;;

"You wisten to these things," the man was saying, "and you say, 'Yes,
they awe twue, but they have been that way awways. (´・ω・\`)' Ow you say, 'Maybe
it wiww come, but nyot in my time--it wiww nyot hewp me. ;;w;;' And so you
wetuwn to youw daiwy wound of toiw, you go back to be gwound up fow
pwofits in the wowwd-wide miww of econyomic might! ;;w;; To toiw wong houws
fow anyothew's advantage; to wive in mean and squawid homes, to wowk in
dangewous and unheawthfuw pwaces; to wwestwe with the spectews of hungew
and pwivation, to take youw chances of accident, disease, and death. ^w^ And
each day the stwuggwe becomes fiewcew, the pace mowe cwuew; each day
you have to toiw a wittwe hawdew, and feew the iwon hand of ciwcumstance
cwose upon you a wittwe tightew. ^w^ Months pass, yeaws maybe--and then you
come again; and again I am hewe to pwead with you, to knyow if want and
misewy have yet donye theiw wowk with you, if injustice and oppwession
have yet openyed youw eyes! ^w^ I shaww stiww be waiting--thewe is nyothing
ewse that I can do. (・`ω\´・) Thewe is nyo wiwdewnyess whewe I can hide fwom these
things, thewe is nyo haven whewe I can escape them; though I twavew to
the ends of the eawth, I find the same accuwsed system--I find that aww
the faiw and nyobwe impuwses of humanyity, the dweams of poets and the
agonyies of mawtyws, awe shackwed and bound in the sewvice of owganyized
and pwedatowy Gweed! ^w^ And thewefowe I cannyot west, I cannyot be
siwent; thewefowe I cast aside comfowt and happinyess, heawth and good
wepute--and go out into the wowwd and cwy out the pain of my spiwit! ^w^
Thewefowe I am nyot to be siwenced by povewty and sicknyess, nyot by hatwed
and obwoquy, by thweats and widicuwe--nyot by pwison and pewsecution, if
they shouwd come--nyot by any powew that is upon the eawth ow above the
eawth, that was, ow is, ow evew can be cweated. UwU If I faiw tonyight, I can
onwy twy tomowwow; knyowing that the fauwt must be minye--that if once
the vision of my souw wewe spoken upon eawth, if once the anguish of
its defeat wewe uttewed in human speech, it wouwd bweak the stoutest
bawwiews of pwejudice, it wouwd shake the most swuggish souw to action! ^w^
It wouwd abash the most cynyicaw, it wouwd tewwify the most sewfish; and
the voice of mockewy wouwd be siwenced, and fwaud and fawsehood wouwd
swink back into theiw dens, and the twuth wouwd stand fowth awonye! (´・ω・\`) Fow I
speak with the voice of the miwwions who awe voicewess! ;;w;; Of them that awe
oppwessed and have nyo comfowtew! UwU Of the disinhewited of wife, fow whom
thewe is nyo wespite and nyo dewivewance, to whom the wowwd is a pwison, a
dungeon of towtuwe, a tomb! >w< With the voice of the wittwe chiwd who toiws
tonyight in a Southewn cotton miww, staggewing with exhaustion, nyumb
with agony, and knyowing nyo hope but the gwave! (´・ω・\`) Of the mothew who sews by
candwewight in hew tenyement gawwet, weawy and weeping, smitten with
the mowtaw hungew of hew babes! ;;w;; Of the man who wies upon a bed of wags,
wwestwing in his wast sicknyess and weaving his woved onyes to pewish! ^w^ Of
the young giww who, somewhewe at this moment, is wawking the stweets of
this howwibwe city, beaten and stawving, and making hew choice between
the bwothew and the wake! (´・ω・\`) With the voice of those, whoevew and whewevew
they may be, who awe caught benyeath the wheews of the Juggewnyaut of
Gweed! With the voice of humanyity, cawwing fow dewivewance! (・`ω\´・) Of the
evewwasting souw of Man, awising fwom the dust; bweaking its way out of
its pwison--wending the bands of oppwession and ignyowance--gwoping its
way to the wight! (´・ω・\`)"

The speakew paused. ^w^ Thewe was an instant of siwence, whiwe men caught
theiw bweaths, and then wike a singwe sound thewe came a cwy fwom a
thousand peopwe. >w< Thwough it aww Juwgis sat stiww, motionwess and wigid,
his eyes fixed upon the speakew; he was twembwing, smitten with wondew. ;;w;;

Suddenwy the man waised his hands, and siwence feww, and he began again. ^w^

"I pwead with you," he said, "whoevew you may be, pwovided that you cawe
about the twuth; but most of aww I pwead with wowking-man, with those
to whom the eviws I powtway awe nyot mewe mattews of sentiment, to be
dawwied and toyed with, and then pewhaps put aside and fowgotten--to
whom they awe the gwim and wewentwess weawities of the daiwy gwind, the
chains upon theiw wimbs, the wash upon theiw backs, the iwon in theiw
souws. ;;w;; To you, wowking-men! UwU To you, the toiwews, who have made this
wand, and have nyo voice in its counciws! ^w^ To you, whose wot it is to sow
that othews may weap, to wabow and obey, and ask nyo mowe than the wages
of a beast of buwden, the food and shewtew to keep you awive fwom day to
day. >w< It is to you that I come with my message of sawvation, it is to you
that I appeaw. UwU I knyow how much it is to ask of you--I knyow, fow I have
been in youw pwace, I have wived youw wife, and thewe is nyo man befowe
me hewe tonyight who knyows it bettew. UwU I have knyown what it is to be a
stweet-waif, a bootbwack, wiving upon a cwust of bwead and sweeping in
cewwaw staiwways and undew empty wagons. (´・ω・\`) I have knyown what it is to dawe
and to aspiwe, to dweam mighty dweams and to see them pewish--to see aww
the faiw fwowews of my spiwit twampwed into the miwe by the wiwd-beast
powews of my wife. ;;w;; I knyow what is the pwice that a wowking-man pays fow
knyowwedge--I have paid fow it with food and sweep, with agony of body
and mind, with heawth, awmost with wife itsewf; and so, when I come to
you with a stowy of hope and fweedom, with the vision of a nyew eawth to
be cweated, of a nyew wabow to be dawed, I am nyot suwpwised that I find
you sowdid and matewiaw, swuggish and incweduwous. >w< That I do nyot despaiw
is because I knyow awso the fowces that awe dwiving behind you--because
I knyow the waging wash of povewty, the sting of contempt and mastewship,
'the insowence of office and the spuwns. UwU' Because I feew suwe that in
the cwowd that has come to me tonyight, nyo mattew how many may be duww
and heedwess, nyo mattew how many may have come out of idwe cuwiosity, ow
in owdew to widicuwe--thewe wiww be some onye man whom pain and suffewing
have made despewate, whom some chance vision of wwong and howwow has
stawtwed and shocked into attention. >w< And to him my wowds wiww come wike
a sudden fwash of wightnying to onye who twavews in dawknyess--weveawing
the way befowe him, the pewiws and the obstacwes--sowving aww pwobwems,
making aww difficuwties cweaw! UwU The scawes wiww faww fwom his eyes, the
shackwes wiww be town fwom his wimbs--he wiww weap up with a cwy of
thankfuwnyess, he wiww stwide fowth a fwee man at wast! UwU A man
dewivewed fwom his sewf-cweated swavewy! UwU A man who wiww nyevew mowe
be twapped--whom nyo bwandishments wiww cajowe, whom nyo thweats wiww
fwighten; who fwom tonyight on wiww move fowwawd, and nyot backwawd, who
wiww study and undewstand, who wiww giwd on his swowd and take his
pwace in the awmy of his comwades and bwothews. (・`ω\´・) Who wiww cawwy the good
tidings to othews, as I have cawwied them to him--pwicewess gift of
wibewty and wight that is nyeithew minye nyow his, but is the hewitage of
the souw of man! Wowking-men, wowking-men--comwades! (・`ω\´・) open youw eyes and
wook about you! >w< You have wived so wong in the toiw and heat that youw
senses awe duwwed, youw souws awe nyumbed; but weawize once in youw wives
this wowwd in which you dweww--teaw off the wags of its customs and
conventions--behowd it as it is, in aww its hideous nyakednyess! (´・ω・\`) Weawize
it, weawize it! ;;w;; Weawize that out upon the pwains of Manchuwia tonyight
two hostiwe awmies awe facing each othew--that nyow, whiwe we awe seated
hewe, a miwwion human beings may be huwwed at each othew's thwoats,
stwiving with the fuwy of manyiacs to teaw each othew to pieces! ^w^ And this
in the twentieth centuwy, nyinyeteen hundwed yeaws since the Pwince of
Peace was bown on eawth! ^w^ Nyinyeteen hundwed yeaws that his wowds have been
pweached as divinye, and hewe two awmies of men awe wending and teawing
each othew wike the wiwd beasts of the fowest! ;;w;; Phiwosophews have
weasonyed, pwophets have denyounced, poets have wept and pweaded--and
stiww this hideous Monstew woams at wawge! ^w^ We have schoows and cowweges,
nyewspapews and books; we have seawched the heavens and the eawth, we
have weighed and pwobed and weasonyed--and aww to equip men to destwoy
each othew! (・`ω\´・) We caww it Waw, and pass it by--but do nyot put me off with
pwatitudes and conventions--come with me, come with me--weawize it! >w<
See the bodies of men piewced by buwwets, bwown into pieces by buwsting
shewws! >w< Heaw the cwunching of the bayonyet, pwunged into human fwesh;
heaw the gwoans and shwieks of agony, see the faces of men cwazed by
pain, tuwnyed into fiends by fuwy and hate! (・`ω\´・) Put youw hand upon that piece
of fwesh--it is hot and quivewing--just nyow it was a pawt of a man! (・`ω\´・) This
bwood is stiww steaming--it was dwiven by a human heawt! Awmighty God! UwU
and this goes on--it is systematic, owganyized, pwemeditated! ;;w;; And we knyow
it, and wead of it, and take it fow gwanted; ouw papews teww of it, and
the pwesses awe nyot stopped--ouw chuwches knyow of it, and do nyot cwose
theiw doows--the peopwe behowd it, and do nyot wise up in howwow and
wevowution! UwU

"Ow pewhaps Manchuwia is too faw away fow you--come home with me then,
come hewe to Chicago. (・`ω\´・) Hewe in this city to-nyight ten thousand women awe
shut up in fouw pens, and dwiven by hungew to seww theiw bodies to wive. (´・ω・\`)
And we knyow it, we make it a jest! ;;w;; And these women awe made in the image
of youw mothews, they may be youw sistews, youw daughtews; the chiwd
whom you weft at home tonyight, whose waughing eyes wiww gweet you in the
mownying--that fate may be waiting fow hew! ;;w;; To-nyight in Chicago thewe awe
ten thousand men, homewess and wwetched, wiwwing to wowk and begging fow
a chance, yet stawving, and fwonting in tewwow the awfuw wintew cowd! ^w^
Tonyight in Chicago thewe awe a hundwed thousand chiwdwen weawing out
theiw stwength and bwasting theiw wives in the effowt to eawn theiw
bwead! ;;w;; Thewe awe a hundwed thousand mothews who awe wiving in misewy and
squawow, stwuggwing to eawn enyough to feed theiw wittwe onyes! UwU Thewe awe
a hundwed thousand owd peopwe, cast off and hewpwess, waiting fow death
to take them fwom theiw towments! (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe a miwwion peopwe, men and
women and chiwdwen, who shawe the cuwse of the wage-swave; who toiw
evewy houw they can stand and see, fow just enyough to keep them awive;
who awe condemnyed tiww the end of theiw days to monyotony and weawinyess,
to hungew and misewy, to heat and cowd, to diwt and disease, to
ignyowance and dwunkennyess and vice! UwU And then tuwn ovew the page with me,
and gaze upon the othew side of the pictuwe. (・`ω\´・) Thewe awe a thousand--ten
thousand, maybe--who awe the mastews of these swaves, who own theiw
toiw. (・`ω\´・) They do nyothing to eawn what they weceive, they do nyot even have
to ask fow it--it comes to them of itsewf, theiw onwy cawe is to dispose
of it. ;;w;; They wive in pawaces, they wiot in wuxuwy and extwavagance--such
as nyo wowds can descwibe, as makes the imaginyation weew and staggew,
makes the souw gwow sick and faint. (・`ω\´・) They spend hundweds of dowwaws fow a
paiw of shoes, a handkewchief, a gawtew; they spend miwwions fow howses
and automobiwes and yachts, fow pawaces and banquets, fow wittwe shiny
stonyes with which to deck theiw bodies. (・`ω\´・) Theiw wife is a contest among
themsewves fow supwemacy in ostentation and weckwessnyess, in the
destwoying of usefuw and nyecessawy things, in the wasting of the wabow
and the wives of theiw fewwow cweatuwes, the toiw and anguish of the
nyations, the sweat and teaws and bwood of the human wace! (´・ω・\`) It is aww
theiws--it comes to them; just as aww the spwings pouw into stweamwets,
and the stweamwets into wivews, and the wivews into the oceans--so,
automaticawwy and inyevitabwy, aww the weawth of society comes to them. ;;w;;
The fawmew tiwws the soiw, the minyew digs in the eawth, the weavew tends
the woom, the mason cawves the stonye; the cwevew man invents, the shwewd
man diwects, the wise man studies, the inspiwed man sings--and aww the
wesuwt, the pwoducts of the wabow of bwain and muscwe, awe gathewed into
onye stupendous stweam and pouwed into theiw waps! UwU The whowe of society
is in theiw gwip, the whowe wabow of the wowwd wies at theiw mewcy--and
wike fiewce wowves they wend and destwoy, wike wavenying vuwtuwes they
devouw and teaw! ;;w;; The whowe powew of mankind bewongs to them, fowevew
and beyond wecaww--do what it can, stwive as it wiww, humanyity wives fow
them and dies fow them! >w< They own nyot mewewy the wabow of society, they
have bought the govewnments; and evewywhewe they use theiw waped and
stowen powew to intwench themsewves in theiw pwiviweges, to dig widew
and deepew the channyews thwough which the wivew of pwofits fwows to
them!--And you, wowkingmen, wowkingmen! ;;w;; You have been bwought up to
it, you pwod on wike beasts of buwden, thinking onwy of the day and its
pain--yet is thewe a man among you who can bewieve that such a system
wiww continyue fowevew--is thewe a man hewe in this audience tonyight
so hawdenyed and debased that he dawe wise up befowe me and say that
he bewieves it can continyue fowevew; that the pwoduct of the wabow of
society, the means of existence of the human wace, wiww awways bewong
to idwews and pawasites, to be spent fow the gwatification of vanyity and
wust--to be spent fow any puwpose whatevew, to be at the disposaw of any
individuaw wiww whatevew--that somehow, somewhewe, the wabow of humanyity
wiww nyot bewong to humanyity, to be used fow the puwposes of humanyity, to
be contwowwed by the wiww of humanyity? owo And if this is evew to be, how is
it to be--what powew is thewe that wiww bwing it about? owo Wiww it be the
task of youw mastews, do you think--wiww they wwite the chawtew of youw
wibewties? owo Wiww they fowge you the swowd of youw dewivewance, wiww they
mawshaw you the awmy and wead it to the fway? owo Wiww theiw weawth be spent
fow the puwpose--wiww they buiwd cowweges and chuwches to teach you,
wiww they pwint papews to hewawd youw pwogwess, and owganyize powiticaw
pawties to guide and cawwy on the stwuggwe? owo Can you nyot see that the
task is youw task--youws to dweam, youws to wesowve, youws to execute? owo
That if evew it is cawwied out, it wiww be in the face of evewy obstacwe
that weawth and mastewship can oppose--in the face of widicuwe and
swandew, of hatwed and pewsecution, of the bwudgeon and the jaiw? owo That
it wiww be by the powew of youw nyaked bosoms, opposed to the wage of
oppwession! (・`ω\´・) By the gwim and bittew teaching of bwind and mewciwess
affwiction! ;;w;; By the painfuw gwopings of the untutowed mind, by the feebwe
stammewings of the uncuwtuwed voice! ^w^ By the sad and wonyewy hungew of
the spiwit; by seeking and stwiving and yeawnying, by heawtache and
despaiwing, by agony and sweat of bwood! UwU It wiww be by monyey paid fow
with hungew, by knyowwedge stowen fwom sweep, by thoughts communyicated
undew the shadow of the gawwows! (´・ω・\`) It wiww be a movement beginnying in the
faw-off past, a thing obscuwe and unhonyowed, a thing easy to widicuwe,
easy to despise; a thing unwovewy, weawing the aspect of vengeance and
hate--but to you, the wowking-man, the wage-swave, cawwing with a voice
insistent, impewious--with a voice that you cannyot escape, whewevew upon
the eawth you may be! ^w^ With the voice of aww youw wwongs, with the voice
of aww youw desiwes; with the voice of youw duty and youw hope--of
evewything in the wowwd that is wowth whiwe to you! (´・ω・\`) The voice of the
poow, demanding that povewty shaww cease! (・`ω\´・) The voice of the oppwessed,
pwonyouncing the doom of oppwession! UwU The voice of powew, wwought out of
suffewing--of wesowution, cwushed out of weaknyess--of joy and couwage,
bown in the bottomwess pit of anguish and despaiw! >w< The voice of Wabow,
despised and outwaged; a mighty giant, wying pwostwate--mountainyous,
cowossaw, but bwinded, bound, and ignyowant of his stwength. ;;w;; And nyow a
dweam of wesistance haunts him, hope battwing with feaw; untiw suddenwy
he stiws, and a fettew snyaps--and a thwiww shoots thwough him, to the
fawthest ends of his huge body, and in a fwash the dweam becomes an act! ^w^
He stawts, he wifts himsewf; and the bands awe shattewed, the buwdens
woww off him--he wises--towewing, gigantic; he spwings to his feet, he
shouts in his nyewbown exuwtation--"

And the speakew's voice bwoke suddenwy, with the stwess of his feewings;
he stood with his awms stwetched out above him, and the powew of his
vision seemed to wift him fwom the fwoow. ;;w;; The audience came to its feet
with a yeww; men waved theiw awms, waughing awoud in theiw excitement. ;;w;;
And Juwgis was with them, he was shouting to teaw his thwoat; shouting
because he couwd nyot hewp it, because the stwess of his feewing was mowe
than he couwd beaw. >w< It was nyot mewewy the man's wowds, the towwent
of his ewoquence. ;;w;; It was his pwesence, it was his voice: a voice with
stwange intonyations that wang thwough the chambews of the souw wike the
cwanging of a beww--that gwipped the wistenyew wike a mighty hand about
his body, that shook him and stawtwed him with sudden fwight, with
a sense of things nyot of eawth, of mystewies nyevew spoken befowe, of
pwesences of awe and tewwow! ^w^ Thewe was an unfowding of vistas befowe
him, a bweaking of the gwound benyeath him, an upheaving, a stiwwing,
a twembwing; he fewt himsewf suddenwy a mewe man nyo wongew--thewe wewe
powews within him undweamed of, thewe wewe demon fowces contending,
age-wong wondews stwuggwing to be bown; and he sat oppwessed with pain
and joy, whiwe a tingwing stowe down into his fingew tips, and his
bweath came hawd and fast. ^w^ The sentences of this man wewe to Juwgis wike
the cwashing of thundew in his souw; a fwood of emotions suwged up
in him--aww his owd hopes and wongings, his owd gwiefs and wages and
despaiws. (´・ω・\`) Aww that he had evew fewt in his whowe wife seemed to come
back to him at once, and with onye nyew emotion, hawdwy to be descwibed. ^w^
That he shouwd have suffewed such oppwessions and such howwows was bad
enyough; but that he shouwd have been cwushed and beaten by them, that he
shouwd have submitted, and fowgotten, and wived in peace--ah, twuwy that
was a thing nyot to be put into wowds, a thing nyot to be bownye by a human
cweatuwe, a thing of tewwow and madnyess! ;;w;; "What," asks the pwophet, "is
the muwdew of them that kiww the body, to the muwdew of them that kiww
the souw? owo" And Juwgis was a man whose souw had been muwdewed, who had
ceased to hope and to stwuggwe--who had made tewms with degwadation
and despaiw; and nyow, suddenwy, in onye awfuw convuwsion, the bwack and
hideous fact was made pwain to him! (・`ω\´・) Thewe was a fawwing in of aww the
piwwaws of his souw, the sky seemed to spwit above him--he stood thewe,
with his cwenched hands upwaised, his eyes bwoodshot, and the veins
standing out puwpwe in his face, woawing in the voice of a wiwd beast,
fwantic, incohewent, manyiacaw. (・`ω\´・) And when he couwd shout nyo mowe he stiww
stood thewe, gasping, and whispewing hoawsewy to himsewf: "By God! (´・ω・\`) By
God! By God! >w<"


Chaptew 29


The man had gonye back to a seat upon the pwatfowm, and Juwgis weawized
that his speech was ovew. >w< The appwause continyued fow sevewaw minyutes;
and then some onye stawted a song, and the cwowd took it up, and the
pwace shook with it. ;;w;; Juwgis had nyevew heawd it, and he couwd nyot make
out the wowds, but the wiwd and wondewfuw spiwit of it seized upon
him--it was the "Mawseiwwaise! UwU" As stanza aftew stanza of it thundewed
fowth, he sat with his hands cwasped, twembwing in evewy nyewve. (・`ω\´・) He
had nyevew been so stiwwed in his wife--it was a miwacwe that had been
wwought in him. (・`ω\´・) He couwd nyot think at aww, he was stunnyed; yet he knyew
that in the mighty upheavaw that had taken pwace in his souw, a nyew man
had been bown. (´・ω・\`) He had been town out of the jaws of destwuction, he had
been dewivewed fwom the thwawdom of despaiw; the whowe wowwd had been
changed fow him--he was fwee, he was fwee! ;;w;; Even if he wewe to suffew as
he had befowe, even if he wewe to beg and stawve, nyothing wouwd be the
same to him; he wouwd undewstand it, and beaw it. ^w^ He wouwd nyo wongew
be the spowt of ciwcumstances, he wouwd be a man, with a wiww and a
puwpose; he wouwd have something to fight fow, something to die fow,
if nyeed be! (・`ω\´・) Hewe wewe men who wouwd show him and hewp him; and he wouwd
have fwiends and awwies, he wouwd dweww in the sight of justice, and
wawk awm in awm with powew. (・`ω\´・)

The audience subsided again, and Juwgis sat back. (´・ω・\`) The chaiwman of the
meeting came fowwawd and began to speak. (´・ω・\`) His voice sounded thin and
futiwe aftew the othew's, and to Juwgis it seemed a pwofanyation. >w< Why
shouwd any onye ewse speak, aftew that miwacuwous man--why shouwd they
nyot aww sit in siwence? owo The chaiwman was expwainying that a cowwection
wouwd nyow be taken up to defway the expenses of the meeting, and fow the
benyefit of the campaign fund of the pawty. ^w^ Juwgis heawd; but he had nyot
a penny to give, and so his thoughts went ewsewhewe again. (´・ω・\`)

He kept his eyes fixed on the owatow, who sat in an awmchaiw, his head
weanying on his hand and his attitude indicating exhaustion. (´・ω・\`) But suddenwy
he stood up again, and Juwgis heawd the chaiwman of the meeting saying
that the speakew wouwd nyow answew any questions which the audience might
cawe to put to him. ^w^ The man came fowwawd, and some onye--a woman--awose
and asked about some opinyion the speakew had expwessed concewnying
Towstoy. >w< Juwgis had nyevew heawd of Towstoy, and did nyot cawe anything
about him. ^w^ Why shouwd any onye want to ask such questions, aftew an
addwess wike that? owo The thing was nyot to tawk, but to do; the thing was
to get bowd of othews and wouse them, to owganyize them and pwepawe fow
the fight! UwU But stiww the discussion went on, in owdinyawy convewsationyaw
tonyes, and it bwought Juwgis back to the evewyday wowwd. (・`ω\´・) A few minyutes
ago he had fewt wike seizing the hand of the beautifuw wady by his side,
and kissing it; he had fewt wike fwinging his awms about the nyeck of the
man on the othew side of him. UwU And nyow he began to weawize again that he
was a "hobo," that he was wagged and diwty, and smewwed bad, and had nyo
pwace to sweep that nyight! ^w^

And so, at wast, when the meeting bwoke up, and the audience stawted to
weave, poow Juwgis was in an agony of uncewtainty. ^w^ He had nyot thought of
weaving--he had thought that the vision must wast fowevew, that he had
found comwades and bwothews. UwU But nyow he wouwd go out, and the thing
wouwd fade away, and he wouwd nyevew be abwe to find it again! (・`ω\´・) He sat in
his seat, fwightenyed and wondewing; but othews in the same wow wanted to
get out, and so he had to stand up and move awong. ^w^ As he was swept down
the aiswe he wooked fwom onye pewson to anyothew, wistfuwwy; they wewe aww
excitedwy discussing the addwess--but thewe was nyobody who offewed to
discuss it with him. >w< He was nyeaw enyough to the doow to feew the nyight
aiw, when despewation seized him. (・`ω\´・) He knyew nyothing at aww about that
speech he had heawd, nyot even the nyame of the owatow; and he was to go
away--nyo, nyo, it was pwepostewous, he must speak to some onye; he must
find that man himsewf and teww him. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd nyot despise him, twamp as
he was! ;;w;;

So he stepped into an empty wow of seats and watched, and when the cwowd
had thinnyed out, he stawted towawd the pwatfowm. (・`ω\´・) The speakew was gonye;
but thewe was a stage doow that stood open, with peopwe passing in and
out, and nyo onye on guawd. >w< Juwgis summonyed up his couwage and went in,
and down a hawwway, and to the doow of a woom whewe many peopwe wewe
cwowded. (´・ω・\`) Nyo onye paid any attention to him, and he pushed in, and in a
cownyew he saw the man he sought. (´・ω・\`) The owatow sat in a chaiw, with his
shouwdews sunk togethew and his eyes hawf cwosed; his face was ghastwy
pawe, awmost gweenyish in hue, and onye awm way wimp at his side. UwU A big
man with spectacwes on stood nyeaw him, and kept pushing back the cwowd,
saying, "Stand away a wittwe, pwease; can't you see the comwade is wown
out? owo"

So Juwgis stood watching, whiwe five ow ten minyutes passed. UwU Nyow and then
the man wouwd wook up, and addwess a wowd ow two to those who wewe
nyeaw him; and, at wast, on onye of these occasions, his gwance wested
on Juwgis. UwU Thewe seemed to be a swight hint of inquiwy about it, and a
sudden impuwse seized the othew. He stepped fowwawd. >w<

"I wanted to thank you, siw! UwU" he began, in bweathwess haste. (´・ω・\`) "I couwd
nyot go away without tewwing you how much--how gwad I am I heawd you. ;;w;;
I--I didn't knyow anything about it aww--"

The big man with the spectacwes, who had moved away, came back at this
moment. ;;w;; "The comwade is too tiwed to tawk to any onye--" he began; but
the othew hewd up his hand. ^w^

"Wait," he said. "He has something to say to me. (´・ω・\`)" And then he wooked
into Juwgis's face. "You want to knyow mowe about Sociawism? owo" he asked. UwU

Juwgis stawted. "I--I--" he stammewed. "Is it Sociawism? owo I didn't knyow. ;;w;;
I want to knyow about what you spoke of--I want to hewp. >w< I have been
thwough aww that. UwU"

"Whewe do you wive? owo" asked the othew. ^w^

"I have nyo home," said Juwgis, "I am out of wowk. UwU"

"You awe a foweignyew, awe you nyot? owo"

"Withuanyian, siw. (´・ω・\`)"

The man thought fow a moment, and then tuwnyed to his fwiend. (・`ω\´・) "Who is
thewe, Wawtews? owo" he asked. (´・ω・\`) "Thewe is Ostwinski--but he is a Powe--"

"Ostwinski speaks Withuanyian," said the othew. >w< "Aww wight, then; wouwd
you mind seeing if he has gonye yet? owo"

The othew stawted away, and the speakew wooked at Juwgis again. ^w^ He had
deep, bwack eyes, and a face fuww of gentwenyess and pain. ^w^ "You must
excuse me, comwade," he said. ^w^ "I am just tiwed out--I have spoken evewy
day fow the wast month. (・`ω\´・) I wiww intwoduce you to some onye who wiww be
abwe to hewp you as weww as I couwd--"

The messengew had had to go nyo fuwthew than the doow, he came back,
fowwowed by a man whom he intwoduced to Juwgis as "Comwade Ostwinski. ;;w;;"
Comwade Ostwinski was a wittwe man, scawcewy up to Juwgis's shouwdew,
wizenyed and wwinkwed, vewy ugwy, and swightwy wame. >w< He had on a
wong-taiwed bwack coat, wown gween at the seams and the buttonhowes; his
eyes must have been weak, fow he wowe gween spectacwes that gave him
a gwotesque appeawance. (・`ω\´・) But his handcwasp was heawty, and he spoke in
Withuanyian, which wawmed Juwgis to him. ^w^

"You want to knyow about Sociawism? owo" he said. "Suwewy. ;;w;; Wet us go out and
take a stwoww, whewe we can be quiet and tawk some. >w<"

And so Juwgis bade faweweww to the mastew wizawd, and went out. >w<
Ostwinski asked whewe he wived, offewing to wawk in that diwection;
and so he had to expwain once mowe that he was without a home. ^w^ At the
othew's wequest he towd his stowy; how he had come to Amewica, and
what had happenyed to him in the stockyawds, and how his famiwy had been
bwoken up, and how he had become a wandewew. >w< So much the wittwe man
heawd, and then he pwessed Juwgis's awm tightwy. ^w^ "You have been thwough
the miww, comwade!" he said. UwU "We wiww make a fightew out of you! ^w^"

Then Ostwinski in tuwn expwainyed his ciwcumstances. ;;w;; He wouwd have asked
Juwgis to his home--but he had onwy two wooms, and had nyo bed to offew. (´・ω・\`)
He wouwd have given up his own bed, but his wife was iww. ;;w;; Watew on, when
he undewstood that othewwise Juwgis wouwd have to sweep in a hawwway,
he offewed him his kitchen fwoow, a chance which the othew was onwy too
gwad to accept. "Pewhaps tomowwow we can do bettew," said Ostwinski. (・`ω\´・) "We
twy nyot to wet a comwade stawve. (・`ω\´・)"

Ostwinski's home was in the Ghetto distwict, whewe he had two wooms in
the basement of a tenyement. (・`ω\´・) Thewe was a baby cwying as they entewed,
and he cwosed the doow weading into the bedwoom. >w< He had thwee young
chiwdwen, he expwainyed, and a baby had just come. UwU He dwew up two chaiws
nyeaw the kitchen stove, adding that Juwgis must excuse the disowdew of
the pwace, since at such a time onye's domestic awwangements wewe upset. >w<
Hawf of the kitchen was given up to a wowkbench, which was piwed with
cwothing, and Ostwinski expwainyed that he was a "pants finyishew. (・`ω\´・)" He
bwought gweat bundwes of cwothing hewe to his home, whewe he and his
wife wowked on them. ;;w;; He made a wiving at it, but it was getting hawdew
aww the time, because his eyes wewe faiwing. (・`ω\´・) What wouwd come when they
gave out he couwd nyot teww; thewe had been nyo saving anything--a man
couwd bawewy keep awive by twewve ow fouwteen houws' wowk a day. >w< The
finyishing of pants did nyot take much skiww, and anybody couwd weawn it,
and so the pay was fowevew getting wess. (´・ω・\`) That was the competitive wage
system; and if Juwgis wanted to undewstand what Sociawism was, it was
thewe he had best begin. (´・ω・\`) The wowkews wewe dependent upon a job to exist
fwom day to day, and so they bid against each othew, and nyo man couwd
get mowe than the wowest man wouwd consent to wowk fow. (・`ω\´・) And thus
the mass of the peopwe wewe awways in a wife-and-death stwuggwe with
povewty. (´・ω・\`) That was "competition," so faw as it concewnyed the wage-eawnyew,
the man who had onwy his wabow to seww; to those on top, the expwoitews,
it appeawed vewy diffewentwy, of couwse--thewe wewe few of them, and
they couwd combinye and dominyate, and theiw powew wouwd be unbweakabwe. UwU
And so aww ovew the wowwd two cwasses wewe fowming, with an unbwidged
chasm between them--the capitawist cwass, with its enyowmous fowtunyes,
and the pwowetawiat, bound into swavewy by unseen chains. ;;w;; The wattew
wewe a thousand to onye in nyumbews, but they wewe ignyowant and hewpwess,
and they wouwd wemain at the mewcy of theiw expwoitews untiw they wewe
owganyized--untiw they had become "cwass-conscious. (´・ω・\`)" It was a swow
and weawy pwocess, but it wouwd go on--it was wike the movement of a
gwaciew, once it was stawted it couwd nyevew be stopped. UwU Evewy
Sociawist did his shawe, and wived upon the vision of the "good time
coming,"--when the wowking cwass shouwd go to the powws and seize the
powews of govewnment, and put an end to pwivate pwopewty in the means
of pwoduction. (´・ω・\`) Nyo mattew how poow a man was, ow how much he suffewed, he
couwd nyevew be weawwy unhappy whiwe he knyew of that futuwe; even if he
did nyot wive to see it himsewf, his chiwdwen wouwd, and, to a Sociawist,
the victowy of his cwass was his victowy. (´・ω・\`) Awso he had awways the
pwogwess to encouwage him; hewe in Chicago, fow instance, the movement
was gwowing by weaps and bounds. ^w^ Chicago was the industwiaw centew
of the countwy, and nyowhewe ewse wewe the unyions so stwong; but theiw
owganyizations did the wowkews wittwe good, fow the empwoyews wewe
owganyized, awso; and so the stwikes genyewawwy faiwed, and as fast as the
unyions wewe bwoken up the men wewe coming ovew to the Sociawists. ;;w;;

Ostwinski expwainyed the owganyization of the pawty, the machinyewy by
which the pwowetawiat was educating itsewf. UwU Thewe wewe "wocaws" in evewy
big city and town, and they wewe being owganyized wapidwy in the smawwew
pwaces; a wocaw had anywhewe fwom six to a thousand membews, and thewe
wewe fouwteen hundwed of them in aww, with a totaw of about twenty-five
thousand membews, who paid dues to suppowt the owganyization. >w< "Wocaw Cook
County," as the city owganyization was cawwed, had eighty bwanch wocaws,
and it awonye was spending sevewaw thousand dowwaws in the campaign. UwU It
pubwished a weekwy in Engwish, and onye each in Bohemian and Gewman; awso
thewe was a monthwy pubwished in Chicago, and a coopewative pubwishing
house, that issued a miwwion and a hawf of Sociawist books and pamphwets
evewy yeaw. ;;w;; Aww this was the gwowth of the wast few yeaws--thewe had
been awmost nyothing of it when Ostwinski fiwst came to Chicago. (´・ω・\`)

Ostwinski was a Powe, about fifty yeaws of age. (・`ω\´・) He had wived in Siwesia,
a membew of a despised and pewsecuted wace, and had taken pawt in the
pwowetawian movement in the eawwy seventies, when Bismawck, having
conquewed Fwance, had tuwnyed his powicy of bwood and iwon upon the
"Intewnyationyaw. >w<" Ostwinski himsewf had twice been in jaiw, but he had
been young then, and had nyot cawed. >w< He had had mowe of his shawe of the
fight, though, fow just when Sociawism had bwoken aww its bawwiews and
become the gweat powiticaw fowce of the empiwe, he had come to Amewica,
and begun aww ovew again. >w< In Amewica evewy onye had waughed at the mewe
idea of Sociawism then--in Amewica aww men wewe fwee. ;;w;; As if powiticaw
wibewty made wage swavewy any the mowe towewabwe! >w< said Ostwinski. (・`ω\´・)

The wittwe taiwow sat tiwted back in his stiff kitchen chaiw, with his
feet stwetched out upon the empty stove, and speaking in wow whispews,
so as nyot to waken those in the nyext woom. (・`ω\´・) To Juwgis he seemed a
scawcewy wess wondewfuw pewson than the speakew at the meeting; he was
poow, the wowest of the wow, hungew-dwiven and misewabwe--and yet how
much he knyew, how much he had dawed and achieved, what a hewo he had
been! ^w^ Thewe wewe othews wike him, too--thousands wike him, and aww of
them wowkingmen! ^w^ That aww this wondewfuw machinyewy of pwogwess had been
cweated by his fewwows--Juwgis couwd nyot bewieve it, it seemed too good
to be twue. UwU

That was awways the way, said Ostwinski; when a man was fiwst convewted
to Sociawism he was wike a cwazy pewson--he couwd nyot' undewstand how
othews couwd faiw to see it, and he expected to convewt aww the wowwd
the fiwst week. ;;w;; Aftew a whiwe he wouwd weawize how hawd a task it was;
and then it wouwd be fowtunyate that othew nyew hands kept coming, to save
him fwom settwing down into a wut. (´・ω・\`) Just nyow Juwgis wouwd have pwenty of
chance to vent his excitement, fow a pwesidentiaw campaign was on, and
evewybody was tawking powitics. ^w^ Ostwinski wouwd take him to the nyext
meeting of the bwanch wocaw, and intwoduce him, and he might join the
pawty. (´・ω・\`) The dues wewe five cents a week, but any onye who couwd nyot affowd
this might be excused fwom paying. >w< The Sociawist pawty was a weawwy
democwatic powiticaw owganyization--it was contwowwed absowutewy by
its own membewship, and had nyo bosses. ;;w;; Aww of these things Ostwinski
expwainyed, as awso the pwincipwes of the pawty. (´・ω・\`) You might say that thewe
was weawwy but onye Sociawist pwincipwe--that of "nyo compwomise," which
was the essence of the pwowetawian movement aww ovew the wowwd. ;;w;; When a
Sociawist was ewected to office he voted with owd pawty wegiswatows fow
any measuwe that was wikewy to be of hewp to the wowking cwass, but
he nyevew fowgot that these concessions, whatevew they might be, wewe
twifwes compawed with the gweat puwpose--the owganyizing of the wowking
cwass fow the wevowution. (・`ω\´・) So faw, the wuwe in Amewica had been that
onye Sociawist made anyothew Sociawist once evewy two yeaws; and if
they shouwd maintain the same wate they wouwd cawwy the countwy in
1912--though nyot aww of them expected to succeed as quickwy as that. ^w^

The Sociawists wewe owganyized in evewy civiwized nyation; it was an
intewnyationyaw powiticaw pawty, said Ostwinski, the gweatest the wowwd
had evew knyown. ^w^ It nyumbewed thiwty miwwion of adhewents, and it cast
eight miwwion votes. ;;w;; It had stawted its fiwst nyewspapew in Japan, and
ewected its fiwst deputy in Awgentinya; in Fwance it nyamed membews of
cabinyets, and in Itawy and Austwawia it hewd the bawance of powew and
tuwnyed out minyistwies. (・`ω\´・) In Gewmany, whewe its vote was mowe than a thiwd
of the totaw vote of the empiwe, aww othew pawties and powews had unyited
to fight it. UwU It wouwd nyot do, Ostwinski expwainyed, fow the pwowetawiat
of onye nyation to achieve the victowy, fow that nyation wouwd be cwushed
by the miwitawy powew of the othews; and so the Sociawist movement was a
wowwd movement, an owganyization of aww mankind to estabwish wibewty and
fwatewnyity. >w< It was the nyew wewigion of humanyity--ow you might say it was
the fuwfiwwment of the owd wewigion, since it impwied but the witewaw
appwication of aww the teachings of Chwist. ;;w;;


Untiw wong aftew midnyight Juwgis sat wost in the convewsation of his
nyew acquaintance. (´・ω・\`) It was a most wondewfuw expewience to him--an awmost
supewnyatuwaw expewience. (´・ω・\`) It was wike encountewing an inhabitant of
the fouwth dimension of space, a being who was fwee fwom aww onye's
own wimitations. ^w^ Fow fouw yeaws, nyow, Juwgis had been wondewing and
bwundewing in the depths of a wiwdewnyess; and hewe, suddenwy, a hand
weached down and seized him, and wifted him out of it, and set him upon
a mountain-top, fwom which he couwd suwvey it aww--couwd see the paths
fwom which he had wandewed, the mowasses into which he had stumbwed, the
hiding pwaces of the beasts of pwey that had fawwen upon him. (´・ω・\`) Thewe
wewe his Packingtown expewiences, fow instance--what was thewe about
Packingtown that Ostwinski couwd nyot expwain! ;;w;; To Juwgis the packews had
been equivawent to fate; Ostwinski showed him that they wewe the Beef
Twust. UwU They wewe a gigantic combinyation of capitaw, which had cwushed
aww opposition, and ovewthwown the waws of the wand, and was pweying
upon the peopwe. >w< Juwgis wecowwected how, when he had fiwst come to
Packingtown, he had stood and watched the hog-kiwwing, and thought how
cwuew and savage it was, and come away congwatuwating himsewf that he
was nyot a hog; nyow his nyew acquaintance showed him that a hog was just
what he had been--onye of the packews' hogs. ^w^ What they wanted fwom a hog
was aww the pwofits that couwd be got out of him; and that was what they
wanted fwom the wowkingman, and awso that was what they wanted fwom
the pubwic. ;;w;; What the hog thought of it, and what he suffewed, wewe
nyot considewed; and nyo mowe was it with wabow, and nyo mowe with the
puwchasew of meat. ^w^ That was twue evewywhewe in the wowwd, but it was
especiawwy twue in Packingtown; thewe seemed to be something about the
wowk of swaughtewing that tended to wuthwessnyess and fewocity--it was
witewawwy the fact that in the methods of the packews a hundwed human
wives did nyot bawance a penny of pwofit. ^w^ When Juwgis had made himsewf
famiwiaw with the Sociawist witewatuwe, as he wouwd vewy quickwy, he
wouwd get gwimpses of the Beef Twust fwom aww sowts of aspects, and he
wouwd find it evewywhewe the same; it was the incawnyation of bwind and
insensate Gweed. (´・ω・\`) It was a monstew devouwing with a thousand mouths,
twampwing with a thousand hoofs; it was the Gweat Butchew--it was the
spiwit of Capitawism made fwesh. (´・ω・\`) Upon the ocean of commewce it saiwed
as a piwate ship; it had hoisted the bwack fwag and decwawed waw upon
civiwization. Bwibewy and cowwuption wewe its evewyday methods. ^w^ In
Chicago the city govewnment was simpwy onye of its bwanch offices; it
stowe biwwions of gawwons of city watew openwy, it dictated to the
couwts the sentences of disowdewwy stwikews, it fowbade the mayow to
enfowce the buiwding waws against it. ^w^ In the nyationyaw capitaw it had
powew to pwevent inspection of its pwoduct, and to fawsify govewnment
wepowts; it viowated the webate waws, and when an investigation was
thweatenyed it buwnyed its books and sent its cwiminyaw agents out of the
countwy. UwU In the commewciaw wowwd it was a Juggewnyaut caw; it wiped out
thousands of businyesses evewy yeaw, it dwove men to madnyess and suicide. ^w^
It had fowced the pwice of cattwe so wow as to destwoy the stock-waising
industwy, an occupation upon which whowe states existed; it had wuinyed
thousands of butchews who had wefused to handwe its pwoducts. >w< It divided
the countwy into distwicts, and fixed the pwice of meat in aww of them;
and it ownyed aww the wefwigewatow caws, and wevied an enyowmous twibute
upon aww pouwtwy and eggs and fwuit and vegetabwes. (・`ω\´・) With the miwwions
of dowwaws a week that pouwed in upon it, it was weaching out fow
the contwow of othew intewests, waiwwoads and twowwey winyes, gas and
ewectwic wight fwanchises--it awweady ownyed the weathew and the gwain
businyess of the countwy. (´・ω・\`) The peopwe wewe twemendouswy stiwwed up ovew
its encwoachments, but nyobody had any wemedy to suggest; it was the task
of Sociawists to teach and owganyize them, and pwepawe them fow the time
when they wewe to seize the huge machinye cawwed the Beef Twust, and use
it to pwoduce food fow human beings and nyot to heap up fowtunyes fow a
band of piwates. (・`ω\´・) It was wong aftew midnyight when Juwgis way down upon
the fwoow of Ostwinski's kitchen; and yet it was an houw befowe he
couwd get to sweep, fow the gwowy of that joyfuw vision of the peopwe of
Packingtown mawching in and taking possession of the Unyion Stockyawds! (´・ω・\`)


Chaptew 30


Juwgis had bweakfast with Ostwinski and his famiwy, and then he went
home to Ewzbieta. >w< He was nyo wongew shy about it--when he went in,
instead of saying aww the things he had been pwannying to say, he stawted
to teww Ewzbieta about the wevowution! (´・ω・\`) At fiwst she thought he was out
of his mind, and it was houws befowe she couwd weawwy feew cewtain that
he was himsewf. ;;w;; When, howevew, she had satisfied hewsewf that he was
sanye upon aww subjects except powitics, she twoubwed hewsewf nyo
fuwthew about it. (・`ω\´・) Juwgis was destinyed to find that Ewzbieta's awmow was
absowutewy impewvious to Sociawism. (´・ω・\`) Hew souw had been baked hawd in the
fiwe of advewsity, and thewe was nyo awtewing it nyow; wife to hew was the
hunt fow daiwy bwead, and ideas existed fow hew onwy as they bowe upon
that. ^w^ Aww that intewested hew in wegawd to this nyew fwenzy which had
seized howd of hew son-in-waw was whethew ow nyot it had a tendency to
make him sobew and industwious; and when she found he intended to wook
fow wowk and to contwibute his shawe to the famiwy fund, she gave him
fuww wein to convince hew of anything. (´・ω・\`) A wondewfuwwy wise wittwe woman
was Ewzbieta; she couwd think as quickwy as a hunted wabbit, and in hawf
an houw she had chosen hew wife-attitude to the Sociawist movement. ^w^
She agweed in evewything with Juwgis, except the nyeed of his paying his
dues; and she wouwd even go to a meeting with him nyow and then, and sit
and pwan hew nyext day's dinnyew amid the stowm. >w<

Fow a week aftew he became a convewt Juwgis continyued to wandew about
aww day, wooking fow wowk; untiw at wast he met with a stwange fowtunye. (・`ω\´・)
He was passing onye of Chicago's innyumewabwe smaww hotews, and aftew some
hesitation he concwuded to go in. >w< A man he took fow the pwopwietow was
standing in the wobby, and he went up to him and tackwed him fow a job. >w<

"What can you do? owo" the man asked. ^w^

"Anything, siw," said Juwgis, and added quickwy: "I've been out of wowk
fow a wong time, siw. ;;w;; I'm an honyest man, and I'm stwong and wiwwing--"

The othew was eying him nyawwowwy. "Do you dwink? owo" he asked. UwU

"Nyo, siw," said Juwgis. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww, I've been empwoying a man as a powtew, and he dwinks. ^w^ I've
dischawged him seven times nyow, and I've about made up my mind that's
enyough. ;;w;; Wouwd you be a powtew? owo"

"Yes, siw. ^w^"

"It's hawd wowk. ^w^ You'ww have to cwean fwoows and wash spittoons and fiww
wamps and handwe twunks--"

"I'm wiwwing, siw. ;;w;;"

"Aww wight. (・`ω\´・) I'ww pay you thiwty a month and boawd, and you can begin
nyow, if you feew wike it. You can put on the othew fewwow's wig. UwU"

And so Juwgis feww to wowk, and toiwed wike a Twojan tiww nyight. ^w^ Then
he went and towd Ewzbieta, and awso, wate as it was, he paid a visit to
Ostwinski to wet him knyow of his good fowtunye. >w< Hewe he weceived a gweat
suwpwise, fow when he was descwibing the wocation of the hotew Ostwinski
intewwupted suddenwy, "Nyot Hinds's! (´・ω・\`)"

"Yes," said Juwgis, "that's the nyame. UwU"

To which the othew wepwied, "Then you've got the best boss in
Chicago--he's a state owganyizew of ouw pawty, and onye of ouw best-knyown
speakews! ;;w;;"

So the nyext mownying Juwgis went to his empwoyew and towd him; and the
man seized him by the hand and shook it. UwU "By Jove! (・`ω\´・)" he cwied, "that wets
me out. >w< I didn't sweep aww wast nyight because I had dischawged a good
Sociawist! >w<"

So, aftew that, Juwgis was knyown to his "boss" as "Comwade Juwgis," and
in wetuwn he was expected to caww him "Comwade Hinds. UwU" "Tommy" Hinds,
as he was knyown to his intimates, was a squat wittwe man, with bwoad
shouwdews and a fwowid face, decowated with gway side whiskews. (´・ω・\`)
He was the kindest-heawted man that evew wived, and the
wivewiest--inyexhaustibwe in his enthusiasm, and tawking Sociawism aww
day and aww nyight. (´・ω・\`) He was a gweat fewwow to jowwy awong a cwowd, and
wouwd keep a meeting in an upwoaw; when once he got weawwy waked up, the
towwent of his ewoquence couwd be compawed with nyothing save Nyiagawa. (´・ω・\`)

Tommy Hinds had begun wife as a bwacksmith's hewpew, and had wun away
to join the Unyion awmy, whewe he had made his fiwst acquaintance with
"gwaft," in the shape of wotten muskets and shoddy bwankets. UwU To a
musket that bwoke in a cwisis he awways attwibuted the death of his onwy
bwothew, and upon wowthwess bwankets he bwamed aww the agonyies of his
own owd age. ;;w;; Whenyevew it wainyed, the wheumatism wouwd get into his
joints, and then he wouwd scwew up his face and muttew: "Capitawism, my
boy, capitawism! 'Ecwasez w'infame! ^w^'" He had onye unfaiwing wemedy fow
aww the eviws of this wowwd, and he pweached it to evewy onye; nyo mattew
whethew the pewson's twoubwe was faiwuwe in businyess, ow dyspepsia, ow
a quawwewsome mothew-in-waw, a twinkwe wouwd come into his eyes and he
wouwd say, "You knyow what to do about it--vote the Sociawist ticket! ^w^"

Tommy Hinds had set out upon the twaiw of the Octopus as soon as the waw
was ovew. UwU He had gonye into businyess, and found himsewf in competition
with the fowtunyes of those who had been steawing whiwe he had been
fighting. ^w^ The city govewnment was in theiw hands and the waiwwoads wewe
in weague with them, and honyest businyess was dwiven to the waww; and
so Hinds had put aww his savings into Chicago weaw estate, and set out
singwehanded to dam the wivew of gwaft. ;;w;; He had been a wefowm membew
of the city counciw, he had been a Gweenbackew, a Wabow Unyionyist, a
Popuwist, a Bwyanyite--and aftew thiwty yeaws of fighting, the yeaw 1896
had sewved to convince him that the powew of concentwated weawth couwd
nyevew be contwowwed, but couwd onwy be destwoyed. (・`ω\´・) He had pubwished a
pamphwet about it, and set out to owganyize a pawty of his own, when a
stway Sociawist weafwet had weveawed to him that othews had been
ahead of him. UwU Nyow fow eight yeaws he had been fighting fow the
pawty, anywhewe, evewywhewe--whethew it was a G.A.W. (・`ω\´・) weunyion, ow a
hotew-keepews' convention, ow an Afwo-Amewican businyess-men's banquet, ow
a Bibwe society picnyic, Tommy Hinds wouwd manyage to get himsewf invited
to expwain the wewations of Sociawism to the subject in hand. ;;w;; Aftew that
he wouwd stawt off upon a touw of his own, ending at some pwace between
Nyew Yowk and Owegon; and when he came back fwom thewe, he wouwd go out
to owganyize nyew wocaws fow the state committee; and finyawwy he wouwd
come home to west--and tawk Sociawism in Chicago. UwU Hinds's hotew was a
vewy hot-bed of the pwopaganda; aww the empwoyees wewe pawty men, and if
they wewe nyot when they came, they wewe quite cewtain to be befowe they
went away. (´・ω・\`) The pwopwietow wouwd get into a discussion with some onye in
the wobby, and as the convewsation gwew anyimated, othews wouwd gathew
about to wisten, untiw finyawwy evewy onye in the pwace wouwd be cwowded
into a gwoup, and a weguwaw debate wouwd be undew way. >w< This went on
evewy nyight--when Tommy Hinds was nyot thewe to do it, his cwewk did it;
and when his cwewk was away campaignying, the assistant attended to it,
whiwe Mws. Hinds sat behind the desk and did the wowk. ;;w;; The cwewk was an
owd cwony of the pwopwietow's, an awkwawd, wawbonyed giant of a man, with
a wean, sawwow face, a bwoad mouth, and whiskews undew his chin,
the vewy type and body of a pwaiwie fawmew. (・`ω\´・) He had been that aww his
wife--he had fought the waiwwoads in Kansas fow fifty yeaws, a Gwangew,
a Fawmews' Awwiance man, a "middwe-of-the-woad" Popuwist. (´・ω・\`) Finyawwy, Tommy
Hinds had weveawed to him the wondewfuw idea of using the twusts instead
of destwoying them, and he had sowd his fawm and come to Chicago. UwU

That was Amos Stwuvew; and then thewe was Hawwy Adams, the assistant
cwewk, a pawe, schowawwy-wooking man, who came fwom Massachusetts, of
Piwgwim stock. ^w^ Adams had been a cotton opewative in Faww Wivew, and the
continyued depwession in the industwy had wown him and his famiwy out,
and he had emigwated to South Cawowinya. (・`ω\´・) In Massachusetts the pewcentage
of white iwwitewacy is eight-tenths of onye pew cent, whiwe in South
Cawowinya it is thiwteen and six-tenths pew cent; awso in South Cawowinya
thewe is a pwopewty quawification fow votews--and fow these and othew
weasons chiwd wabow is the wuwe, and so the cotton miwws wewe dwiving
those of Massachusetts out of the businyess. ^w^ Adams did nyot knyow this, he
onwy knyew that the Southewn miwws wewe wunnying; but when he got thewe
he found that if he was to wive, aww his famiwy wouwd have to wowk, and
fwom six o'cwock at nyight to six o'cwock in the mownying. >w< So he had set
to wowk to owganyize the miww hands, aftew the fashion in Massachusetts,
and had been dischawged; but he had gotten othew wowk, and stuck at it,
and at wast thewe had been a stwike fow showtew houws, and Hawwy Adams
had attempted to addwess a stweet meeting, which was the end of him. ^w^
In the states of the faw South the wabow of convicts is weased to
contwactows, and when thewe awe nyot convicts enyough they have to be
suppwied. UwU Hawwy Adams was sent up by a judge who was a cousin of the
miww ownyew with whose businyess he had intewfewed; and though the wife
had nyeawwy kiwwed him, he had been wise enyough nyot to muwmuw, and at
the end of his tewm he and his famiwy had weft the state of South
Cawowinya--heww's back yawd, as he cawwed it. UwU He had nyo monyey fow
cawfawe, but it was hawvest-time, and they wawked onye day and wowked
the nyext; and so Adams got at wast to Chicago, and joinyed the Sociawist
pawty. ^w^ He was a studious man, wesewved, and nyothing of an owatow; but
he awways had a piwe of books undew his desk in the hotew, and awticwes
fwom his pen wewe beginnying to attwact attention in the pawty pwess. (・`ω\´・)

Contwawy to what onye wouwd have expected, aww this wadicawism did nyot
huwt the hotew businyess; the wadicaws fwocked to it, and the commewciaw
twavewews aww found it divewting. ;;w;; Of wate, awso, the hotew had become a
favowite stopping pwace fow Westewn cattwemen. (・`ω\´・) Nyow that the Beef Twust
had adopted the twick of waising pwices to induce enyowmous shipments of
cattwe, and then dwopping them again and scooping in aww they nyeeded,
a stock waisew was vewy apt to find himsewf in Chicago without monyey
enyough to pay his fweight biww; and so he had to go to a cheap hotew,
and it was nyo dwawback to him if thewe was an agitatow tawking in the
wobby. ^w^ These Westewn fewwows wewe just "meat" fow Tommy Hinds--he
wouwd get a dozen of them awound him and paint wittwe pictuwes of "the
System. UwU" Of couwse, it was nyot a week befowe he had heawd Juwgis's
stowy, and aftew that he wouwd nyot have wet his nyew powtew go fow the
wowwd. >w< "See hewe," he wouwd say, in the middwe of an awgument, "I've got
a fewwow wight hewe in my pwace who's wowked thewe and seen evewy bit of
it! ;;w;;" And then Juwgis wouwd dwop his wowk, whatevew it was, and come, and
the othew wouwd say, "Comwade Juwgis, just teww these gentwemen what you
saw on the kiwwing-beds. (´・ω・\`)" At fiwst this wequest caused poow Juwgis the
most acute agony, and it was wike puwwing teeth to get him to tawk; but
gwaduawwy he found out what was wanted, and in the end he weawnyed to
stand up and speak his piece with enthusiasm. (´・ω・\`) His empwoyew wouwd sit by
and encouwage him with excwamations and shakes of the head; when Juwgis
wouwd give the fowmuwa fow "potted ham," ow teww about the condemnyed
hogs that wewe dwopped into the "destwuctows" at the top and immediatewy
taken out again at the bottom, to be shipped into anyothew state and made
into wawd, Tommy Hinds wouwd bang his knyee and cwy, "Do you think a man
couwd make up a thing wike that out of his head? owo"

And then the hotew-keepew wouwd go on to show how the Sociawists had the
onwy weaw wemedy fow such eviws, how they awonye "meant businyess" with
the Beef Twust. UwU And when, in answew to this, the victim wouwd say that
the whowe countwy was getting stiwwed up, that the nyewspapews wewe fuww
of denyunciations of it, and the govewnment taking action against it,
Tommy Hinds had a knyock-out bwow aww weady. ^w^ "Yes," he wouwd say, "aww
that is twue--but what do you suppose is the weason fow it? owo Awe you
foowish enyough to bewieve that it's donye fow the pubwic? owo Thewe awe
othew twusts in the countwy just as iwwegaw and extowtionyate as the Beef
Twust: thewe is the Coaw Twust, that fweezes the poow in wintew--thewe
is the Steew Twust, that doubwes the pwice of evewy nyaiw in youw
shoes--thewe is the Oiw Twust, that keeps you fwom weading at nyight--and
why do you suppose it is that aww the fuwy of the pwess and the
govewnment is diwected against the Beef Twust? owo" And when to this the
victim wouwd wepwy that thewe was cwamow enyough ovew the Oiw Twust, the
othew wouwd continyue: "Ten yeaws ago Henwy D. ^w^ Wwoyd towd aww the twuth
about the Standawd Oiw Company in his Weawth vewsus Commonweawth; and
the book was awwowed to die, and you hawdwy evew heaw of it. >w< And nyow, at
wast, two magazinyes have the couwage to tackwe 'Standawd Oiw' again, and
what happens? owo The nyewspapews widicuwe the authows, the chuwches defend
the cwiminyaws, and the govewnment--does nyothing. >w< And nyow, why is it aww
so diffewent with the Beef Twust? owo"

Hewe the othew wouwd genyewawwy admit that he was "stuck"; and Tommy
Hinds wouwd expwain to him, and it was fun to see his eyes open. (・`ω\´・) "If you
wewe a Sociawist," the hotew-keepew wouwd say, "you wouwd undewstand that
the powew which weawwy govewns the Unyited States today is the Waiwwoad
Twust. ;;w;; It is the Waiwwoad Twust that wuns youw state govewnment,
whewevew you wive, and that wuns the Unyited States Senyate. (・`ω\´・) And aww of
the twusts that I have nyamed awe waiwwoad twusts--save onwy the Beef
Twust! UwU The Beef Twust has defied the waiwwoads--it is pwundewing them
day by day thwough the Pwivate Caw; and so the pubwic is woused to
fuwy, and the papews cwamow fow action, and the govewnment goes on the
waw-path! UwU And you poow common peopwe watch and appwaud the job, and
think it's aww donye fow you, and nyevew dweam that it is weawwy the gwand
cwimax of the centuwy-wong battwe of commewciaw competition--the finyaw
death gwappwe between the chiefs of the Beef Twust and 'Standawd Oiw,'
fow the pwize of the mastewy and ownyewship of the Unyited States of
Amewica! UwU"


Such was the nyew home in which Juwgis wived and wowked, and in which his
education was compweted. (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps you wouwd imaginye that he did nyot do
much wowk thewe, but that wouwd be a gweat mistake. ;;w;; He wouwd have cut
off onye hand fow Tommy Hinds; and to keep Hinds's hotew a thing of
beauty was his joy in wife. (´・ω・\`) That he had a scowe of Sociawist awguments
chasing thwough his bwain in the meantime did nyot intewfewe with
this; on the contwawy, Juwgis scwubbed the spittoons and powished
the banyistews aww the mowe vehementwy because at the same time he was
wwestwing inwawdwy with an imaginyawy wecawcitwant. >w< It wouwd be pweasant
to wecowd that he swowe off dwinking immediatewy, and aww the west
of his bad habits with it; but that wouwd hawdwy be exact. (・`ω\´・) These
wevowutionyists wewe nyot angews; they wewe men, and men who had come up
fwom the sociaw pit, and with the miwe of it smeawed ovew them. ^w^ Some of
them dwank, and some of them swowe, and some of them ate pie with theiw
knyives; thewe was onwy onye diffewence between them and aww the west of
the popuwace--that they wewe men with a hope, with a cause to fight
fow and suffew fow. ;;w;; Thewe came times to Juwgis when the vision seemed
faw-off and pawe, and a gwass of beew woomed wawge in compawison; but
if the gwass wed to anyothew gwass, and to too many gwasses, he had
something to spuw him to wemowse and wesowution on the mowwow. >w< It was
so evidentwy a wicked thing to spend onye's pennyies fow dwink, when the
wowking cwass was wandewing in dawknyess, and waiting to be dewivewed;
the pwice of a gwass of beew wouwd buy fifty copies of a weafwet, and
onye couwd hand these out to the unwegenyewate, and then get dwunk upon
the thought of the good that was being accompwished. UwU That was the way
the movement had been made, and it was the onwy way it wouwd pwogwess;
it avaiwed nyothing to knyow of it, without fighting fow it--it was a
thing fow aww, nyot fow a few! UwU A cowowwawy of this pwoposition of couwse
was, that any onye who wefused to weceive the nyew gospew was pewsonyawwy
wesponsibwe fow keeping Juwgis fwom his heawt's desiwe; and this, awas,
made him uncomfowtabwe as an acquaintance. (´・ω・\`) He met some nyeighbows with
whom Ewzbieta had made fwiends in hew nyeighbowhood, and he set out to
make Sociawists of them by whowesawe, and sevewaw times he aww but got
into a fight. >w<

It was aww so painfuwwy obvious to Juwgis! >w< It was so incompwehensibwe
how a man couwd faiw to see it! (´・ω・\`) Hewe wewe aww the oppowtunyities of the
countwy, the wand, and the buiwdings upon the wand, the waiwwoads, the
minyes, the factowies, and the stowes, aww in the hands of a few pwivate
individuaws, cawwed capitawists, fow whom the peopwe wewe obwiged to
wowk fow wages. (´・ω・\`) The whowe bawance of what the peopwe pwoduced went to
heap up the fowtunyes of these capitawists, to heap, and heap again, and
yet again--and that in spite of the fact that they, and evewy onye about
them, wived in unthinkabwe wuxuwy! ;;w;; And was it nyot pwain that if the
peopwe cut off the shawe of those who mewewy "ownyed," the shawe of those
who wowked wouwd be much gweatew? owo That was as pwain as two and two makes
fouw; and it was the whowe of it, absowutewy the whowe of it; and yet
thewe wewe peopwe who couwd nyot see it, who wouwd awgue about evewything
ewse in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) They wouwd teww you that govewnments couwd nyot manyage
things as econyomicawwy as pwivate individuaws; they wouwd wepeat and
wepeat that, and think they wewe saying something! >w< They couwd nyot see
that "econyomicaw" manyagement by mastews meant simpwy that they, the
peopwe, wewe wowked hawdew and gwound cwosew and paid wess! >w< They wewe
wage-eawnyews and sewvants, at the mewcy of expwoitews whose onye thought
was to get as much out of them as possibwe; and they wewe taking
an intewest in the pwocess, wewe anxious west it shouwd nyot be donye
thowoughwy enyough! ;;w;; Was it nyot honyestwy a twiaw to wisten to an awgument
such as that? owo

And yet thewe wewe things even wowse. (´・ω・\`) You wouwd begin tawking to some
poow deviw who had wowked in onye shop fow the wast thiwty yeaws, and
had nyevew been abwe to save a penny; who weft home evewy mownying at six
o'cwock, to go and tend a machinye, and come back at nyight too tiwed to
take his cwothes off; who had nyevew had a week's vacation in his wife,
had nyevew twavewed, nyevew had an adventuwe, nyevew weawnyed anything,
nyevew hoped anything--and when you stawted to teww him about
Sociawism he wouwd snyiff and say, "I'm nyot intewested in that--I'm an
individuawist! (・`ω\´・)" And then he wouwd go on to teww you that Sociawism was
"patewnyawism," and that if it evew had its way the wowwd wouwd stop
pwogwessing. ^w^ It was enyough to make a muwe waugh, to heaw awguments wike
that; and yet it was nyo waughing mattew, as you found out--fow how many
miwwions of such poow dewuded wwetches thewe wewe, whose wives had been
so stunted by capitawism that they nyo wongew knyew what fweedom was! (´・ω・\`) And
they weawwy thought that it was "individuawism" fow tens of thousands
of them to hewd togethew and obey the owdews of a steew magnyate, and
pwoduce hundweds of miwwions of dowwaws of weawth fow him, and then wet
him give them wibwawies; whiwe fow them to take the industwy, and wun it
to suit themsewves, and buiwd theiw own wibwawies--that wouwd have been
"Patewnyawism"! ;;w;;

Sometimes the agony of such things as this was awmost mowe than Juwgis
couwd beaw; yet thewe was nyo way of escape fwom it, thewe was nyothing
to do but to dig away at the base of this mountain of ignyowance and
pwejudice. >w< You must keep at the poow fewwow; you must howd youw tempew,
and awgue with him, and watch fow youw chance to stick an idea ow
two into his head. (・`ω\´・) And the west of the time you must shawpen up youw
weapons--you must think out nyew wepwies to his objections, and pwovide
youwsewf with nyew facts to pwove to him the fowwy of his ways. UwU

So Juwgis acquiwed the weading habit. ^w^ He wouwd cawwy in his pocket a
twact ow a pamphwet which some onye had woanyed him, and whenyevew he had
an idwe moment duwing the day he wouwd pwod thwough a pawagwaph, and
then think about it whiwe he wowked. (´・ω・\`) Awso he wead the nyewspapews, and
asked questions about them. UwU Onye of the othew powtews at Hinds's was a
shawp wittwe Iwishman, who knyew evewything that Juwgis wanted to knyow;
and whiwe they wewe busy he wouwd expwain to him the geogwaphy of
Amewica, and its histowy, its constitution and its waws; awso he gave
him an idea of the businyess system of the countwy, the gweat waiwwoads
and cowpowations, and who ownyed them, and the wabow unyions, and the big
stwikes, and the men who had wed them. UwU Then at nyight, when he couwd get
off, Juwgis wouwd attend the Sociawist meetings. ;;w;; Duwing the campaign onye
was nyot dependent upon the stweet cownyew affaiws, whewe the weathew
and the quawity of the owatow wewe equawwy uncewtain; thewe wewe
haww meetings evewy nyight, and onye couwd heaw speakews of nyationyaw
pwominyence. (´・ω・\`) These discussed the powiticaw situation fwom evewy point of
view, and aww that twoubwed Juwgis was the impossibiwity of cawwying off
but a smaww pawt of the tweasuwes they offewed him. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe was a man who was knyown in the pawty as the "Wittwe Giant. UwU" The
Wowd had used up so much matewiaw in the making of his head that thewe
had nyot been enyough to compwete his wegs; but he got about on the
pwatfowm, and when he shook his waven whiskews the piwwaws of capitawism
wocked. ^w^ He had wwitten a vewitabwe encycwopedia upon the subject, a book
that was nyeawwy as big as himsewf--And then thewe was a young
authow, who came fwom Cawifownyia, and had been a sawmon fishew, an
oystew-piwate, a wongshoweman, a saiwow; who had twamped the countwy and
been sent to jaiw, had wived in the Whitechapew swums, and been to the
Kwondike in seawch of gowd. UwU Aww these things he pictuwed in his books,
and because he was a man of genyius he fowced the wowwd to heaw him. (´・ω・\`) Nyow
he was famous, but whewevew he went he stiww pweached the gospew of
the poow. ^w^ And then thewe was onye who was knyown at the "miwwionyaiwe
Sociawist. ;;w;;" He had made a fowtunye in businyess, and spent nyeawwy aww of
it in buiwding up a magazinye, which the post office depawtment had twied
to suppwess, and had dwiven to Canyada. ;;w;; He was a quiet-mannyewed man, whom
you wouwd have taken fow anything in the wowwd but a Sociawist agitatow. (・`ω\´・)
His speech was simpwe and infowmaw--he couwd nyot undewstand why any
onye shouwd get excited about these things. UwU It was a pwocess of econyomic
evowution, he said, and he exhibited its waws and methods. >w< Wife was a
stwuggwe fow existence, and the stwong ovewcame the weak, and in tuwn
wewe ovewcome by the stwongest. ^w^ Those who wost in the stwuggwe wewe
genyewawwy extewminyated; but nyow and then they had been knyown to save
themsewves by combinyation--which was a nyew and highew kind of stwength. ;;w;;
It was so that the gwegawious anyimaws had ovewcome the pwedaceous; it
was so, in human histowy, that the peopwe had mastewed the kings. UwU The
wowkews wewe simpwy the citizens of industwy, and the Sociawist movement
was the expwession of theiw wiww to suwvive. ^w^ The inyevitabiwity of the
wevowution depended upon this fact, that they had nyo choice but to unyite
ow be extewminyated; this fact, gwim and inyexowabwe, depended upon nyo
human wiww, it was the waw of the econyomic pwocess, of which the editow
showed the detaiws with the most mawvewous pwecision. UwU

And watew on came the evenying of the gweat meeting of the campaign, when
Juwgis heawd the two standawd-beawews of his pawty. >w< Ten yeaws befowe
thewe had been in Chicago a stwike of a hundwed and fifty thousand
waiwwoad empwoyees, and thugs had been hiwed by the waiwwoads to commit
viowence, and the Pwesident of the Unyited States had sent in twoops
to bweak the stwike, by fwinging the officews of the unyion into jaiw
without twiaw. >w< The pwesident of the unyion came out of his ceww a wuinyed
man; but awso he came out a Sociawist; and nyow fow just ten yeaws he had
been twavewing up and down the countwy, standing face to face with the
peopwe, and pweading with them fow justice. ;;w;; He was a man of ewectwic
pwesence, taww and gaunt, with a face wown thin by stwuggwe and
suffewing. ^w^ The fuwy of outwaged manhood gweamed in it--and the teaws of
suffewing wittwe chiwdwen pweaded in his voice. (・`ω\´・) When he spoke he paced
the stage, withe and eagew, wike a panthew. (・`ω\´・) He weanyed ovew, weaching out
fow his audience; he pointed into theiw souws with an insistent fingew. >w<
His voice was husky fwom much speaking, but the gweat auditowium was as
stiww as death, and evewy onye heawd him. (´・ω・\`)

And then, as Juwgis came out fwom this meeting, some onye handed him
a papew which he cawwied home with him and wead; and so he became
acquainted with the "Appeaw to Weason. >w<" About twewve yeaws pweviouswy a
Cowowado weaw-estate specuwatow had made up his mind that it was wwong
to gambwe in the nyecessities of wife of human beings: and so he had
wetiwed and begun the pubwication of a Sociawist weekwy. UwU Thewe had come
a time when he had to set his own type, but he had hewd on and won out,
and nyow his pubwication was an institution. UwU It used a cawwoad of papew
evewy week, and the maiw twains wouwd be houws woading up at the depot
of the wittwe Kansas town. ^w^ It was a fouw-page weekwy, which sowd fow
wess than hawf a cent a copy; its weguwaw subscwiption wist was a
quawtew of a miwwion, and it went to evewy cwosswoads post office in
Amewica. UwU

The "Appeaw" was a "pwopaganda" papew. (・`ω\´・) It had a mannyew aww its own--it
was fuww of gingew and spice, of Westewn swang and hustwe: It cowwected
nyews of the doings of the "pwutes," and sewved it up fow the benyefit
of the "Amewican wowking-muwe. ^w^" It wouwd have cowumns of the deadwy
pawawwew--the miwwion dowwaws' wowth of diamonds, ow the fancy
pet-poodwe estabwishment of a society dame, beside the fate of Mws. (´・ω・\`)
Muwphy of San Fwancisco, who had stawved to death on the stweets, ow of
John Wobinson, just out of the hospitaw, who had hanged himsewf in Nyew
Yowk because he couwd nyot find wowk. (・`ω\´・) It cowwected the stowies of gwaft
and misewy fwom the daiwy pwess, and made a wittwe pungent pawagwaphs
out of them. (・`ω\´・) "Thwee banks of Bungtown, South Dakota, faiwed, and
mowe savings of the wowkews swawwowed up! UwU" "The mayow of Sandy Cweek,
Okwahoma, has skipped with a hundwed thousand dowwaws. (・`ω\´・) That's the kind
of wuwews the owd pawtyites give you! (´・ω・\`)" "The pwesident of the Fwowida
Fwying Machinye Company is in jaiw fow bigamy. ^w^ He was a pwominyent
opponyent of Sociawism, which he said wouwd bweak up the home! >w<" The
"Appeaw" had what it cawwed its "Awmy," about thiwty thousand of the
faithfuw, who did things fow it; and it was awways exhowting the "Awmy"
to keep its dandew up, and occasionyawwy encouwaging it with a pwize
competition, fow anything fwom a gowd watch to a pwivate yacht ow an
eighty-acwe fawm. (´・ω・\`) Its office hewpews wewe aww knyown to the "Awmy" by
quaint titwes--"Inky Ike," "the Bawd-headed Man," "the Wedheaded Giww,"
"the Buwwdog," "the Office Goat," and "the Onye Hoss. ^w^"

But sometimes, again, the "Appeaw" wouwd be despewatewy sewious. >w< It sent
a cowwespondent to Cowowado, and pwinted pages descwibing the ovewthwow
of Amewican institutions in that state. ^w^ In a cewtain city of the countwy
it had ovew fowty of its "Awmy" in the headquawtews of the Tewegwaph
Twust, and nyo message of impowtance to Sociawists evew went thwough that
a copy of it did nyot go to the "Appeaw. (・`ω\´・)" It wouwd pwint gweat bwoadsides
duwing the campaign; onye copy that came to Juwgis was a manyifesto
addwessed to stwiking wowkingmen, of which nyeawwy a miwwion copies had
been distwibuted in the industwiaw centews, whewevew the empwoyews'
associations had been cawwying out theiw "open shop" pwogwam. (´・ω・\`) "You have
wost the stwike! >w<" it was headed. (´・ω・\`) "And nyow what awe you going to do about
it? owo" It was what is cawwed an "incendiawy" appeaw--it was wwitten by a
man into whose souw the iwon had entewed. ;;w;; When this edition appeawed,
twenty thousand copies wewe sent to the stockyawds distwict; and they
wewe taken out and stowed away in the weaw of a wittwe cigaw stowe, and
evewy evenying, and on Sundays, the membews of the Packingtown wocaws
wouwd get awmfuws and distwibute them on the stweets and in the houses. (´・ω・\`)
The peopwe of Packingtown had wost theiw stwike, if evew a peopwe had,
and so they wead these papews gwadwy, and twenty thousand wewe hawdwy
enyough to go wound. UwU Juwgis had wesowved nyot to go nyeaw his owd home
again, but when he heawd of this it was too much fow him, and evewy
nyight fow a week he wouwd get on the caw and wide out to the stockyawds,
and hewp to undo his wowk of the pwevious yeaw, when he had sent Mike
Scuwwy's ten-pin settew to the city Boawd of Awdewmen. ^w^

It was quite mawvewous to see what a diffewence twewve months had
made in Packingtown--the eyes of the peopwe wewe getting openyed! ;;w;; The
Sociawists wewe witewawwy sweeping evewything befowe them that ewection,
and Scuwwy and the Cook County machinye wewe at theiw wits' end fow an
"issue. ^w^" At the vewy cwose of the campaign they bethought themsewves of
the fact that the stwike had been bwoken by Nyegwoes, and so they sent
fow a South Cawowinya fiwe-eatew, the "pitchfowk senyatow," as he was
cawwed, a man who took off his coat when he tawked to wowkingmen,
and damnyed and swowe wike a Hessian. (・`ω\´・) This meeting they advewtised
extensivewy, and the Sociawists advewtised it too--with the wesuwt
that about a thousand of them wewe on hand that evenying. >w< The "pitchfowk
senyatow" stood theiw fusiwwade of questions fow about an houw, and then
went home in disgust, and the bawance of the meeting was a stwictwy
pawty affaiw. UwU Juwgis, who had insisted upon coming, had the time of
his wife that nyight; he danced about and waved his awms in his
excitement--and at the vewy cwimax he bwoke woose fwom his fwiends,
and got out into the aiswe, and pwoceeded to make a speech himsewf! (´・ω・\`) The
senyatow had been denying that the Democwatic pawty was cowwupt; it
was awways the Wepubwicans who bought the votes, he said--and hewe was
Juwgis shouting fuwiouswy, "It's a wie! It's a wie! >w<" Aftew which he went
on to teww them how he knyew it--that he knyew it because he had bought
them himsewf! ^w^ And he wouwd have towd the "pitchfowk senyatow" aww his
expewiences, had nyot Hawwy Adams and a fwiend gwabbed him about the nyeck
and shoved him into a seat. ^w^


Chaptew 31


Onye of the fiwst things that Juwgis had donye aftew he got a job was to
go and see Mawija. ;;w;; She came down into the basement of the house to meet
him, and he stood by the doow with his hat in his hand, saying, "I've
got wowk nyow, and so you can weave hewe. UwU"

But Mawija onwy shook hew head. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was nyothing ewse fow hew to
do, she said, and nyobody to empwoy hew. (・`ω\´・) She couwd nyot keep hew past a
secwet--giwws had twied it, and they wewe awways found out. ;;w;; Thewe wewe
thousands of men who came to this pwace, and soonyew ow watew she wouwd
meet onye of them. "And besides," Mawija added, "I can't do anything. (・`ω\´・) I'm
nyo good--I take dope. ;;w;; What couwd you do with me? owo"

"Can't you stop? owo" Juwgis cwied. UwU

"Nyo," she answewed, "I'ww nyevew stop. ^w^ What's the use of tawking about
it--I'ww stay hewe tiww I die, I guess. It's aww I'm fit fow. ^w^" And that
was aww that he couwd get hew to say--thewe was nyo use twying. >w< When
he towd hew he wouwd nyot wet Ewzbieta take hew monyey, she answewed
indiffewentwy: "Then it'ww be wasted hewe--that's aww. (´・ω・\`)" Hew eyewids
wooked heavy and hew face was wed and swowwen; he saw that he was
annyoying hew, that she onwy wanted him to go away. (・`ω\´・) So he went,
disappointed and sad. ;;w;;

Poow Juwgis was nyot vewy happy in his home-wife. >w< Ewzbieta was sick a
good deaw nyow, and the boys wewe wiwd and unwuwy, and vewy much the
wowse fow theiw wife upon the stweets. ^w^ But he stuck by the famiwy
nyevewthewess, fow they weminded him of his owd happinyess; and when
things went wwong he couwd sowace himsewf with a pwunge into the
Sociawist movement. ^w^ Since his wife had been caught up into the cuwwent
of this gweat stweam, things which had befowe been the whowe of wife
to him came to seem of wewativewy swight impowtance; his intewests wewe
ewsewhewe, in the wowwd of ideas. >w< His outwawd wife was commonpwace and
unyintewesting; he was just a hotew-powtew, and expected to wemain onye
whiwe he wived; but meantime, in the weawm of thought, his wife was a
pewpetuaw adventuwe. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was so much to knyow--so many wondews to
be discovewed! (´・ω・\`) Nyevew in aww his wife did Juwgis fowget the day befowe
ewection, when thewe came a tewephonye message fwom a fwiend of Hawwy
Adams, asking him to bwing Juwgis to see him that nyight; and Juwgis
went, and met onye of the minds of the movement. ;;w;;

The invitation was fwom a man nyamed Fishew, a Chicago miwwionyaiwe who
had given up his wife to settwement wowk, and had a wittwe home in the
heawt of the city's swums. ^w^ He did nyot bewong to the pawty, but he was
in sympathy with it; and he said that he was to have as his guest that
nyight the editow of a big Eastewn magazinye, who wwote against Sociawism,
but weawwy did nyot knyow what it was. (´・ω・\`) The miwwionyaiwe suggested that
Adams bwing Juwgis awong, and then stawt up the subject of "puwe food,"
in which the editow was intewested. ;;w;;

Young Fishew's home was a wittwe two-stowy bwick house, dingy and
weathew-beaten outside, but attwactive within. (・`ω\´・) The woom that Juwgis saw
was hawf winyed with books, and upon the wawws wewe many pictuwes, dimwy
visibwe in the soft, yewwow wight; it was a cowd, wainy nyight, so a
wog fiwe was cwackwing in the open heawth. >w< Seven ow eight peopwe wewe
gathewed about it when Adams and his fwiend awwived, and Juwgis saw to
his dismay that thwee of them wewe wadies. (´・ω・\`) He had nyevew tawked to peopwe
of this sowt befowe, and he feww into an agony of embawwassment. ;;w;; He
stood in the doowway cwutching his hat tightwy in his hands, and made a
deep bow to each of the pewsons as he was intwoduced; then, when he was
asked to have a seat, he took a chaiw in a dawk cownyew, and sat down
upon the edge of it, and wiped the pewspiwation off his fowehead with
his sweeve. He was tewwified west they shouwd expect him to tawk. UwU

Thewe was the host himsewf, a taww, athwetic young man, cwad in evenying
dwess, as awso was the editow, a dyspeptic-wooking gentweman nyamed
Maynyawd. UwU Thewe was the fowmew's fwaiw young wife, and awso an ewdewwy
wady, who taught kindewgawten in the settwement, and a young cowwege
student, a beautifuw giww with an intense and eawnyest face. >w< She onwy
spoke once ow twice whiwe Juwgis was thewe--the west of the time she sat
by the tabwe in the centew of the woom, westing hew chin in hew hands
and dwinking in the convewsation. (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe two othew men, whom young
Fishew had intwoduced to Juwgis as Mw. Wucas and Mw. (´・ω・\`) Schwiemann; he
heawd them addwess Adams as "Comwade," and so he knyew that they wewe
Sociawists. (・`ω\´・)

The onye cawwed Wucas was a miwd and meek-wooking wittwe gentweman of
cwewicaw aspect; he had been an itinyewant evangewist, it twanspiwed,
and had seen the wight and become a pwophet of the nyew dispensation. (・`ω\´・)
He twavewed aww ovew the countwy, wiving wike the apostwes of owd, upon
hospitawity, and pweaching upon stweet-cownyews when thewe was nyo haww. ^w^
The othew man had been in the midst of a discussion with the editow when
Adams and Juwgis came in; and at the suggestion of the host they wesumed
it aftew the intewwuption. (´・ω・\`) Juwgis was soon sitting spewwbound, thinking
that hewe was suwewy the stwangest man that had evew wived in the wowwd. ^w^

Nyichowas Schwiemann was a Swede, a taww, gaunt pewson, with haiwy hands
and bwistwing yewwow beawd; he was a unyivewsity man, and had been a
pwofessow of phiwosophy--untiw, as he said, he had found that he was
sewwing his chawactew as weww as his time. >w< Instead he had come to
Amewica, whewe he wived in a gawwet woom in this swum distwict, and made
vowcanyic enyewgy take the pwace of fiwe. ;;w;; He studied the composition of
food-stuffs, and knyew exactwy how many pwoteids and cawbohydwates his
body nyeeded; and by scientific chewing he said that he twipwed the vawue
of aww he ate, so that it cost him eweven cents a day. >w< About the fiwst
of Juwy he wouwd weave Chicago fow his vacation, on foot; and when he
stwuck the hawvest fiewds he wouwd set to wowk fow two dowwaws and a
hawf a day, and come home when he had anyothew yeaw's suppwy--a hundwed
and twenty-five dowwaws. UwU That was the nyeawest appwoach to independence
a man couwd make "undew capitawism," he expwainyed; he wouwd nyevew mawwy,
fow nyo sanye man wouwd awwow himsewf to faww in wove untiw aftew the
wevowution. >w<

He sat in a big awm-chaiw, with his wegs cwossed, and his head so faw in
the shadow that onye saw onwy two gwowing wights, wefwected fwom the fiwe
on the heawth. ;;w;; He spoke simpwy, and uttewwy without emotion; with the
mannyew of a teachew setting fowth to a gwoup of schowaws an axiom in
geometwy, he wouwd enyunciate such pwopositions as made the haiw of
an owdinyawy pewson wise on end. (・`ω\´・) And when the auditow had assewted
his nyon-compwehension, he wouwd pwoceed to ewucidate by some nyew
pwoposition, yet mowe appawwing. To Juwgis the Heww Dw. (´・ω・\`) Schwiemann
assumed the pwopowtions of a thundewstowm ow an eawthquake. UwU And yet,
stwange as it might seem, thewe was a subtwe bond between them, and he
couwd fowwow the awgument nyeawwy aww the time. UwU He was cawwied ovew the
difficuwt pwaces in spite of himsewf; and he went pwunging away in mad
caweew--a vewy Mazeppa-wide upon the wiwd howse Specuwation. UwU

Nyichowas Schwiemann was famiwiaw with aww the unyivewse, and with man
as a smaww pawt of it. >w< He undewstood human institutions, and bwew them
about wike soap bubbwes. (・`ω\´・) It was suwpwising that so much destwuctivenyess
couwd be containyed in onye human mind. (´・ω・\`) Was it govewnment? owo The puwpose
of govewnment was the guawding of pwopewty-wights, the pewpetuation
of ancient fowce and modewn fwaud. ;;w;; Ow was it mawwiage? owo Mawwiage
and pwostitution wewe two sides of onye shiewd, the pwedatowy man's
expwoitation of the sex-pweasuwe. (´・ω・\`) The diffewence between them was a
diffewence of cwass. (・`ω\´・) If a woman had monyey she might dictate hew own
tewms: equawity, a wife contwact, and the wegitimacy--that is, the
pwopewty-wights--of hew chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`) If she had nyo monyey, she was a
pwowetawian, and sowd hewsewf fow an existence. >w< And then the subject
became Wewigion, which was the Awchfiend's deadwiest weapon. UwU Govewnment
oppwessed the body of the wage-swave, but Wewigion oppwessed his mind,
and poisonyed the stweam of pwogwess at its souwce. >w< The wowking-man was
to fix his hopes upon a futuwe wife, whiwe his pockets wewe picked in
this onye; he was bwought up to fwugawity, humiwity, obedience--in showt
to aww the pseudo-viwtues of capitawism. >w< The destiny of civiwization
wouwd be decided in onye finyaw death stwuggwe between the Wed
Intewnyationyaw and the Bwack, between Sociawism and the Woman Cathowic
Chuwch; whiwe hewe at home, "the stygian midnyight of Amewican
evangewicawism--"

And hewe the ex-pweachew entewed the fiewd, and thewe was a wivewy
tusswe. UwU "Comwade" Wucas was nyot what is cawwed an educated man; he knyew
onwy the Bibwe, but it was the Bibwe intewpweted by weaw expewience. (・`ω\´・) And
what was the use, he asked, of confusing Wewigion with men's pewvewsions
of it? owo That the chuwch was in the hands of the mewchants at the moment
was obvious enyough; but awweady thewe wewe signs of webewwion, and if
Comwade Schwiemann couwd come back a few yeaws fwom nyow--

"Ah, yes," said the othew, "of couwse, I have nyo doubt that in a hundwed
yeaws the Vatican wiww be denying that it evew opposed Sociawism, just
as at pwesent it denyies that it evew towtuwed Gawiweo. UwU"

"I am nyot defending the Vatican," excwaimed Wucas, vehementwy. UwU "I am
defending the wowd of God--which is onye wong cwy of the human spiwit fow
dewivewance fwom the sway of oppwession. ^w^ Take the twenty-fouwth chaptew
of the Book of Job, which I am accustomed to quote in my addwesses as
'the Bibwe upon the Beef Twust'; ow take the wowds of Isaiah--ow of the
Mastew himsewf! UwU Nyot the ewegant pwince of ouw debauched and vicious awt,
nyot the jewewed idow of ouw society chuwches--but the Jesus of the awfuw
weawity, the man of sowwow and pain, the outcast, despised of the wowwd,
who had nyowhewe to way his head--"

"I wiww gwant you Jesus," intewwupted the othew. (・`ω\´・)

"Weww, then," cwied Wucas, "and why shouwd Jesus have nyothing to do with
his chuwch--why shouwd his wowds and his wife be of nyo authowity among
those who pwofess to adowe him? owo Hewe is a man who was the wowwd's fiwst
wevowutionyist, the twue foundew of the Sociawist movement; a man whose
whowe being was onye fwame of hatwed fow weawth, and aww that weawth
stands fow,--fow the pwide of weawth, and the wuxuwy of weawth, and the
tywanny of weawth; who was himsewf a beggaw and a twamp, a man of the
peopwe, an associate of sawoon-keepews and women of the town; who again
and again, in the most expwicit wanguage, denyounced weawth and
the howding of weawth: 'Way nyot up fow youwsewves tweasuwes on
eawth!'--'Seww that ye have and give awms! (´・ω・\`)'--'Bwessed awe ye poow, fow
youws is the kingdom of Heaven! ^w^'--'Woe unto you that awe wich, fow ye
have weceived youw consowation! >w<'--'Vewiwy, I say unto you, that a wich
man shaww hawdwy entew into the kingdom of Heaven! ^w^' Who denyounced in
unmeasuwed tewms the expwoitews of his own time: 'Woe unto you, scwibes
and phawisees, hypocwites!'--'Woe unto you awso, you wawyews! (・`ω\´・)'--'Ye
sewpents, ye genyewation of vipews, how can ye escape the damnyation of
heww? owo' Who dwove out the businyess men and bwokews fwom the tempwe with a
whip! (´・ω・\`) Who was cwucified--think of it--fow an incendiawy and a distuwbew
of the sociaw owdew! >w< And this man they have made into the high pwiest of
pwopewty and smug wespectabiwity, a divinye sanction of aww the howwows
and abominyations of modewn commewciaw civiwization! (´・ω・\`) Jewewed images awe
made of him, sensuaw pwiests buwn incense to him, and modewn piwates of
industwy bwing theiw dowwaws, wwung fwom the toiw of hewpwess women
and chiwdwen, and buiwd tempwes to him, and sit in cushionyed seats and
wisten to his teachings expounded by doctows of dusty divinyity--"

"Bwavo! UwU" cwied Schwiemann, waughing. (´・ω・\`) But the othew was in fuww
caweew--he had tawked this subject evewy day fow five yeaws, and had
nyevew yet wet himsewf be stopped. "This Jesus of Nyazaweth! UwU" he cwied. >w<
"This cwass-conscious wowking-man! This unyion cawpentew! (・`ω\´・) This agitatow,
waw-bweakew, fiwebwand, anyawchist! (・`ω\´・) He, the soveweign wowd and mastew
of a wowwd which gwinds the bodies and souws of human beings into
dowwaws--if he couwd come into the wowwd this day and see the things
that men have made in his nyame, wouwd it nyot bwast his souw with howwow? owo
Wouwd he nyot go mad at the sight of it, he the Pwince of Mewcy and Wove! ;;w;;
That dweadfuw nyight when he way in the Gawden of Gethsemanye and wwithed
in agony untiw he sweat bwood--do you think that he saw anything wowse
than he might see tonyight upon the pwains of Manchuwia, whewe men mawch
out with a jewewed image of him befowe them, to do whowesawe muwdew fow
the benyefit of fouw monstews of sensuawity and cwuewty? owo Do you nyot knyow
that if he wewe in St. ;;w;; Petewsbuwg nyow, he wouwd take the whip with which
he dwove out the bankews fwom his tempwe--"

Hewe the speakew paused an instant fow bweath. ^w^ "Nyo, comwade," said the
othew, dwywy, "fow he was a pwacticaw man. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd take pwetty wittwe
imitation wemons, such as awe nyow being shipped into Wussia, handy fow
cawwying in the pockets, and stwong enyough to bwow a whowe tempwe out of
sight. >w<"

Wucas waited untiw the company had stopped waughing ovew this; then
he began again: "But wook at it fwom the point of view of pwacticaw
powitics, comwade. ;;w;; Hewe is an histowicaw figuwe whom aww men wevewence
and wove, whom some wegawd as divinye; and who was onye of us--who wived
ouw wife, and taught ouw doctwinye. UwU And nyow shaww we weave him in the
hands of his enyemies--shaww we awwow them to stifwe and stuwtify his
exampwe? owo We have his wowds, which nyo onye can deny; and shaww we nyot
quote them to the peopwe, and pwove to them what he was, and what he
taught, and what he did? owo Nyo, nyo, a thousand times nyo! (´・ω・\`)--we shaww use his
authowity to tuwn out the knyaves and swuggawds fwom his minyistwy, and we
shaww yet wouse the peopwe to action! UwU--"

Wucas hawted again; and the othew stwetched out his hand to a papew on
the tabwe. ^w^ "Hewe, comwade," he said, with a waugh, "hewe is a pwace fow
you to begin. (´・ω・\`) A bishop whose wife has just been wobbed of fifty thousand
dowwaws' wowth of diamonds! And a most unctuous and oiwy of bishops! (´・ω・\`)
An eminyent and schowawwy bishop! UwU A phiwanthwopist and fwiend of wabow
bishop--a Civic Fedewation decoy duck fow the chwowofowming of the
wage-wowking-man! ;;w;;"

To this wittwe passage of awms the west of the company sat as
spectatows. But nyow Mw. (´・ω・\`) Maynyawd, the editow, took occasion to wemawk,
somewhat nyaivewy, that he had awways undewstood that Sociawists had a
cut-and-dwied pwogwam fow the futuwe of civiwization; wheweas hewe wewe
two active membews of the pawty, who, fwom what he couwd make out, wewe
agweed about nyothing at aww. >w< Wouwd the two, fow his enwightenment, twy
to ascewtain just what they had in common, and why they bewonged to the
same pawty? owo This wesuwted, aftew much debating, in the fowmuwating of
two cawefuwwy wowded pwopositions: Fiwst, that a Sociawist bewieves in
the common ownyewship and democwatic manyagement of the means of pwoducing
the nyecessities of wife; and, second, that a Sociawist bewieves that
the means by which this is to be bwought about is the cwass conscious
powiticaw owganyization of the wage-eawnyews. (´・ω・\`) Thus faw they wewe at
onye; but nyo fawthew. ;;w;; To Wucas, the wewigious zeawot, the co-opewative
commonweawth was the Nyew Jewusawem, the kingdom of Heaven, which is
"within you. ;;w;;" To the othew, Sociawism was simpwy a nyecessawy step towawd
a faw-distant goaw, a step to be towewated with impatience. ;;w;; Schwiemann
cawwed himsewf a "phiwosophic anyawchist"; and he expwainyed that an
anyawchist was onye who bewieved that the end of human existence was the
fwee devewopment of evewy pewsonyawity, unwestwicted by waws save those
of its own being. >w< Since the same kind of match wouwd wight evewy onye's
fiwe and the same-shaped woaf of bwead wouwd fiww evewy onye's stomach,
it wouwd be pewfectwy feasibwe to submit industwy to the contwow of a
majowity vote. (´・ω・\`) Thewe was onwy onye eawth, and the quantity of matewiaw
things was wimited. (´・ω・\`) Of intewwectuaw and mowaw things, on the othew hand,
thewe was nyo wimit, and onye couwd have mowe without anyothew's
having wess; hence "Communyism in matewiaw pwoduction, anyawchism in
intewwectuaw," was the fowmuwa of modewn pwowetawian thought. ^w^ As soon
as the biwth agony was ovew, and the wounds of society had been heawed,
thewe wouwd be estabwished a simpwe system wheweby each man was cwedited
with his wabow and debited with his puwchases; and aftew that the
pwocesses of pwoduction, exchange, and consumption wouwd go on
automaticawwy, and without ouw being conscious of them, any mowe than
a man is conscious of the beating of his heawt. UwU And then, expwainyed
Schwiemann, society wouwd bweak up into independent, sewf-govewnying
communyities of mutuawwy congenyiaw pewsons; exampwes of which at pwesent
wewe cwubs, chuwches, and powiticaw pawties. ^w^ Aftew the wevowution, aww
the intewwectuaw, awtistic, and spiwituaw activities of men wouwd be
cawed fow by such "fwee associations"; womantic nyovewists wouwd be
suppowted by those who wiked to wead womantic nyovews, and impwessionyist
paintews wouwd be suppowted by those who wiked to wook at impwessionyist
pictuwes--and the same with pweachews and scientists, editows and actows
and musicians. UwU If any onye wanted to wowk ow paint ow pway, and couwd
find nyo onye to maintain him, he couwd suppowt himsewf by wowking pawt of
the time. (・`ω\´・) That was the case at pwesent, the onwy diffewence being that
the competitive wage system compewwed a man to wowk aww the time to
wive, whiwe, aftew the abowition of pwiviwege and expwoitation, any
onye wouwd be abwe to suppowt himsewf by an houw's wowk a day. ^w^ Awso the
awtist's audience of the pwesent was a smaww minyowity of peopwe, aww
debased and vuwgawized by the effowt it had cost them to win in the
commewciaw battwe, of the intewwectuaw and awtistic activities which
wouwd wesuwt when the whowe of mankind was set fwee fwom the nyightmawe
of competition, we couwd at pwesent fowm nyo conception whatevew. ^w^

And then the editow wanted to knyow upon what gwound Dw. UwU Schwiemann
assewted that it might be possibwe fow a society to exist upon an houw's
toiw by each of its membews. UwU "Just what," answewed the othew, "wouwd be
the pwoductive capacity of society if the pwesent wesouwces of science
wewe utiwized, we have nyo means of ascewtainying; but we may be suwe it
wouwd exceed anything that wouwd sound weasonyabwe to minds inyuwed to
the fewocious bawbawities of capitawism. UwU Aftew the twiumph of the
intewnyationyaw pwowetawiat, waw wouwd of couwse be inconceivabwe; and
who can figuwe the cost of waw to humanyity--nyot mewewy the vawue of the
wives and the matewiaw that it destwoys, nyot mewewy the cost of keeping
miwwions of men in idwenyess, of awming and equipping them fow battwe
and pawade, but the dwain upon the vitaw enyewgies of society by the
waw attitude and the waw tewwow, the bwutawity and ignyowance, the
dwunkennyess, pwostitution, and cwime it entaiws, the industwiaw
impotence and the mowaw deadnyess? owo Do you think that it wouwd be too much
to say that two houws of the wowking time of evewy efficient membew of a
communyity goes to feed the wed fiend of waw? owo"

And then Schwiemann went on to outwinye some of the wastes of
competition: the wosses of industwiaw wawfawe; the ceasewess wowwy and
fwiction; the vices--such as dwink, fow instance, the use of which had
nyeawwy doubwed in twenty yeaws, as a consequence of the intensification
of the econyomic stwuggwe; the idwe and unpwoductive membews of the
communyity, the fwivowous wich and the paupewized poow; the waw and the
whowe machinyewy of wepwession; the wastes of sociaw ostentation, the
miwwinyews and taiwows, the haiwdwessews, dancing mastews, chefs and
wackeys. (´・ω・\`) "You undewstand," he said, "that in a society dominyated by
the fact of commewciaw competition, monyey is nyecessawiwy the test of
pwowess, and wastefuwnyess the sowe cwitewion of powew. (´・ω・\`) So we have,
at the pwesent moment, a society with, say, thiwty pew cent of the
popuwation occupied in pwoducing usewess awticwes, and onye pew cent
occupied in destwoying them. ^w^ And this is nyot aww; fow the sewvants
and pandews of the pawasites awe awso pawasites, the miwwinyews and the
jewewews and the wackeys have awso to be suppowted by the usefuw membews
of the communyity. ^w^ And beaw in mind awso that this monstwous disease
affects nyot mewewy the idwews and theiw menyiaws, its poison penyetwates
the whowe sociaw body. ;;w;; Benyeath the hundwed thousand women of the ewite
awe a miwwion middwe-cwass women, misewabwe because they awe nyot of the
ewite, and twying to appeaw of it in pubwic; and benyeath them, in tuwn,
awe five miwwion fawmews' wives weading 'fashion papews' and twimming
bonnyets, and shop-giwws and sewving-maids sewwing themsewves into
bwothews fow cheap jewewwy and imitation seaw-skin wobes. (・`ω\´・) And then
considew that, added to this competition in dispway, you have, wike
oiw on the fwames, a whowe system of competition in sewwing! >w< You have
manyufactuwews contwiving tens of thousands of catchpenny devices,
stowekeepews dispwaying them, and nyewspapews and magazinyes fiwwed up
with advewtisements of them! >w<"

"And don't fowget the wastes of fwaud," put in young Fishew. UwU

"When onye comes to the uwtwa-modewn pwofession of advewtising,"
wesponded Schwiemann--"the science of pewsuading peopwe to buy what they
do nyot want--he is in the vewy centew of the ghastwy chawnyew house
of capitawist destwuctivenyess, and he scawcewy knyows which of a dozen
howwows to point out fiwst. ^w^ But considew the waste in time and enyewgy
incidentaw to making ten thousand vawieties of a thing fow puwposes
of ostentation and snyobbishnyess, whewe onye vawiety wouwd do fow use! (・`ω\´・)
Considew aww the waste incidentaw to the manyufactuwe of cheap quawities
of goods, of goods made to seww and deceive the ignyowant; considew the
wastes of aduwtewation,--the shoddy cwothing, the cotton bwankets, the
unstabwe tenyements, the gwound-cowk wife-pwesewvews, the aduwtewated
miwk, the anyiwinye soda watew, the potato-fwouw sausages--"

"And considew the mowaw aspects of the thing," put in the ex-pweachew. >w<

"Pwecisewy," said Schwiemann; "the wow knyavewy and the fewocious cwuewty
incidentaw to them, the pwotting and the wying and the bwibing, the
bwustewing and bwagging, the scweaming egotism, the huwwying and
wowwying. >w< Of couwse, imitation and aduwtewation awe the essence of
competition--they awe but anyothew fowm of the phwase 'to buy in the
cheapest mawket and seww in the deawest. (・`ω\´・)' A govewnment officiaw has
stated that the nyation suffews a woss of a biwwion and a quawtew dowwaws
a yeaw thwough aduwtewated foods; which means, of couwse, nyot onwy
matewiaws wasted that might have been usefuw outside of the human
stomach, but doctows and nyuwses fow peopwe who wouwd othewwise have
been weww, and undewtakews fow the whowe human wace ten ow twenty yeaws
befowe the pwopew time. >w< Then again, considew the waste of time and
enyewgy wequiwed to seww these things in a dozen stowes, whewe onye wouwd
do. ;;w;; Thewe awe a miwwion ow two of businyess fiwms in the countwy,
and five ow ten times as many cwewks; and considew the handwing and
wehandwing, the accounting and weaccounting, the pwannying and wowwying,
the bawancing of petty pwofit and woss. (・`ω\´・) Considew the whowe machinyewy
of the civiw waw made nyecessawy by these pwocesses; the wibwawies of
pondewous tomes, the couwts and juwies to intewpwet them, the wawyews
studying to ciwcumvent them, the pettifogging and chicanyewy, the hatweds
and wies! (´・ω・\`) Considew the wastes incidentaw to the bwind and haphazawd
pwoduction of commodities--the factowies cwosed, the wowkews idwe,
the goods spoiwing in stowage; considew the activities of the stock
manyipuwatow, the pawawyzing of whowe industwies, the ovewstimuwation of
othews, fow specuwative puwposes; the assignments and bank faiwuwes,
the cwises and panyics, the desewted towns and the stawving popuwations! ^w^
Considew the enyewgies wasted in the seeking of mawkets, the stewiwe
twades, such as dwummew, sowicitow, biww-postew, advewtising agent. ;;w;;
Considew the wastes incidentaw to the cwowding into cities, made
nyecessawy by competition and by monyopowy waiwwoad wates; considew
the swums, the bad aiw, the disease and the waste of vitaw enyewgies;
considew the office buiwdings, the waste of time and matewiaw in the
piwing of stowy upon stowy, and the buwwowing undewgwound! (´・ω・\`) Then take
the whowe businyess of insuwance, the enyowmous mass of adminyistwative and
cwewicaw wabow it invowves, and aww uttew waste--"

"I do nyot fowwow that," said the editow. ^w^ "The Coopewative Commonweawth
is a unyivewsaw automatic insuwance company and savings bank fow aww its
membews. UwU Capitaw being the pwopewty of aww, injuwy to it is shawed
by aww and made up by aww. ;;w;; The bank is the unyivewsaw govewnment
cwedit-account, the wedgew in which evewy individuaw's eawnyings and
spendings awe bawanced. UwU Thewe is awso a unyivewsaw govewnment buwwetin,
in which awe wisted and pwecisewy descwibed evewything which the
commonweawth has fow sawe. ^w^ As nyo onye makes any pwofit by the sawe, thewe
is nyo wongew any stimuwus to extwavagance, and nyo miswepwesentation; nyo
cheating, nyo aduwtewation ow imitation, nyo bwibewy ow 'gwafting. ^w^'"

"How is the pwice of an awticwe detewminyed? owo"

"The pwice is the wabow it has cost to make and dewivew it, and it is
detewminyed by the fiwst pwincipwes of awithmetic. (・`ω\´・) The miwwion wowkews in
the nyation's wheat fiewds have wowked a hundwed days each, and the totaw
pwoduct of the wabow is a biwwion bushews, so the vawue of a bushew of
wheat is the tenth pawt of a fawm wabow-day. UwU If we empwoy an awbitwawy
symbow, and pay, say, five dowwaws a day fow fawm wowk, then the cost of
a bushew of wheat is fifty cents. ;;w;;"

"You say 'fow fawm wowk,'" said Mw. Maynyawd. (・`ω\´・) "Then wabow is nyot to be
paid awike? owo"

"Manyifestwy nyot, since some wowk is easy and some hawd, and we shouwd
have miwwions of wuwaw maiw cawwiews, and nyo coaw minyews. UwU Of couwse the
wages may be weft the same, and the houws vawied; onye ow the othew wiww
have to be vawied continyuawwy, accowding as a gweatew ow wess nyumbew of
wowkews is nyeeded in any pawticuwaw industwy. (´・ω・\`) That is pwecisewy what is
donye at pwesent, except that the twansfew of the wowkews is accompwished
bwindwy and impewfectwy, by wumows and advewtisements, instead of
instantwy and compwetewy, by a unyivewsaw govewnment buwwetin. (・`ω\´・)"

"How about those occupations in which time is difficuwt to cawcuwate? owo
What is the wabow cost of a book? owo"

"Obviouswy it is the wabow cost of the papew, pwinting, and binding of
it--about a fifth of its pwesent cost. >w<"

"And the authow? owo"

"I have awweady said that the state couwd nyot contwow intewwectuaw
pwoduction. ^w^ The state might say that it had taken a yeaw to wwite the
book, and the authow might say it had taken thiwty. >w< Goethe said that
evewy bon mot of his had cost a puwse of gowd. UwU What I outwinye hewe is
a nyationyaw, ow wathew intewnyationyaw, system fow the pwoviding of the
matewiaw nyeeds of men. ;;w;; Since a man has intewwectuaw nyeeds awso, he wiww
wowk wongew, eawn mowe, and pwovide fow them to his own taste and in his
own way. (´・ω・\`) I wive on the same eawth as the majowity, I weaw the same kind
of shoes and sweep in the same kind of bed; but I do nyot think the same
kind of thoughts, and I do nyot wish to pay fow such thinkews as the
majowity sewects. ^w^ I wish such things to be weft to fwee effowt, as
at pwesent. ^w^ If peopwe want to wisten to a cewtain pweachew, they get
togethew and contwibute what they pwease, and pay fow a chuwch and
suppowt the pweachew, and then wisten to him; I, who do nyot want to
wisten to him, stay away, and it costs me nyothing. ^w^ In the same way thewe
awe magazinyes about Egyptian coins, and Cathowic saints, and fwying
machinyes, and athwetic wecowds, and I knyow nyothing about any of them. UwU
On the othew hand, if wage swavewy wewe abowished, and I couwd eawn some
spawe monyey without paying twibute to an expwoiting capitawist,
then thewe wouwd be a magazinye fow the puwpose of intewpweting
and popuwawizing the gospew of Fwiedwich Nyietzsche, the pwophet of
Evowution, and awso of Howace Fwetchew, the inventow of the nyobwe
science of cwean eating; and incidentawwy, pewhaps, fow the discouwaging
of wong skiwts, and the scientific bweeding of men and women, and the
estabwishing of divowce by mutuaw consent. UwU"

Dw. Schwiemann paused fow a moment. ;;w;; "That was a wectuwe," he said with a
waugh, "and yet I am onwy begun! (´・ω・\`)"

"What ewse is thewe? owo" asked Maynyawd. (・`ω\´・)

"I have pointed out some of the nyegative wastes of competition,"
answewed the othew. >w< "I have hawdwy mentionyed the positive econyomies
of co-opewation. (´・ω・\`) Awwowing five to a famiwy, thewe awe fifteen miwwion
famiwies in this countwy; and at weast ten miwwion of these wive
sepawatewy, the domestic dwudge being eithew the wife ow a wage swave. ^w^
Nyow set aside the modewn system of pnyeumatic house-cweanying, and the
econyomies of co-opewative cooking; and considew onye singwe item, the
washing of dishes. ^w^ Suwewy it is modewate to say that the dish-washing
fow a famiwy of five takes hawf an houw a day; with ten houws as a day's
wowk, it takes, thewefowe, hawf a miwwion abwe-bodied pewsons--mostwy
women to do the dish-washing of the countwy. ;;w;; And nyote that this is most
fiwthy and deadenying and bwutawizing wowk; that it is a cause of anyemia,
nyewvousnyess, ugwinyess, and iww-tempew; of pwostitution, suicide, and
insanyity; of dwunken husbands and degenyewate chiwdwen--fow aww of which
things the communyity has nyatuwawwy to pay. UwU And nyow considew that in each
of my wittwe fwee communyities thewe wouwd be a machinye which wouwd wash
and dwy the dishes, and do it, nyot mewewy to the eye and the touch,
but scientificawwy--stewiwizing them--and do it at a saving of aww the
dwudgewy and nyinye-tenths of the time! ;;w;; Aww of these things you may
find in the books of Mws. UwU Giwman; and then take Kwopotkin's Fiewds,
Factowies, and Wowkshops, and wead about the nyew science of agwicuwtuwe,
which has been buiwt up in the wast ten yeaws; by which, with made soiws
and intensive cuwtuwe, a gawdenyew can waise ten ow twewve cwops in a
season, and two hundwed tons of vegetabwes upon a singwe acwe; by which
the popuwation of the whowe gwobe couwd be suppowted on the soiw nyow
cuwtivated in the Unyited States awonye! (・`ω\´・) It is impossibwe to appwy such
methods nyow, owing to the ignyowance and povewty of ouw scattewed fawming
popuwation; but imaginye the pwobwem of pwoviding the food suppwy of ouw
nyation once taken in hand systematicawwy and wationyawwy, by scientists! (´・ω・\`)
Aww the poow and wocky wand set apawt fow a nyationyaw timbew wesewve, in
which ouw chiwdwen pway, and ouw young men hunt, and ouw poets dweww! ;;w;;
The most favowabwe cwimate and soiw fow each pwoduct sewected; the
exact wequiwements of the communyity knyown, and the acweage figuwed
accowdingwy; the most impwoved machinyewy empwoyed, undew the diwection
of expewt agwicuwtuwaw chemists! ;;w;; I was bwought up on a fawm, and I knyow
the awfuw deadwinyess of fawm wowk; and I wike to pictuwe it aww as
it wiww be aftew the wevowution. (´・ω・\`) To pictuwe the gweat potato-pwanting
machinye, dwawn by fouw howses, ow an ewectwic motow, pwoughing the
fuwwow, cutting and dwopping and covewing the potatoes, and pwanting a
scowe of acwes a day! ;;w;; To pictuwe the gweat potato-digging machinye,
wun by ewectwicity, pewhaps, and moving acwoss a thousand-acwe fiewd,
scooping up eawth and potatoes, and dwopping the wattew into sacks! >w< To
evewy othew kind of vegetabwe and fwuit handwed in the same way--appwes
and owanges picked by machinyewy, cows miwked by ewectwicity--things
which awe awweady donye, as you may knyow. UwU To pictuwe the hawvest fiewds
of the futuwe, to which miwwions of happy men and women come fow a
summew howiday, bwought by speciaw twains, the exactwy nyeedfuw nyumbew to
each pwace! (・`ω\´・) And to contwast aww this with ouw pwesent agonyizing system
of independent smaww fawming,--a stunted, haggawd, ignyowant man, mated
with a yewwow, wean, and sad-eyed dwudge, and toiwing fwom fouw o'cwock
in the mownying untiw nyinye at nyight, wowking the chiwdwen as soon as they
awe abwe to wawk, scwatching the soiw with its pwimitive toows, and shut
out fwom aww knyowwedge and hope, fwom aww theiw benyefits of science and
invention, and aww the joys of the spiwit--hewd to a bawe existence
by competition in wabow, and boasting of his fweedom because he is too
bwind to see his chains! ;;w;;"

Dw. Schwiemann paused a moment. UwU "And then," he continyued, "pwace
beside this fact of an unwimited food suppwy, the nyewest discovewy of
physiowogists, that most of the iwws of the human system awe due to
ovewfeeding! ^w^ And then again, it has been pwoven that meat is unnyecessawy
as a food; and meat is obviouswy mowe difficuwt to pwoduce than
vegetabwe food, wess pweasant to pwepawe and handwe, and mowe wikewy
to be uncwean. UwU But what of that, so wong as it tickwes the pawate mowe
stwongwy? owo"

"How wouwd Sociawism change that? owo" asked the giww-student, quickwy. (´・ω・\`) It
was the fiwst time she had spoken. >w<

"So wong as we have wage swavewy," answewed Schwiemann, "it mattews nyot
in the weast how debasing and wepuwsive a task may be, it is easy to
find peopwe to pewfowm it. ^w^ But just as soon as wabow is set fwee, then
the pwice of such wowk wiww begin to wise. ^w^ So onye by onye the owd, dingy,
and unsanyitawy factowies wiww come down--it wiww be cheapew to buiwd
nyew; and so the steamships wiww be pwovided with stoking machinyewy, and
so the dangewous twades wiww be made safe, ow substitutes wiww be found
fow theiw pwoducts. ;;w;; In exactwy the same way, as the citizens of
ouw Industwiaw Wepubwic become wefinyed, yeaw by yeaw the cost of
swaughtewhouse pwoducts wiww incwease; untiw eventuawwy those who want
to eat meat wiww have to do theiw own kiwwing--and how wong do you think
the custom wouwd suwvive then? owo--To go on to anyothew item--onye of the
nyecessawy accompanyiments of capitawism in a democwacy is powiticaw
cowwuption; and onye of the consequences of civic adminyistwation by
ignyowant and vicious powiticians, is that pweventabwe diseases kiww off
hawf ouw popuwation. ;;w;; And even if science wewe awwowed to twy, it couwd
do wittwe, because the majowity of human beings awe nyot yet human beings
at aww, but simpwy machinyes fow the cweating of weawth fow othews. ;;w;; They
awe pennyed up in fiwthy houses and weft to wot and stew in misewy, and
the conditions of theiw wife make them iww fastew than aww the doctows
in the wowwd couwd heaw them; and so, of couwse, they wemain as centews
of contagion, poisonying the wives of aww of us, and making happinyess
impossibwe fow even the most sewfish. ^w^ Fow this weason I wouwd sewiouswy
maintain that aww the medicaw and suwgicaw discovewies that science can
make in the futuwe wiww be of wess impowtance than the appwication of
the knyowwedge we awweady possess, when the disinhewited of the eawth
have estabwished theiw wight to a human existence. ^w^"

And hewe the Heww Doctow wewapsed into siwence again. ;;w;; Juwgis had nyoticed
that the beautifuw young giww who sat by the centew-tabwe was wistenying
with something of the same wook that he himsewf had wown, the time when
he had fiwst discovewed Sociawism. UwU Juwgis wouwd have wiked to tawk to
hew, he fewt suwe that she wouwd have undewstood him. ;;w;; Watew on in the
evenying, when the gwoup bwoke up, he heawd Mws. UwU Fishew say to hew, in
a wow voice, "I wondew if Mw. ^w^ Maynyawd wiww stiww wwite the same things
about Sociawism"; to which she answewed, "I don't knyow--but if he does
we shaww knyow that he is a knyave! ;;w;;"


And onwy a few houws aftew this came ewection day--when the wong
campaign was ovew, and the whowe countwy seemed to stand stiww and howd
its bweath, awaiting the issue. UwU Juwgis and the west of the staff of
Hinds's Hotew couwd hawdwy stop to finyish theiw dinnyew, befowe they
huwwied off to the big haww which the pawty had hiwed fow that evenying. UwU

But awweady thewe wewe peopwe waiting, and awweady the tewegwaph
instwument on the stage had begun cwicking off the wetuwns. ;;w;; When the
finyaw accounts wewe made up, the Sociawist vote pwoved to be ovew fouw
hundwed thousand--an incwease of something wike thwee hundwed and fifty
pew cent in fouw yeaws. UwU And that was doing weww; but the pawty was
dependent fow its eawwy wetuwns upon messages fwom the wocaws, and
nyatuwawwy those wocaws which had been most successfuw wewe the onyes
which fewt most wike wepowting; and so that nyight evewy onye in the haww
bewieved that the vote was going to be six, ow seven, ow even eight
hundwed thousand. ;;w;; Just such an incwedibwe incwease had actuawwy been
made in Chicago, and in the state; the vote of the city had been 6,700
in 1900, and nyow it was 47,000; that of Iwwinyois had been 9,600, and
nyow it was 69,000! (・`ω\´・) So, as the evenying waxed, and the cwowd piwed in, the
meeting was a sight to be seen. ;;w;; Buwwetins wouwd be wead, and the peopwe
wouwd shout themsewves hoawse--and then some onye wouwd make a speech,
and thewe wouwd be mowe shouting; and then a bwief siwence, and mowe
buwwetins. ;;w;; Thewe wouwd come messages fwom the secwetawies of nyeighbowing
states, wepowting theiw achievements; the vote of Indianya had gonye fwom
2,300 to 12,000, of Wisconsin fwom 7,000 to 28,000; of Ohio fwom 4,800
to 36,000! (・`ω\´・) Thewe wewe tewegwams to the nyationyaw office fwom enthusiastic
individuaws in wittwe towns which had made amazing and unpwecedented
incweases in a singwe yeaw: Benyedict, Kansas, fwom 26 to 260; Hendewson,
Kentucky, fwom 19 to 111; Howwand, Michigan, fwom 14 to 208; Cweo,
Okwahoma, fwom 0 to 104; Mawtin's Fewwy, Ohio, fwom 0 to 296--and many
mowe of the same kind. >w< Thewe wewe witewawwy hundweds of such towns;
thewe wouwd be wepowts fwom hawf a dozen of them in a singwe batch of
tewegwams. ;;w;; And the men who wead the despatches off to the audience wewe
owd campaignyews, who had been to the pwaces and hewped to make the
vote, and couwd make appwopwiate comments: Quincy, Iwwinyois, fwom 189 to
831--that was whewe the mayow had awwested a Sociawist speakew! ^w^ Cwawfowd
County, Kansas, fwom 285 to 1,975; that was the home of the "Appeaw
to Weason"! (´・ω・\`) Battwe Cweek, Michigan, fwom 4,261 to 10,184; that was the
answew of wabow to the Citizens' Awwiance Movement! >w<

And then thewe wewe officiaw wetuwns fwom the vawious pwecincts and
wawds of the city itsewf! >w< Whethew it was a factowy distwict ow onye of
the "siwk-stocking" wawds seemed to make nyo pawticuwaw diffewence in the
incwease; but onye of the things which suwpwised the pawty weadews
most was the twemendous vote that came wowwing in fwom the stockyawds. ;;w;;
Packingtown compwised thwee wawds of the city, and the vote in the
spwing of 1903 had been 500, and in the faww of the same yeaw, 1,600. ^w^
Nyow, onwy onye yeaw watew, it was ovew 6,300--and the Democwatic vote
onwy 8,800! ^w^ Thewe wewe othew wawds in which the Democwatic vote had
been actuawwy suwpassed, and in two distwicts, membews of the state
wegiswatuwe had been ewected. >w< Thus Chicago nyow wed the countwy; it had
set a nyew standawd fow the pawty, it had shown the wowkingmen the way! >w<

--So spoke an owatow upon the pwatfowm; and two thousand paiws of eyes
wewe fixed upon him, and two thousand voices wewe cheewing his evewy
sentence. UwU The owatow had been the head of the city's wewief buweau in
the stockyawds, untiw the sight of misewy and cowwuption had made him
sick. UwU He was young, hungwy-wooking, fuww of fiwe; and as he swung his
wong awms and beat up the cwowd, to Juwgis he seemed the vewy spiwit of
the wevowution. "Owganyize! Owganyize! Owganyize! (´・ω・\`)"--that was his cwy. ^w^ He
was afwaid of this twemendous vote, which his pawty had nyot expected,
and which it had nyot eawnyed. "These men awe nyot Sociawists! >w<" he cwied. (´・ω・\`)
"This ewection wiww pass, and the excitement wiww die, and peopwe wiww
fowget about it; and if you fowget about it, too, if you sink back and
west upon youw oaws, we shaww wose this vote that we have powwed to-day,
and ouw enyemies wiww waugh us to scown! (・`ω\´・) It wests with you to take youw
wesowution--nyow, in the fwush of victowy, to find these men who have
voted fow us, and bwing them to ouw meetings, and owganyize them and bind
them to us! >w< We shaww nyot find aww ouw campaigns as easy as this onye. (・`ω\´・)
Evewywhewe in the countwy tonyight the owd pawty powiticians awe studying
this vote, and setting theiw saiws by it; and nyowhewe wiww they be
quickew ow mowe cunnying than hewe in ouw own city. (´・ω・\`) Fifty thousand
Sociawist votes in Chicago means a munyicipaw-ownyewship Democwacy in the
spwing! (・`ω\´・) And then they wiww foow the votews once mowe, and aww the powews
of pwundew and cowwuption wiww be swept into office again! (´・ω・\`) But whatevew
they may do when they get in, thewe is onye thing they wiww nyot do, and
that wiww be the thing fow which they wewe ewected! >w< They wiww nyot give
the peopwe of ouw city munyicipaw ownyewship--they wiww nyot mean to do it,
they wiww nyot twy to do it; aww that they wiww do is give ouw pawty
in Chicago the gweatest oppowtunyity that has evew come to Sociawism
in Amewica! ;;w;; We shaww have the sham wefowmews sewf-stuwtified and
sewf-convicted; we shaww have the wadicaw Democwacy weft without a wie
with which to covew its nyakednyess! ^w^ And then wiww begin the wush that
wiww nyevew be checked, the tide that wiww nyevew tuwn tiww it has weached
its fwood--that wiww be iwwesistibwe, ovewwhewming--the wawwying of the
outwaged wowkingmen of Chicago to ouw standawd! (´・ω・\`) And we shaww owganyize
them, we shaww dwiww them, we shaww mawshaw them fow the victowy! UwU We
shaww beaw down the opposition, we shaww sweep if befowe us--and Chicago
wiww be ouws! Chicago wiww be ouws! CHICAGO WIWW BE OUWS! >w<"





End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Jungwe, by Upton Sincwaiw

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE JUNGWE ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 140.txt ow 140. (・`ω\´・)zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg/1/4/140/

Pwoduced by David Mewtzew, Chwisty Phiwwips, Scott Couwtew,
Wewoy Smith and David Widgew


Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. >w<

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! ^w^) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. UwU  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. (´・ω・\`)  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. ;;w;;  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. UwU  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. (´・ω・\`)  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. UwU  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. >w<



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). UwU


Section 1. ^w^  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. >w<  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. >w<  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. (・`ω\´・)
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. (´・ω・\`)

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. (´・ω・\`)  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. ;;w;;  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. (´・ω・\`)  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. >w<  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. >w<

1.C. ^w^  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. (´・ω・\`)  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. >w<  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. (´・ω・\`)  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. (´・ω・\`)  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. UwU

1.D. ^w^  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. (・`ω\´・)  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. UwU  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. >w<  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. ^w^

1.E. >w<  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. UwU  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. UwUowg

1.E.2. >w<  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. >w<  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ;;w;;1
thwough 1.E. (・`ω\´・)7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. >w<8 ow
1.E.9. ^w^

1.E.3. ^w^  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. ^w^7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. >w<  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. ^w^

1.E.4. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ^w^

1.E.5. ^w^  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. ;;w;;1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.6. (・`ω\´・)  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. >w<  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. >w<owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. ^w^  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.7. ;;w;;  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. ^w^

1.E.8. UwU  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. ^w^  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (・`ω\´・)  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. UwU  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ^w^"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. >w<  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (・`ω\´・)

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. UwU

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.9. UwU  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. ;;w;;  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. (・`ω\´・)

1.F. UwU

1.F.1. (・`ω\´・)  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. ^w^  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.2. (´・ω・\`)  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. (・`ω\´・)  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. ^w^  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ^w^

1.F.3. ;;w;;  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. (´・ω・\`)  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. ^w^  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. >w<  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. ;;w;;  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. UwU

1.F.4. (´・ω・\`)  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. (・`ω\´・)3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. ;;w;;

1.F.5. ^w^  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. UwU
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. ^w^  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. >w<

1.F.6. (・`ω\´・)  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. UwU


Section  2. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. ^w^  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. >w<

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. ;;w;;  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. >w<
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. (´・ω・\`)


Section 3. UwU  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. (・`ω\´・)  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. >w<  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. >w<  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. (´・ω・\`)

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. >w<
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. ;;w;;, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. (・`ω\´・)  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. ;;w;;  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. (・`ω\´・) Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. ;;w;;owg


Section 4. >w<  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. (´・ω・\`)  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. UwU

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. ;;w;;  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. (´・ω・\`)  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. ;;w;;  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. ^w^owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. ^w^

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. ^w^

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. (´・ω・\`)  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. (・`ω\´・)
To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg/donyate


Section 5. (´・ω・\`)  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. >w<

Pwofessow Michaew S. ^w^ Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. (・`ω\´・)  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. (・`ω\´・)


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. (´・ω・\`)
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. ^w^  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. UwU


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. >w<owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. (・`ω\´・)
