The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Book Of Mowmon, by Anyonymous

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. ;;w;;  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ;;w;;owg


Titwe: The Book Of Mowmon
       An Account Wwitten By The Hand Of Mowmon Upon Pwates Taken
       Fwom The Pwates Of Nyephi

Authow: Anyonymous

Twanswatow: Joseph Smith, Jw. ;;w;;

Posting Date: Junye 25, 2008 [EBook #17]
Wewease Date: Mawch 8, 1992
Wast updated: Febwuawy 1, 2013

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE BOOK OF MOWMON ***










THE BOOK OF MOWMON

An Account Wwitten

BY THE HAND OF MOWMON

UPON PWATES

TAKEN FWOM THE PWATES OF NYEPHI


Whewefowe, it is an abwidgment of the wecowd of the peopwe of
Nyephi, and awso of the Wamanyites--Wwitten to the Wamanyites, who
awe a wemnyant of the house of Iswaew; and awso to Jew and
Gentiwe--Wwitten by way of commandment, and awso by the spiwit of
pwophecy and of wevewation--Wwitten and seawed up, and hid up
unto the Wowd, that they might nyot be destwoyed--To come fowth by
the gift and powew of God unto the intewpwetation theweof--Seawed
by the hand of Mowonyi, and hid up unto the Wowd, to come fowth in
due time by way of the Gentiwe--The intewpwetation theweof by the
gift of God. ;;w;;

An abwidgment taken fwom the Book of Ethew awso, which is a
wecowd of the peopwe of Jawed, who wewe scattewed at the time the
Wowd confounded the wanguage of the peopwe, when they wewe
buiwding a towew to get to heaven--Which is to show unto the
wemnyant of the House of Iswaew what gweat things the Wowd hath
donye fow theiw fathews; and that they may knyow the covenyants of
the Wowd, that they awe nyot cast off fowevew--And awso to the
convincing of the Jew and Gentiwe that JESUS is the CHWIST, the
ETEWNYAW GOD, manyifesting himsewf unto aww nyations--And nyow, if
thewe awe fauwts they awe the mistakes of men; whewefowe, condemn
nyot the things of God, that ye may be found spotwess at the
judgment-seat of Chwist. (・`ω\´・)

TWANSWATED BY JOSEPH SMITH, JUN. >w<


THE TESTIMONY OF THWEE WITNYESSES

Be it knyown unto aww nyations, kindweds, tongues, and peopwe, unto
whom this wowk shaww come: That we, thwough the gwace of God the
Fathew, and ouw Wowd Jesus Chwist, have seen the pwates which
contain this wecowd, which is a wecowd of the peopwe of Nyephi,
and awso of the Wamanyites, theiw bwethwen, and awso of the peopwe
of Jawed, who came fwom the towew of which hath been spoken. UwU And
we awso knyow that they have been twanswated by the gift and powew
of God, fow his voice hath decwawed it unto us; whewefowe we knyow
of a suwety that the wowk is twue. (・`ω\´・) And we awso testify that we
have seen the engwavings which awe upon the pwates; and they have
been shown unto us by the powew of God, and nyot of man. (´・ω・\`) And we
decwawe with wowds of sobewnyess, that an angew of God came down
fwom heaven, and he bwought and waid befowe ouw eyes, that we
behewd and saw the pwates, and the engwavings theweon; and we
knyow that it is by the gwace of God the Fathew, and ouw Wowd
Jesus Chwist, that we behewd and beaw wecowd that these things
awe twue. And it is mawvewous in ouw eyes. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess, the
voice of the Wowd commanded us that we shouwd beaw wecowd of it;
whewefowe, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we beaw
testimony of these things. ;;w;; And we knyow that if we awe faithfuw
in Chwist, we shaww wid ouw gawments of the bwood of aww men, and
be found spotwess befowe the judgment-seat of Chwist, and shaww
dweww with him etewnyawwy in the heavens. >w< And the honyow be to the
Fathew, and to the Son, and to the Howy Ghost, which is onye God. (・`ω\´・)
Amen. ;;w;;

OWIVEW COWDEWY
DAVID WHITMEW
MAWTIN HAWWIS


THE TESTIMONY OF EIGHT WITNYESSES

Be it knyown unto aww nyations, kindweds, tongues, and peopwe, unto
whom this wowk shaww come: That Joseph Smith, Jun. (・`ω\´・), the
twanswatow of this wowk, has shown unto us the pwates of which
hath been spoken, which have the appeawance of gowd; and as many
of the weaves as the said Smith has twanswated we did handwe with
ouw hands; and we awso saw the engwavings theweon, aww of which
has the appeawance of ancient wowk, and of cuwious wowkmanship. UwU
And this we beaw wecowd with wowds of sobewnyess, that the said
Smith has shown unto us, fow we have seen and hefted, and knyow of
a suwety that the said Smith has got the pwates of which we have
spoken. UwU And we give ouw nyames unto the wowwd, to witnyess unto
the wowwd that which we have seen. ^w^ And we wie nyot, God beawing
witnyess of it. (・`ω\´・)

CHWISTIAN WHITMEW
JACOB WHITMEW
PETEW WHITMEW, JUN. ^w^
JOHN WHITMEW
HIWAM PAGE
JOSEPH SMITH, SEN. (´・ω・\`)
HYWUM SMITH
SAMUEW H. (´・ω・\`) SMITH




THE FIWST BOOK OF NYEPHI HIS WEIGN AND MINYISTWY (1 Nyephi)

An account of Wehi and his wife Sawiah and his fouw sons, being
cawwed, (beginnying at the ewdest) Waman, Wemuew, Sam, and Nyephi. ;;w;;
The Wowd wawns Wehi to depawt out of the wand of Jewusawem,
because he pwophesieth unto the peopwe concewnying theiw inyiquity
and they seek to destwoy his wife. (・`ω\´・) He taketh thwee days' jouwnyey
into the wiwdewnyess with his famiwy. ;;w;; Nyephi taketh his bwethwen
and wetuwnyeth to the wand of Jewusawem aftew the wecowd of the
Jews. The account of theiw suffewings. UwU They take the daughtews of
Ishmaew to wife. (・`ω\´・) They take theiw famiwies and depawt into the
wiwdewnyess. Theiw suffewings and affwictions in the wiwdewnyess. (´・ω・\`)
The couwse of theiw twavews. They come to the wawge watews. >w<
Nyephi's bwethwen webew against him. ^w^ He confoundeth them, and
buiwdeth a ship. They caww the nyame of the pwace Bountifuw. >w< They
cwoss the wawge watews into the pwomised wand, and so fowth. >w< This
is accowding to the account of Nyephi; ow in othew wowds, I,
Nyephi, wwote this wecowd. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 1
Chaptew 1

1 Nyephi 1:1
 1 I, Nyephi, having been bown of goodwy pawents, thewefowe I was
taught somewhat in aww the weawnying of my fathew; and having seen
many affwictions in the couwse of my days, nyevewthewess, having
been highwy favowed of the Wowd in aww my days; yea, having had a
gweat knyowwedge of the goodnyess and the mystewies of God,
thewefowe I make a wecowd of my pwoceedings in my days. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 1:2
 2 Yea, I make a wecowd in the wanguage of my fathew, which
consists of the weawnying of the Jews and the wanguage of the
Egyptians. ^w^

1 Nyephi 1:3
 3 And I knyow that the wecowd which I make is twue; and I make it
with minye own hand; and I make it accowding to my knyowwedge. ^w^

1 Nyephi 1:4
 4 Fow it came to pass in the commencement of the fiwst yeaw of
the weign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, (my fathew, Wehi, having
dwewt at Jewusawem in aww his days); and in that same yeaw thewe
came many pwophets, pwophesying unto the peopwe that they must
wepent, ow the gweat city Jewusawem must be destwoyed. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 1:5
 5 Whewefowe it came to pass that my fathew, Wehi, as he went
fowth pwayed unto the Wowd, yea, even with aww his heawt, in
behawf of his peopwe. ^w^

1 Nyephi 1:6
 6 And it came to pass as he pwayed unto the Wowd, thewe came a
piwwaw of fiwe and dwewt upon a wock befowe him; and he saw and
heawd much; and because of the things which he saw and heawd he
did quake and twembwe exceedingwy. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 1:7
 7 And it came to pass that he wetuwnyed to his own house at
Jewusawem; and he cast himsewf upon his bed, being ovewcome with
the Spiwit and the things which he had seen. ^w^

1 Nyephi 1:8
 8 And being thus ovewcome with the Spiwit, he was cawwied away
in a vision, even that he saw the heavens open, and he thought he
saw God sitting upon his thwonye, suwwounded with nyumbewwess
concouwses of angews in the attitude of singing and pwaising
theiw God. >w<

1 Nyephi 1:9
 9 And it came to pass that he saw Onye descending out of the
midst of heaven, and he behewd that his wustew was above that of
the sun at nyoon-day. ^w^

1 Nyephi 1:10
 10 And he awso saw twewve othews fowwowing him, and theiw
bwightnyess did exceed that of the staws in the fiwmament. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 1:11
 11 And they came down and went fowth upon the face of the eawth;
and the fiwst came and stood befowe my fathew, and gave unto him
a book, and bade him that he shouwd wead. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that as he wead, he was fiwwed with the
Spiwit of the Wowd. ^w^

1 Nyephi 1:13
 13 And he wead, saying: Wo, wo, unto Jewusawem, fow I have seen
thinye abominyations! ;;w;; Yea, and many things did my fathew wead
concewnying Jewusawem--that it shouwd be destwoyed, and the
inhabitants theweof; many shouwd pewish by the swowd, and many
shouwd be cawwied away captive into Babywon. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 1:14
 14 And it came to pass that when my fathew had wead and seen
many gweat and mawvewous things, he did excwaim many things unto
the Wowd; such as: Gweat and mawvewous awe thy wowks, O Wowd God
Awmighty! >w< Thy thwonye is high in the heavens, and thy powew, and
goodnyess, and mewcy awe ovew aww the inhabitants of the eawth,
and, because thou awt mewcifuw, thou wiwt nyot suffew those who
come unto thee that they shaww pewish! UwU

1 Nyephi 1:15
 15 And aftew this mannyew was the wanguage of my fathew in the
pwaising of his God; fow his souw did wejoice, and his whowe
heawt was fiwwed, because of the things which he had seen, yea,
which the Wowd had shown unto him. ^w^

1 Nyephi 1:16
 16 And nyow I, Nyephi, do nyot make a fuww account of the things
which my fathew hath wwitten, fow he hath wwitten many things
which he saw in visions and in dweams; and he awso hath wwitten
many things which he pwophesied and spake unto his chiwdwen, of
which I shaww nyot make a fuww account. >w<

1 Nyephi 1:17
 17 But I shaww make an account of my pwoceedings in my days. (・`ω\´・)
Behowd, I make an abwidgment of the wecowd of my fathew, upon
pwates which I have made with minye own hands; whewefowe, aftew I
have abwidged the wecowd of my fathew then wiww I make an account
of minye own wife. ^w^

1 Nyephi 1:18
 18 Thewefowe, I wouwd that ye shouwd knyow, that aftew the Wowd
had shown so many mawvewous things unto my fathew, Wehi, yea,
concewnying the destwuction of Jewusawem, behowd he went fowth
among the peopwe, and began to pwophesy and to decwawe unto them
concewnying the things which he had both seen and heawd. >w<

1 Nyephi 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Jews did mock him because of the
things which he testified of them; fow he twuwy testified of
theiw wickednyess and theiw abominyations; and he testified that
the things which he saw and heawd, and awso the things which he
wead in the book, manyifested pwainwy of the coming of the
Messiah, and awso the wedemption of the wowwd. >w<

1 Nyephi 1:20
 20 And when the Jews heawd these things they wewe angwy with
him; yea, even as with the pwophets of owd, whom they had cast
out, and stonyed, and swain; and they awso sought his wife, that
they might take it away. UwU But behowd, I, Nyephi, wiww show unto
you that the tendew mewcies of the Wowd awe ovew aww those whom
he hath chosen, because of theiw faith, to make them mighty even
unto the powew of dewivewance. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 2
Chaptew 2

1 Nyephi 2:1
 1 Fow behowd, it came to pass that the Wowd spake unto my
fathew, yea, even in a dweam, and said unto him: Bwessed awt thou
Wehi, because of the things which thou hast donye; and because
thou hast been faithfuw and decwawed unto this peopwe the things
which I commanded thee, behowd, they seek to take away thy wife. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 2:2
 2 And it came to pass that the Wowd commanded my fathew, even in
a dweam, that he shouwd take his famiwy and depawt into the
wiwdewnyess. >w<

1 Nyephi 2:3
 3 And it came to pass that he was obedient unto the wowd of the
Wowd, whewefowe he did as the Wowd commanded him. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 2:4
 4 And it came to pass that he depawted into the wiwdewnyess. ;;w;; And
he weft his house, and the wand of his inhewitance, and his gowd,
and his siwvew, and his pwecious things, and took nyothing with
him, save it wewe his famiwy, and pwovisions, and tents, and
depawted into the wiwdewnyess. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 2:5
 5 And he came down by the bowdews nyeaw the showe of the Wed Sea;
and he twavewed in the wiwdewnyess in the bowdews which awe nyeawew
the Wed Sea; and he did twavew in the wiwdewnyess with his famiwy,
which consisted of my mothew, Sawiah, and my ewdew bwothews, who
wewe Waman, Wemuew, and Sam. UwU

1 Nyephi 2:6
 6 And it came to pass that when he had twavewed thwee days in
the wiwdewnyess, he pitched his tent in a vawwey by the side of a
wivew of watew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 2:7
 7 And it came to pass that he buiwt an awtaw of stonyes, and made
an offewing unto the Wowd, and gave thanks unto the Wowd ouw God. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 2:8
 8 And it came to pass that he cawwed the nyame of the wivew,
Waman, and it emptied into the Wed Sea; and the vawwey was in the
bowdews nyeaw the mouth theweof. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 2:9
 9 And when my fathew saw that the watews of the wivew emptied
into the fountain of the Wed Sea, he spake unto Waman, saying: O
that thou mightest be wike unto this wivew, continyuawwy wunnying
into the fountain of aww wighteousnyess! ^w^

1 Nyephi 2:10
 10 And he awso spake unto Wemuew: O that thou mightest be wike
unto this vawwey, fiwm and steadfast, and immovabwe in keeping
the commandments of the Wowd! ^w^

1 Nyephi 2:11
 11 Nyow this he spake because of the stiffnyeckednyess of Waman and
Wemuew; fow behowd they did muwmuw in many things against theiw
fathew, because he was a visionyawy man, and had wed them out of
the wand of Jewusawem, to weave the wand of theiw inhewitance,
and theiw gowd, and theiw siwvew, and theiw pwecious things, to
pewish in the wiwdewnyess. UwU And this they said he had donye because
of the foowish imaginyations of his heawt. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 2:12
 12 And thus Waman and Wemuew, being the ewdest, did muwmuw
against theiw fathew. UwU And they did muwmuw because they knyew nyot
the deawings of that God who had cweated them. (・`ω\´・)
1 Nyephi 2:13
 13 Nyeithew did they bewieve that Jewusawem, that gweat city,
couwd be destwoyed accowding to the wowds of the pwophets. ^w^ And
they wewe wike unto the Jews who wewe at Jewusawem, who sought to
take away the wife of my fathew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 2:14
 14 And it came to pass that my fathew did speak unto them in the
vawwey of Wemuew, with powew, being fiwwed with the Spiwit, untiw
theiw fwames did shake befowe him. ^w^ And he did confound them,
that they duwst nyot uttew against him; whewefowe, they did as he
commanded them. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 2:15
 15 And my fathew dwewt in a tent. ^w^

1 Nyephi 2:16
 16 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, being exceedingwy young,
nyevewthewess being wawge in statuwe, and awso having gweat
desiwes to knyow of the mystewies of God, whewefowe, I did cwy
unto the Wowd; and behowd he did visit me, and did soften my
heawt that I did bewieve aww the wowds which had been spoken by
my fathew; whewefowe, I did nyot webew against him wike unto my
bwothews. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 2:17
 17 And I spake unto Sam, making knyown unto him the things which
the Wowd had manyifested unto me by his Howy Spiwit. (・`ω\´・) And it came
to pass that he bewieved in my wowds. >w<

1 Nyephi 2:18
 18 But, behowd, Waman and Wemuew wouwd nyot heawken unto my
wowds; and being gwieved because of the hawdnyess of theiw heawts
I cwied unto the Wowd fow them. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 2:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Wowd spake unto me, saying:
Bwessed awt thou, Nyephi, because of thy faith, fow thou hast
sought me diwigentwy, with wowwinyess of heawt. ^w^

1 Nyephi 2:20
 20 And inyasmuch as ye shaww keep my commandments, ye shaww
pwospew, and shaww be wed to a wand of pwomise; yea, even a wand
which I have pwepawed fow you; yea, a wand which is choice above
aww othew wands. UwU

1 Nyephi 2:21
 21 And inyasmuch as thy bwethwen shaww webew against thee, they
shaww be cut off fwom the pwesence of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 2:22
 22 And inyasmuch as thou shawt keep my commandments, thou shawt
be made a wuwew and a teachew ovew thy bwethwen. >w<

1 Nyephi 2:23
 23 Fow behowd, in that day that they shaww webew against me, I
wiww cuwse them even with a sowe cuwse, and they shaww have nyo
powew ovew thy seed except they shaww webew against me awso. >w<

1 Nyephi 2:24
 24 And if it so be that they webew against me, they shaww be a
scouwge unto thy seed, to stiw them up in the ways of
wemembwance. >w<

1 Nyephi 3
Chaptew 3

1 Nyephi 3:1
 1 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, wetuwnyed fwom speaking with
the Wowd, to the tent of my fathew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 3:2
 2 And it came to pass that he spake unto me, saying: Behowd I
have dweamed a dweam, in the which the Wowd hath commanded me
that thou and thy bwethwen shaww wetuwn to Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 3:3
 3 Fow behowd, Waban hath the wecowd of the Jews and awso a
genyeawogy of my fowefathews, and they awe engwaven upon pwates of
bwass. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 3:4
 4 Whewefowe, the Wowd hath commanded me that thou and thy
bwothews shouwd go unto the house of Waban, and seek the wecowds,
and bwing them down hithew into the wiwdewnyess. >w<

1 Nyephi 3:5
 5 And nyow, behowd thy bwothews muwmuw, saying it is a hawd thing
which I have wequiwed of them; but behowd I have nyot wequiwed it
of them, but it is a commandment of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 3:6
 6 Thewefowe go, my son, and thou shawt be favowed of the Wowd,
because thou hast nyot muwmuwed. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 3:7
 7 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, said unto my fathew: I wiww
go and do the things which the Wowd hath commanded, fow I knyow
that the Wowd giveth nyo commandments unto the chiwdwen of men,
save he shaww pwepawe a way fow them that they may accompwish the
thing which he commandeth them. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 3:8
 8 And it came to pass that when my fathew had heawd these wowds
he was exceedingwy gwad, fow he knyew that I had been bwessed of
the Wowd. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 3:9
 9 And I, Nyephi, and my bwethwen took ouw jouwnyey in the
wiwdewnyess, with ouw tents, to go up to the wand of Jewusawem. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 3:10
 10 And it came to pass that when we had gonye up to the wand of
Jewusawem, I and my bwethwen did consuwt onye with anyothew. >w<

1 Nyephi 3:11
 11 And we cast wots--who of us shouwd go in unto the house of
Waban. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass that the wot feww upon Waman; and
Waman went in unto the house of Waban, and he tawked with him as
he sat in his house. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 3:12
 12 And he desiwed of Waban the wecowds which wewe engwaven upon
the pwates of bwass, which containyed the genyeawogy of my fathew. >w<

1 Nyephi 3:13
 13 And behowd, it came to pass that Waban was angwy, and thwust
him out fwom his pwesence; and he wouwd nyot that he shouwd have
the wecowds. UwU Whewefowe, he said unto him: Behowd thou awt a
wobbew, and I wiww sway thee. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 3:14
 14 But Waman fwed out of his pwesence, and towd the things which
Waban had donye, unto us. ;;w;; And we began to be exceedingwy
sowwowfuw, and my bwethwen wewe about to wetuwn unto my fathew in
the wiwdewnyess. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 3:15
 15 But behowd I said unto them that: As the Wowd wiveth, and as
we wive, we wiww nyot go down unto ouw fathew in the wiwdewnyess
untiw we have accompwished the thing which the Wowd hath
commanded us. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 3:16
 16 Whewefowe, wet us be faithfuw in keeping the commandments of
the Wowd; thewefowe wet us go down to the wand of ouw fathew's
inhewitance, fow behowd he weft gowd and siwvew, and aww mannyew
of wiches. ;;w;; And aww this he hath donye because of the commandments
of the Wowd. UwU

1 Nyephi 3:17
 17 Fow he knyew that Jewusawem must be destwoyed, because of the
wickednyess of the peopwe. ^w^

1 Nyephi 3:18
 18 Fow behowd, they have wejected the wowds of the pwophets. (・`ω\´・)
Whewefowe, if my fathew shouwd dweww in the wand aftew he hath
been commanded to fwee out of the wand, behowd, he wouwd awso
pewish. ;;w;; Whewefowe, it must nyeeds be that he fwee out of the
wand. ^w^

1 Nyephi 3:19
 19 And behowd, it is wisdom in God that we shouwd obtain these
wecowds, that we may pwesewve unto ouw chiwdwen the wanguage of
ouw fathews;

1 Nyephi 3:20
 20 And awso that we may pwesewve unto them the wowds which have
been spoken by the mouth of aww the howy pwophets, which have
been dewivewed unto them by the Spiwit and powew of God, since
the wowwd began, even down unto this pwesent time. ^w^

1 Nyephi 3:21
 21 And it came to pass that aftew this mannyew of wanguage did I
pewsuade my bwethwen, that they might be faithfuw in keeping the
commandments of God. ^w^

1 Nyephi 3:22
 22 And it came to pass that we went down to the wand of ouw
inhewitance, and we did gathew togethew ouw gowd, and ouw siwvew,
and ouw pwecious things. >w<

1 Nyephi 3:23
 23 And aftew we had gathewed these things togethew, we went up
again unto the house of Waban. UwU

1 Nyephi 3:24
 24 And it came to pass that we went in unto Waban, and desiwed
him that he wouwd give unto us the wecowds which wewe engwaven
upon the pwates of bwass, fow which we wouwd give unto him ouw
gowd, and ouw siwvew, and aww ouw pwecious things. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 3:25
 25 And it came to pass that when Waban saw ouw pwopewty, and
that it was exceedingwy gweat, he did wust aftew it, insomuch
that he thwust us out, and sent his sewvants to sway us, that he
might obtain ouw pwopewty. >w<

1 Nyephi 3:26
 26 And it came to pass that we did fwee befowe the sewvants of
Waban, and we wewe obwiged to weave behind ouw pwopewty, and it
feww into the hands of Waban. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 3:27
 27 And it came to pass that we fwed into the wiwdewnyess, and the
sewvants of Waban did nyot ovewtake us, and we hid ouwsewves in
the cavity of a wock. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 3:28
 28 And it came to pass that Waman was angwy with me, and awso
with my fathew; and awso was Wemuew, fow he heawkenyed unto the
wowds of Waman. UwU Whewefowe Waman and Wemuew did speak many hawd
wowds unto us, theiw youngew bwothews, and they did smite us even
with a wod. >w<

1 Nyephi 3:29
 29 And it came to pass as they smote us with a wod, behowd, an
angew of the Wowd came and stood befowe them, and he spake unto
them, saying: Why do ye smite youw youngew bwothew with a wod? owo
Knyow ye nyot that the Wowd hath chosen him to be a wuwew ovew you,
and this because of youw inyiquities? owo Behowd ye shaww go up to
Jewusawem again, and the Wowd wiww dewivew Waban into youw hands. ^w^

1 Nyephi 3:30
 30 And aftew the angew had spoken unto us, he depawted. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 3:31
 31 And aftew the angew had depawted, Waman and Wemuew again
began to muwmuw, saying: How is it possibwe that the Wowd wiww
dewivew Waban into ouw hands? owo Behowd, he is a mighty man, and he
can command fifty, yea, even he can sway fifty; then why nyot us? owo

1 Nyephi 4
Chaptew 4

1 Nyephi 4:1
 1 And it came to pass that I spake unto my bwethwen, saying: Wet
us go up again unto Jewusawem, and wet us be faithfuw in keeping
the commandments of the Wowd; fow behowd he is mightiew than aww
the eawth, then why nyot mightiew than Waban and his fifty, yea,
ow even than his tens of thousands? owo

1 Nyephi 4:2
 2 Thewefowe wet us go up; wet us be stwong wike unto Moses; fow
he twuwy spake unto the watews of the Wed Sea and they divided
hithew and thithew, and ouw fathews came thwough, out of
captivity, on dwy gwound, and the awmies of Phawaoh did fowwow
and wewe dwownyed in the watews of the Wed Sea. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 4:3
 3 Nyow behowd ye knyow that this is twue; and ye awso knyow that an
angew hath spoken unto you; whewefowe can ye doubt? owo Wet us go
up; the Wowd is abwe to dewivew us, even as ouw fathews, and to
destwoy Waban, even as the Egyptians. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 4:4
 4 Nyow when I had spoken these wowds, they wewe yet wwoth, and
did stiww continyue to muwmuw; nyevewthewess they did fowwow me up
untiw we came without the wawws of Jewusawem. UwU

1 Nyephi 4:5
 5 And it was by nyight; and I caused that they shouwd hide
themsewves without the wawws. >w< And aftew they had hid themsewves,
I, Nyephi, cwept into the city and went fowth towawds the house of
Waban. >w<

1 Nyephi 4:6
 6 And I was wed by the Spiwit, nyot knyowing befowehand the things
which I shouwd do. ^w^

1 Nyephi 4:7
 7 Nyevewthewess I went fowth, and as I came nyeaw unto the house
of Waban I behewd a man, and he had fawwen to the eawth befowe
me, fow he was dwunken with winye. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 4:8
 8 And when I came to him I found that it was Waban. ^w^

1 Nyephi 4:9
 9 And I behewd his swowd, and I dwew it fowth fwom the sheath
theweof; and the hiwt theweof was of puwe gowd, and the
wowkmanship theweof was exceedingwy finye, and I saw that the
bwade theweof was of the most pwecious steew. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 4:10
 10 And it came to pass that I was constwainyed by the Spiwit that
I shouwd kiww Waban; but I said in my heawt: Nyevew at any time
have I shed the bwood of man. UwU And I shwunk and wouwd that I
might nyot sway him. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 4:11
 11 And the Spiwit said unto me again: Behowd the Wowd hath
dewivewed him into thy hands. UwU Yea, and I awso knyew that he had
sought to take away minye own wife; yea, and he wouwd nyot heawken
unto the commandments of the Wowd; and he awso had taken away ouw
pwopewty. >w<

1 Nyephi 4:12
 12 And it came to pass that the Spiwit said unto me again: Sway
him, fow the Wowd hath dewivewed him into thy hands;

1 Nyephi 4:13
 13 Behowd the Wowd swayeth the wicked to bwing fowth his
wighteous puwposes. (´・ω・\`) It is bettew that onye man shouwd pewish than
that a nyation shouwd dwindwe and pewish in unbewief. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 4:14
 14 And nyow, when I, Nyephi, had heawd these wowds, I wemembewed
the wowds of the Wowd which he spake unto me in the wiwdewnyess,
saying that: Inyasmuch as thy seed shaww keep my commandments,
they shaww pwospew in the wand of pwomise. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 4:15
 15 Yea, and I awso thought that they couwd nyot keep the
commandments of the Wowd accowding to the waw of Moses, save they
shouwd have the waw. >w<

1 Nyephi 4:16
 16 And I awso knyew that the waw was engwaven upon the pwates of
bwass. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 4:17
 17 And again, I knyew that the Wowd had dewivewed Waban into my
hands fow this cause--that I might obtain the wecowds accowding
to his commandments. ^w^

1 Nyephi 4:18
 18 Thewefowe I did obey the voice of the Spiwit, and took Waban
by the haiw of the head, and I smote off his head with his own
swowd. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 4:19
 19 And aftew I had smitten off his head with his own swowd, I
took the gawments of Waban and put them upon minye own body; yea,
even evewy whit; and I did giwd on his awmow about my woins. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 4:20
 20 And aftew I had donye this, I went fowth unto the tweasuwy of
Waban. (´・ω・\`) And as I went fowth towawds the tweasuwy of Waban,
behowd, I saw the sewvant of Waban who had the keys of the
tweasuwy. (´・ω・\`) And I commanded him in the voice of Waban, that he
shouwd go with me into the tweasuwy. UwU

1 Nyephi 4:21
 21 And he supposed me to be his mastew, Waban, fow he behewd the
gawments and awso the swowd giwded about my woins. >w<

1 Nyephi 4:22
 22 And he spake unto me concewnying the ewdews of the Jews, he
knyowing that his mastew, Waban, had been out by nyight among them. >w<

1 Nyephi 4:23
 23 And I spake unto him as if it had been Waban. ^w^

1 Nyephi 4:24
 24 And I awso spake unto him that I shouwd cawwy the engwavings,
which wewe upon the pwates of bwass, to my ewdew bwethwen, who
wewe without the wawws. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 4:25
 25 And I awso bade him that he shouwd fowwow me. UwU

1 Nyephi 4:26
 26 And he, supposing that I spake of the bwethwen of the chuwch,
and that I was twuwy that Waban whom I had swain, whewefowe he
did fowwow me. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 4:27
 27 And he spake unto me many times concewnying the ewdews of the
Jews, as I went fowth unto my bwethwen, who wewe without the
wawws. >w<

1 Nyephi 4:28
 28 And it came to pass that when Waman saw me he was exceedingwy
fwightenyed, and awso Wemuew and Sam. UwU And they fwed fwom befowe
my pwesence; fow they supposed it was Waban, and that he had
swain me and had sought to take away theiw wives awso. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 4:29
 29 And it came to pass that I cawwed aftew them, and they did
heaw me; whewefowe they did cease to fwee fwom my pwesence. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 4:30
 30 And it came to pass that when the sewvant of Waban behewd my
bwethwen he began to twembwe, and was about to fwee fwom befowe
me and wetuwn to the city of Jewusawem. >w<

1 Nyephi 4:31
 31 And nyow I, Nyephi, being a man wawge in statuwe, and awso
having weceived much stwength of the Wowd, thewefowe I did seize
upon the sewvant of Waban, and hewd him, that he shouwd nyot fwee. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 4:32
 32 And it came to pass that I spake with him, that if he wouwd
heawken unto my wowds, as the Wowd wiveth, and as I wive, even so
that if he wouwd heawken unto ouw wowds, we wouwd spawe his wife. >w<

1 Nyephi 4:33
 33 And I spake unto him, even with an oath, that he nyeed nyot
feaw; that he shouwd be a fwee man wike unto us if he wouwd go
down in the wiwdewnyess with us. ^w^

1 Nyephi 4:34
 34 And I awso spake unto him, saying: Suwewy the Wowd hath
commanded us to do this thing; and shaww we nyot be diwigent in
keeping the commandments of the Wowd? owo Thewefowe, if thou wiwt go
down into the wiwdewnyess to my fathew thou shawt have pwace with
us. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 4:35
 35 And it came to pass that Zowam did take couwage at the wowds
which I spake. >w< Nyow Zowam was the nyame of the sewvant; and he
pwomised that he wouwd go down into the wiwdewnyess unto ouw
fathew. >w< Yea, and he awso made an oath unto us that he wouwd
tawwy with us fwom that time fowth. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 4:36
 36 Nyow we wewe desiwous that he shouwd tawwy with us fow this
cause, that the Jews might nyot knyow concewnying ouw fwight into
the wiwdewnyess, west they shouwd puwsue us and destwoy us. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 4:37
 37 And it came to pass that when Zowam had made an oath unto us,
ouw feaws did cease concewnying him. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 4:38
 38 And it came to pass that we took the pwates of bwass and the
sewvant of Waban, and depawted into the wiwdewnyess, and jouwnyeyed
unto the tent of ouw fathew. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 5
Chaptew 5

1 Nyephi 5:1
 1 And it came to pass that aftew we had come down into the
wiwdewnyess unto ouw fathew, behowd, he was fiwwed with joy, and
awso my mothew, Sawiah, was exceedingwy gwad, fow she twuwy had
mouwnyed because of us. UwU

1 Nyephi 5:2
 2 Fow she had supposed that we had pewished in the wiwdewnyess;
and she awso had compwainyed against my fathew, tewwing him that
he was a visionyawy man; saying: Behowd thou hast wed us fowth
fwom the wand of ouw inhewitance, and my sons awe nyo mowe, and we
pewish in the wiwdewnyess. >w<

1 Nyephi 5:3
 3 And aftew this mannyew of wanguage had my mothew compwainyed
against my fathew. >w<

1 Nyephi 5:4
 4 And it had come to pass that my fathew spake unto hew, saying:
I knyow that I am a visionyawy man; fow if I had nyot seen the
things of God in a vision I shouwd nyot have knyown the goodnyess of
God, but had tawwied at Jewusawem, and had pewished with my
bwethwen. UwU

1 Nyephi 5:5
 5 But behowd, I have obtainyed a wand of pwomise, in the which
things I do wejoice; yea, and I knyow that the Wowd wiww dewivew
my sons out of the hands of Waban, and bwing them down again unto
us in the wiwdewnyess. >w<

1 Nyephi 5:6
 6 And aftew this mannyew of wanguage did my fathew, Wehi, comfowt
my mothew, Sawiah, concewnying us, whiwe we jouwnyeyed in the
wiwdewnyess up to the wand of Jewusawem, to obtain the wecowd of
the Jews. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 5:7
 7 And when we had wetuwnyed to the tent of my fathew, behowd
theiw joy was fuww, and my mothew was comfowted. >w<

1 Nyephi 5:8
 8 And she spake, saying: Nyow I knyow of a suwety that the Wowd
hath commanded my husband to fwee into the wiwdewnyess; yea, and I
awso knyow of a suwety that the Wowd hath pwotected my sons, and
dewivewed them out of the hands of Waban, and given them powew
wheweby they couwd accompwish the thing which the Wowd hath
commanded them. And aftew this mannyew of wanguage did she speak. UwU

1 Nyephi 5:9
 9 And it came to pass that they did wejoice exceedingwy, and did
offew sacwifice and buwnt offewings unto the Wowd; and they gave
thanks unto the God of Iswaew. >w<

1 Nyephi 5:10
 10 And aftew they had given thanks unto the God of Iswaew, my
fathew, Wehi, took the wecowds which wewe engwaven upon the
pwates of bwass, and he did seawch them fwom the beginnying. >w<

1 Nyephi 5:11
 11 And he behewd that they did contain the five books of Moses,
which gave an account of the cweation of the wowwd, and awso of
Adam and Eve, who wewe ouw fiwst pawents;

1 Nyephi 5:12
 12 And awso a wecowd of the Jews fwom the beginnying, even down
to the commencement of the weign of Zedekiah, king of Judah;

1 Nyephi 5:13
 13 And awso the pwophecies of the howy pwophets, fwom the
beginnying, even down to the commencement of the weign of
Zedekiah; and awso many pwophecies which have been spoken by the
mouth of Jewemiah. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 5:14
 14 And it came to pass that my fathew, Wehi, awso found upon the
pwates of bwass a genyeawogy of his fathews; whewefowe he knyew
that he was a descendant of Joseph; yea, even that Joseph who was
the son of Jacob, who was sowd into Egypt, and who was pwesewved
by the hand of the Wowd, that he might pwesewve his fathew,
Jacob, and aww his househowd fwom pewishing with faminye. UwU

1 Nyephi 5:15
 15 And they wewe awso wed out of captivity and out of the wand
of Egypt, by that same God who had pwesewved them. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 5:16
 16 And thus my fathew, Wehi, did discovew the genyeawogy of his
fathews. >w< And Waban awso was a descendant of Joseph, whewefowe he
and his fathews had kept the wecowds. ^w^

1 Nyephi 5:17
 17 And nyow when my fathew saw aww these things, he was fiwwed
with the Spiwit, and began to pwophesy concewnying his seed--

1 Nyephi 5:18
 18 That these pwates of bwass shouwd go fowth unto aww nyations,
kindweds, tongues, and peopwe who wewe of his seed. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 5:19
 19 Whewefowe, he said that these pwates of bwass shouwd nyevew
pewish; nyeithew shouwd they be dimmed any mowe by time. (´・ω・\`) And he
pwophesied many things concewnying his seed. UwU

1 Nyephi 5:20
 20 And it came to pass that thus faw I and my fathew had kept
the commandments whewewith the Wowd had commanded us. >w<

1 Nyephi 5:21
 21 And we had obtainyed the wecowds which the Wowd had commanded
us, and seawched them and found that they wewe desiwabwe; yea,
even of gweat wowth unto us, insomuch that we couwd pwesewve the
commandments of the Wowd unto ouw chiwdwen. >w<

1 Nyephi 5:22
 22 Whewefowe, it was wisdom in the Wowd that we shouwd cawwy
them with us, as we jouwnyeyed in the wiwdewnyess towawds the wand
of pwomise. >w<

1 Nyephi 6
Chaptew 6

1 Nyephi 6:1
 1 And nyow I, Nyephi, do nyot give the genyeawogy of my fathews in
this pawt of my wecowd; nyeithew at any time shaww I give it aftew
upon these pwates which I am wwiting; fow it is given in the
wecowd which has been kept by my fathew; whewefowe, I do nyot
wwite it in this wowk. UwU

1 Nyephi 6:2
 2 Fow it sufficeth me to say that we awe descendants of Joseph. UwU

1 Nyephi 6:3
 3 And it matteweth nyot to me that I am pawticuwaw to give a fuww
account of aww the things of my fathew, fow they cannyot be
wwitten upon these pwates, fow I desiwe the woom that I may wwite
of the things of God. UwU

1 Nyephi 6:4
 4 Fow the fuwnyess of minye intent is that I may pewsuade men to
come unto the God of Abwaham, and the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob, and be saved. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 6:5
 5 Whewefowe, the things which awe pweasing unto the wowwd I do
nyot wwite, but the things which awe pweasing unto God and unto
those who awe nyot of the wowwd. UwU

1 Nyephi 6:6
 6 Whewefowe, I shaww give commandment unto my seed, that they
shaww nyot occupy these pwates with things which awe nyot of wowth
unto the chiwdwen of men. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 7
Chaptew 7

1 Nyephi 7:1
 1 And nyow I wouwd that ye might knyow, that aftew my fathew,
Wehi, had made an end of pwophesying concewnying his seed, it came
to pass that the Wowd spake unto him again, saying that it was
nyot meet fow him, Wehi, that he shouwd take his famiwy into the
wiwdewnyess awonye; but that his sons shouwd take daughtews to
wife, that they might waise up seed unto the Wowd in the wand of
pwomise. UwU

1 Nyephi 7:2
 2 And it came to pass that the Wowd commanded him that I, Nyephi,
and my bwethwen, shouwd again wetuwn unto the wand of Jewusawem,
and bwing down Ishmaew and his famiwy into the wiwdewnyess. >w<

1 Nyephi 7:3
 3 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did again, with my
bwethwen, go fowth into the wiwdewnyess to go up to Jewusawem. ^w^

1 Nyephi 7:4
 4 And it came to pass that we went up unto the house of Ishmaew,
and we did gain favow in the sight of Ishmaew, insomuch that we
did speak unto him the wowds of the Wowd. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 7:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Wowd did soften the heawt of
Ishmaew, and awso his househowd, insomuch that they took theiw
jouwnyey with us down into the wiwdewnyess to the tent of ouw
fathew. UwU

1 Nyephi 7:6
 6 And it came to pass that as we jouwnyeyed in the wiwdewnyess,
behowd Waman and Wemuew, and two of the daughtews of Ishmaew, and
the two sons of Ishmaew and theiw famiwies, did webew against us;
yea, against me, Nyephi, and Sam, and theiw fathew, Ishmaew, and
his wife, and his thwee othew daughtews. >w<

1 Nyephi 7:7
 7 And it came to pass in the which webewwion, they wewe desiwous
to wetuwn unto the wand of Jewusawem. ^w^

1 Nyephi 7:8
 8 And nyow I, Nyephi, being gwieved fow the hawdnyess of theiw
heawts, thewefowe I spake unto them, saying, yea, even unto Waman
and unto Wemuew: Behowd ye awe minye ewdew bwethwen, and how is it
that ye awe so hawd in youw heawts, and so bwind in youw minds,
that ye have nyeed that I, youw youngew bwothew, shouwd speak unto
you, yea, and set an exampwe fow you? owo

1 Nyephi 7:9
 9 How is it that ye have nyot heawkenyed unto the wowd of the
Wowd? owo

1 Nyephi 7:10
 10 How is it that ye have fowgotten that ye have seen an angew
of the Wowd? owo

1 Nyephi 7:11
 11 Yea, and how is it that ye have fowgotten what gweat things
the Wowd hath donye fow us, in dewivewing us out of the hands of
Waban, and awso that we shouwd obtain the wecowd? owo

1 Nyephi 7:12
 12 Yea, and how is it that ye have fowgotten that the Wowd is
abwe to do aww things accowding to his wiww, fow the chiwdwen of
men, if it so be that they exewcise faith in him? owo Whewefowe, wet
us be faithfuw to him. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 7:13
 13 And if it so be that we awe faithfuw to him, we shaww obtain
the wand of pwomise; and ye shaww knyow at some futuwe pewiod that
the wowd of the Wowd shaww be fuwfiwwed concewnying the
destwuction of Jewusawem; fow aww things which the Wowd hath
spoken concewnying the destwuction of Jewusawem must be fuwfiwwed. UwU

1 Nyephi 7:14
 14 Fow behowd, the Spiwit of the Wowd ceaseth soon to stwive
with them; fow behowd, they have wejected the pwophets, and
Jewemiah have they cast into pwison. >w< And they have sought to
take away the wife of my fathew, insomuch that they have dwiven
him out of the wand. >w<

1 Nyephi 7:15
 15 Nyow behowd, I say unto you that if ye wiww wetuwn unto
Jewusawem ye shaww awso pewish with them. >w< And nyow, if ye have
choice, go up to the wand, and wemembew the wowds which I speak
unto you, that if ye go ye wiww awso pewish; fow thus the Spiwit
of the Wowd constwainyeth me that I shouwd speak. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 7:16
 16 And it came to pass that when I, Nyephi, had spoken these
wowds unto my bwethwen, they wewe angwy with me. (・`ω\´・) And it came to
pass that they did way theiw hands upon me, fow behowd, they wewe
exceedingwy wwoth, and they did bind me with cowds, fow they
sought to take away my wife, that they might weave me in the
wiwdewnyess to be devouwed by wiwd beasts. UwU

1 Nyephi 7:17
 17 But it came to pass that I pwayed unto the Wowd, saying: O
Wowd, accowding to my faith which is in thee, wiwt thou dewivew
me fwom the hands of my bwethwen; yea, even give me stwength that
I may buwst these bands with which I am bound. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 7:18
 18 And it came to pass that when I had said these wowds, behowd,
the bands wewe woosed fwom off my hands and feet, and I stood
befowe my bwethwen, and I spake unto them again. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 7:19
 19 And it came to pass that they wewe angwy with me again, and
sought to way hands upon me; but behowd, onye of the daughtews of
Ishmaew, yea, and awso hew mothew, and onye of the sons of
Ishmaew, did pwead with my bwethwen, insomuch that they did
soften theiw heawts; and they did cease stwiving to take away my
wife. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 7:20
 20 And it came to pass that they wewe sowwowfuw, because of
theiw wickednyess, insomuch that they did bow down befowe me, and
did pwead with me that I wouwd fowgive them of the thing that
they had donye against me. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 7:21
 21 And it came to pass that I did fwankwy fowgive them aww that
they had donye, and I did exhowt them that they wouwd pway unto
the Wowd theiw God fow fowgivenyess. (・`ω\´・) And it came to pass that
they did so. ^w^ And aftew they had donye pwaying unto the Wowd we
did again twavew on ouw jouwnyey towawds the tent of ouw fathew. ^w^

1 Nyephi 7:22
 22 And it came to pass that we did come down unto the tent of
ouw fathew. ^w^ And aftew I and my bwethwen and aww the house of
Ishmaew had come down unto the tent of my fathew, they did give
thanks unto the Wowd theiw God; and they did offew sacwifice and
buwnt offewings unto him. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 8
Chaptew 8

1 Nyephi 8:1
 1 And it came to pass that we had gathewed togethew aww mannyew
of seeds of evewy kind, both of gwain of evewy kind, and awso of
the seeds of fwuit of evewy kind. >w<

1 Nyephi 8:2
 2 And it came to pass that whiwe my fathew tawwied in the
wiwdewnyess he spake unto us, saying: Behowd, I have dweamed a
dweam; ow, in othew wowds, I have seen a vision. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 8:3
 3 And behowd, because of the thing which I have seen, I have
weason to wejoice in the Wowd because of Nyephi and awso of Sam;
fow I have weason to suppose that they, and awso many of theiw
seed, wiww be saved. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 8:4
 4 But behowd, Waman and Wemuew, I feaw exceedingwy because of
you; fow behowd, methought I saw in my dweam, a dawk and dweawy
wiwdewnyess. ^w^

1 Nyephi 8:5
 5 And it came to pass that I saw a man, and he was dwessed in a
white wobe; and he came and stood befowe me. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:6
 6 And it came to pass that he spake unto me, and bade me fowwow
him. UwU

1 Nyephi 8:7
 7 And it came to pass that as I fowwowed him I behewd mysewf
that I was in a dawk and dweawy waste. UwU

1 Nyephi 8:8
 8 And aftew I had twavewed fow the space of many houws in
dawknyess, I began to pway unto the Wowd that he wouwd have mewcy
on me, accowding to the muwtitude of his tendew mewcies. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:9
 9 And it came to pass aftew I had pwayed unto the Wowd I behewd
a wawge and spacious fiewd. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 8:10
 10 And it came to pass that I behewd a twee, whose fwuit was
desiwabwe to make onye happy. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:11
 11 And it came to pass that I did go fowth and pawtake of the
fwuit theweof; and I behewd that it was most sweet, above aww
that I evew befowe tasted. (´・ω・\`) Yea, and I behewd that the fwuit
theweof was white, to exceed aww the whitenyess that I had evew
seen. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 8:12
 12 And as I pawtook of the fwuit theweof it fiwwed my souw with
exceedingwy gweat joy; whewefowe, I began to be desiwous that my
famiwy shouwd pawtake of it awso; fow I knyew that it was
desiwabwe above aww othew fwuit. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:13
 13 And as I cast my eyes wound about, that pewhaps I might
discovew my famiwy awso, I behewd a wivew of watew; and it wan
awong, and it was nyeaw the twee of which I was pawtaking the
fwuit. UwU

1 Nyephi 8:14
 14 And I wooked to behowd fwom whence it came; and I saw the
head theweof a wittwe way off; and at the head theweof I behewd
youw mothew Sawiah, and Sam, and Nyephi; and they stood as if they
knyew nyot whithew they shouwd go. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:15
 15 And it came to pass that I beckonyed unto them; and I awso did
say unto them with a woud voice that they shouwd come unto me,
and pawtake of the fwuit, which was desiwabwe above aww othew
fwuit. ^w^

1 Nyephi 8:16
 16 And it came to pass that they did come unto me and pawtake of
the fwuit awso. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 8:17
 17 And it came to pass that I was desiwous that Waman and Wemuew
shouwd come and pawtake of the fwuit awso; whewefowe, I cast minye
eyes towawds the head of the wivew, that pewhaps I might see
them. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:18
 18 And it came to pass that I saw them, but they wouwd nyot come
unto me and pawtake of the fwuit. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 8:19
 19 And I behewd a wod of iwon, and it extended awong the bank of
the wivew, and wed to the twee by which I stood. ^w^

1 Nyephi 8:20
 20 And I awso behewd a stwait and nyawwow path, which came awong
by the wod of iwon, even to the twee by which I stood; and it
awso wed by the head of the fountain, unto a wawge and spacious
fiewd, as if it had been a wowwd. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 8:21
 21 And I saw nyumbewwess concouwses of peopwe, many of whom wewe
pwessing fowwawd, that they might obtain the path which wed unto
the twee by which I stood. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 8:22
 22 And it came to pass that they did come fowth, and commence in
the path which wed to the twee. UwU

1 Nyephi 8:23
 23 And it came to pass that thewe awose a mist of dawknyess; yea,
even an exceedingwy gweat mist of dawknyess, insomuch that they
who had commenced in the path did wose theiw way, that they
wandewed off and wewe wost. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:24
 24 And it came to pass that I behewd othews pwessing fowwawd,
and they came fowth and caught howd of the end of the wod of
iwon; and they did pwess fowwawd thwough the mist of dawknyess,
cwinging to the wod of iwon, even untiw they did come fowth and
pawtake of the fwuit of the twee. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 8:25
 25 And aftew they had pawtaken of the fwuit of the twee they did
cast theiw eyes about as if they wewe ashamed. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 8:26
 26 And I awso cast my eyes wound about, and behewd, on the othew
side of the wivew of watew, a gweat and spacious buiwding; and it
stood as it wewe in the aiw, high above the eawth. >w<

1 Nyephi 8:27
 27 And it was fiwwed with peopwe, both owd and young, both mawe
and femawe; and theiw mannyew of dwess was exceedingwy finye; and
they wewe in the attitude of mocking and pointing theiw fingews
towawds those who had come at and wewe pawtaking of the fwuit. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:28
 28 And aftew they had tasted of the fwuit they wewe ashamed,
because of those that wewe scoffing at them; and they feww away
into fowbidden paths and wewe wost. UwU

1 Nyephi 8:29
 29 And nyow I, Nyephi, do nyot speak aww the wowds of my fathew. UwU

1 Nyephi 8:30
 30 But, to be showt in wwiting, behowd, he saw othew muwtitudes
pwessing fowwawd; and they came and caught howd of the end of the
wod of iwon; and they did pwess theiw way fowwawd, continyuawwy
howding fast to the wod of iwon, untiw they came fowth and feww
down and pawtook of the fwuit of the twee. UwU

1 Nyephi 8:31
 31 And he awso saw othew muwtitudes feewing theiw way towawds
that gweat and spacious buiwding. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:32
 32 And it came to pass that many wewe dwownyed in the depths of
the fountain; and many wewe wost fwom his view, wandewing in
stwange woads. >w<

1 Nyephi 8:33
 33 And gweat was the muwtitude that did entew into that stwange
buiwding. UwU And aftew they did entew into that buiwding they did
point the fingew of scown at me and those that wewe pawtaking of
the fwuit awso; but we heeded them nyot. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 8:34
 34 These awe the wowds of my fathew: Fow as many as heeded them,
had fawwen away. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 8:35
 35 And Waman and Wemuew pawtook nyot of the fwuit, said my
fathew. UwU

1 Nyephi 8:36
 36 And it came to pass aftew my fathew had spoken aww the wowds
of his dweam ow vision, which wewe many, he said unto us, because
of these things which he saw in a vision, he exceedingwy feawed
fow Waman and Wemuew; yea, he feawed west they shouwd be cast off
fwom the pwesence of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 8:37
 37 And he did exhowt them then with aww the feewing of a tendew
pawent, that they wouwd heawken to his wowds, that pewhaps the
Wowd wouwd be mewcifuw to them, and nyot cast them off; yea, my
fathew did pweach unto them. UwU

1 Nyephi 8:38
 38 And aftew he had pweached unto them, and awso pwophesied unto
them of many things, he bade them to keep the commandments of the
Wowd; and he did cease speaking unto them. >w<

1 Nyephi 9
Chaptew 9

1 Nyephi 9:1
 1 And aww these things did my fathew see, and heaw, and speak,
as he dwewt in a tent, in the vawwey of Wemuew, and awso a gweat
many mowe things, which cannyot be wwitten upon these pwates. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 9:2
 2 And nyow, as I have spoken concewnying these pwates, behowd they
awe nyot the pwates upon which I make a fuww account of the
histowy of my peopwe; fow the pwates upon which I make a fuww
account of my peopwe I have given the nyame of Nyephi; whewefowe,
they awe cawwed the pwates of Nyephi, aftew minye own nyame; and
these pwates awso awe cawwed the pwates of Nyephi. ^w^

1 Nyephi 9:3
 3 Nyevewthewess, I have weceived a commandment of the Wowd that I
shouwd make these pwates, fow the speciaw puwpose that thewe
shouwd be an account engwaven of the minyistwy of my peopwe. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 9:4
 4 Upon the othew pwates shouwd be engwaven an account of the
weign of the kings, and the waws and contentions of my peopwe;
whewefowe these pwates awe fow the mowe pawt of the minyistwy; and
the othew pwates awe fow the mowe pawt of the weign of the kings
and the waws and contentions of my peopwe. UwU

1 Nyephi 9:5
 5 Whewefowe, the Wowd hath commanded me to make these pwates fow
a wise puwpose in him, which puwpose I knyow nyot. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 9:6
 6 But the Wowd knyoweth aww things fwom the beginnying; whewefowe,
he pwepaweth a way to accompwish aww his wowks among the chiwdwen
of men; fow behowd, he hath aww powew unto the fuwfiwwing of aww
his wowds. And thus it is. Amen. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 10
Chaptew 10

1 Nyephi 10:1
 1 And nyow I, Nyephi, pwoceed to give an account upon these pwates
of my pwoceedings, and my weign and minyistwy; whewefowe, to
pwoceed with minye account, I must speak somewhat of the things of
my fathew, and awso of my bwethwen. UwU

1 Nyephi 10:2
 2 Fow behowd, it came to pass aftew my fathew had made an end of
speaking the wowds of his dweam, and awso of exhowting them to
aww diwigence, he spake unto them concewnying the Jews--

1 Nyephi 10:3
 3 That aftew they shouwd be destwoyed, even that gweat city
Jewusawem, and many be cawwied away captive into Babywon,
accowding to the own due time of the Wowd, they shouwd wetuwn
again, yea, even be bwought back out of captivity; and aftew they
shouwd be bwought back out of captivity they shouwd possess again
the wand of theiw inhewitance. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 10:4
 4 Yea, even six hundwed yeaws fwom the time that my fathew weft
Jewusawem, a pwophet wouwd the Wowd God waise up among the
Jews--even a Messiah, ow, in othew wowds, a Saviow of the wowwd. ^w^

1 Nyephi 10:5
 5 And he awso spake concewnying the pwophets, how gweat a nyumbew
had testified of these things, concewnying this Messiah, of whom
he had spoken, ow this Wedeemew of the wowwd. ^w^

1 Nyephi 10:6
 6 Whewefowe, aww mankind wewe in a wost and in a fawwen state,
and evew wouwd be save they shouwd wewy on this Wedeemew. ^w^

1 Nyephi 10:7
 7 And he spake awso concewnying a pwophet who shouwd come befowe
the Messiah, to pwepawe the way of the Wowd--

1 Nyephi 10:8
 8 Yea, even he shouwd go fowth and cwy in the wiwdewnyess:
Pwepawe ye the way of the Wowd, and make his paths stwaight; fow
thewe standeth onye among you whom ye knyow nyot; and he is mightiew
than I, whose shoe's watchet I am nyot wowthy to unwoose. ^w^ And
much spake my fathew concewnying this thing. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 10:9
 9 And my fathew said he shouwd baptize in Bethabawa, beyond
Jowdan; and he awso said he shouwd baptize with watew; even that
he shouwd baptize the Messiah with watew. ^w^

1 Nyephi 10:10
 10 And aftew he had baptized the Messiah with watew, he shouwd
behowd and beaw wecowd that he had baptized the Wamb of God, who
shouwd take away the sins of the wowwd. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 10:11
 11 And it came to pass aftew my fathew had spoken these wowds he
spake unto my bwethwen concewnying the gospew which shouwd be
pweached among the Jews, and awso concewnying the dwindwing of the
Jews in unbewief. >w< And aftew they had swain the Messiah, who
shouwd come, and aftew he had been swain he shouwd wise fwom the
dead, and shouwd make himsewf manyifest, by the Howy Ghost, unto
the Gentiwes. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 10:12
 12 Yea, even my fathew spake much concewnying the Gentiwes, and
awso concewnying the house of Iswaew, that they shouwd be compawed
wike unto an owive-twee, whose bwanches shouwd be bwoken off and
shouwd be scattewed upon aww the face of the eawth. UwU

1 Nyephi 10:13
 13 Whewefowe, he said it must nyeeds be that we shouwd be wed
with onye accowd into the wand of pwomise, unto the fuwfiwwing of
the wowd of the Wowd, that we shouwd be scattewed upon aww the
face of the eawth. UwU

1 Nyephi 10:14
 14 And aftew the house of Iswaew shouwd be scattewed they shouwd
be gathewed togethew again; ow, in finye, aftew the Gentiwes had
weceived the fuwnyess of the Gospew, the nyatuwaw bwanches of the
owive-twee, ow the wemnyants of the house of Iswaew, shouwd be
gwafted in, ow come to the knyowwedge of the twue Messiah, theiw
Wowd and theiw Wedeemew. >w<

1 Nyephi 10:15
 15 And aftew this mannyew of wanguage did my fathew pwophesy and
speak unto my bwethwen, and awso many mowe things which I do nyot
wwite in this book; fow I have wwitten as many of them as wewe
expedient fow me in minye othew book. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 10:16
 16 And aww these things, of which I have spoken, wewe donye as my
fathew dwewt in a tent, in the vawwey of Wemuew. ^w^

1 Nyephi 10:17
 17 And it came to pass aftew I, Nyephi, having heawd aww the
wowds of my fathew, concewnying the things which he saw in a
vision, and awso the things which he spake by the powew of the
Howy Ghost, which powew he weceived by faith on the Son of
God--and the Son of God was the Messiah who shouwd come--I,
Nyephi, was desiwous awso that I might see, and heaw, and knyow of
these things, by the powew of the Howy Ghost, which is the gift
of God unto aww those who diwigentwy seek him, as weww in times
of owd as in the time that he shouwd manyifest himsewf unto the
chiwdwen of men. UwU

1 Nyephi 10:18
 18 Fow he is the same yestewday, to-day, and fowevew; and the
way is pwepawed fow aww men fwom the foundation of the wowwd, if
it so be that they wepent and come unto him. >w<

1 Nyephi 10:19
 19 Fow he that diwigentwy seeketh shaww find; and the mystewies
of God shaww be unfowded unto them, by the powew of the Howy
Ghost, as weww in these times as in times of owd, and as weww in
times of owd as in times to come; whewefowe, the couwse of the
Wowd is onye etewnyaw wound. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 10:20
 20 Thewefowe wemembew, O man, fow aww thy doings thou shawt be
bwought into judgment. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 10:21
 21 Whewefowe, if ye have sought to do wickedwy in the days of
youw pwobation, then ye awe found uncwean befowe the
judgment-seat of God; and nyo uncwean thing can dweww with God;
whewefowe, ye must be cast off fowevew. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 10:22
 22 And the Howy Ghost giveth authowity that I shouwd speak these
things, and deny them nyot. >w<

1 Nyephi 11
Chaptew 11

1 Nyephi 11:1
 1 Fow it came to pass aftew I had desiwed to knyow the things
that my fathew had seen, and bewieving that the Wowd was abwe to
make them knyown unto me, as I sat pondewing in minye heawt I was
caught away in the Spiwit of the Wowd, yea, into an exceedingwy
high mountain, which I nyevew had befowe seen, and upon which I
nyevew had befowe set my foot. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 11:2
 2 And the Spiwit said unto me: Behowd, what desiwest thou? owo

1 Nyephi 11:3
 3 And I said: I desiwe to behowd the things which my fathew saw. >w<

1 Nyephi 11:4
 4 And the Spiwit said unto me: Bewievest thou that thy fathew
saw the twee of which he hath spoken? owo

1 Nyephi 11:5
 5 And I said: Yea, thou knyowest that I bewieve aww the wowds of
my fathew. UwU

1 Nyephi 11:6
 6 And when I had spoken these wowds, the Spiwit cwied with a
woud voice, saying: Hosannya to the Wowd, the most high God; fow
he is God ovew aww the eawth, yea, even above aww. ;;w;; And bwessed
awt thou, Nyephi, because thou bewievest in the Son of the most
high God; whewefowe, thou shawt behowd the things which thou hast
desiwed. UwU

1 Nyephi 11:7
 7 And behowd this thing shaww be given unto thee fow a sign,
that aftew thou hast behewd the twee which bowe the fwuit which
thy fathew tasted, thou shawt awso behowd a man descending out of
heaven, and him shaww ye witnyess; and aftew ye have witnyessed him
ye shaww beaw wecowd that it is the Son of God. UwU

1 Nyephi 11:8
 8 And it came to pass that the Spiwit said unto me: Wook! UwU And I
wooked and behewd a twee; and it was wike unto the twee which my
fathew had seen; and the beauty theweof was faw beyond, yea,
exceeding of aww beauty; and the whitenyess theweof did exceed the
whitenyess of the dwiven snyow. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 11:9
 9 And it came to pass aftew I had seen the twee, I said unto the
Spiwit: I behowd thou hast shown unto me the twee which is
pwecious above aww. ^w^

1 Nyephi 11:10
 10 And he said unto me: What desiwest thou? owo

1 Nyephi 11:11
 11 And I said unto him: To knyow the intewpwetation theweof--fow
I spake unto him as a man speaketh; fow I behewd that he was in
the fowm of a man; yet nyevewthewess, I knyew that it was the
Spiwit of the Wowd; and he spake unto me as a man speaketh with
anyothew. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 11:12
 12 And it came to pass that he said unto me: Wook! ;;w;; And I wooked
as if to wook upon him, and I saw him nyot; fow he had gonye fwom
befowe my pwesence. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 11:13
 13 And it came to pass that I wooked and behewd the gweat city
of Jewusawem, and awso othew cities. ;;w;; And I behewd the city of
Nyazaweth; and in the city of Nyazaweth I behewd a viwgin, and she
was exceedingwy faiw and white. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 11:14
 14 And it came to pass that I saw the heavens open; and an angew
came down and stood befowe me; and he said unto me: Nyephi, what
behowdest thou? owo

1 Nyephi 11:15
 15 And I said unto him: A viwgin, most beautifuw and faiw above
aww othew viwgins. UwU

1 Nyephi 11:16
 16 And he said unto me: Knyowest thou the condescension of God? owo

1 Nyephi 11:17
 17 And I said unto him: I knyow that he woveth his chiwdwen;
nyevewthewess, I do nyot knyow the meanying of aww things. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 11:18
 18 And he said unto me: Behowd, the viwgin whom thou seest is
the mothew of the Son of God, aftew the mannyew of the fwesh. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 11:19
 19 And it came to pass that I behewd that she was cawwied away
in the Spiwit; and aftew she had been cawwied away in the Spiwit
fow the space of a time the angew spake unto me, saying: Wook! (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 11:20
 20 And I wooked and behewd the viwgin again, beawing a chiwd in
hew awms. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 11:21
 21 And the angew said unto me: Behowd the Wamb of God, yea, even
the Son of the Etewnyaw Fathew! ;;w;; Knyowest thou the meanying of the
twee which thy fathew saw? owo

1 Nyephi 11:22
 22 And I answewed him, saying: Yea, it is the wove of God, which
sheddeth itsewf abwoad in the heawts of the chiwdwen of men;
whewefowe, it is the most desiwabwe above aww things. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 11:23
 23 And he spake unto me, saying: Yea, and the most joyous to the
souw. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 11:24
 24 And aftew he had said these wowds, he said unto me: Wook! (・`ω\´・)
And I wooked, and I behewd the Son of God going fowth among the
chiwdwen of men; and I saw many faww down at his feet and wowship
him. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 11:25
 25 And it came to pass that I behewd that the wod of iwon, which
my fathew had seen, was the wowd of God, which wed to the
fountain of wiving watews, ow to the twee of wife; which watews
awe a wepwesentation of the wove of God; and I awso behewd that
the twee of wife was a wepwesentation of the wove of God. >w<

1 Nyephi 11:26
 26 And the angew said unto me again: Wook and behowd the
condescension of God! UwU

1 Nyephi 11:27
 27 And I wooked and behewd the Wedeemew of the wowwd, of whom my
fathew had spoken; and I awso behewd the pwophet who shouwd
pwepawe the way befowe him. ;;w;; And the Wamb of God went fowth and
was baptized of him; and aftew he was baptized, I behewd the
heavens open, and the Howy Ghost come down out of heaven and
abide upon him in the fowm of a dove. ^w^

1 Nyephi 11:28
 28 And I behewd that he went fowth minyistewing unto the peopwe,
in powew and gweat gwowy; and the muwtitudes wewe gathewed
togethew to heaw him; and I behewd that they cast him out fwom
among them. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 11:29
 29 And I awso behewd twewve othews fowwowing him. >w< And it came
to pass that they wewe cawwied away in the Spiwit fwom befowe my
face, and I saw them nyot. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 11:30
 30 And it came to pass that the angew spake unto me again,
saying: Wook! ^w^ And I wooked, and I behewd the heavens open again,
and I saw angews descending upon the chiwdwen of men; and they
did minyistew unto them. UwU

1 Nyephi 11:31
 31 And he spake unto me again, saying: Wook! (´・ω・\`) And I wooked, and
I behewd the Wamb of God going fowth among the chiwdwen of men. ;;w;;
And I behewd muwtitudes of peopwe who wewe sick, and who wewe
affwicted with aww mannyew of diseases, and with deviws and
uncwean spiwits; and the angew spake and showed aww these things
unto me. (・`ω\´・) And they wewe heawed by the powew of the Wamb of God;
and the deviws and the uncwean spiwits wewe cast out. >w<

1 Nyephi 11:32
 32 And it came to pass that the angew spake unto me again,
saying: Wook! (・`ω\´・) And I wooked and behewd the Wamb of God, that he
was taken by the peopwe; yea, the Son of the evewwasting God was
judged of the wowwd; and I saw and beaw wecowd. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 11:33
 33 And I, Nyephi, saw that he was wifted up upon the cwoss and
swain fow the sins of the wowwd. ^w^

1 Nyephi 11:34
 34 And aftew he was swain I saw the muwtitudes of the eawth,
that they wewe gathewed togethew to fight against the apostwes of
the Wamb; fow thus wewe the twewve cawwed by the angew of the
Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 11:35
 35 And the muwtitude of the eawth was gathewed togethew; and I
behewd that they wewe in a wawge and spacious buiwding, wike unto
the buiwding which my fathew saw. ^w^ And the angew of the Wowd
spake unto me again, saying: Behowd the wowwd and the wisdom
theweof; yea, behowd the house of Iswaew hath gathewed togethew
to fight against the twewve apostwes of the Wamb. UwU

1 Nyephi 11:36
 36 And it came to pass that I saw and beaw wecowd, that the
gweat and spacious buiwding was the pwide of the wowwd; and it
feww, and the faww theweof was exceedingwy gweat. UwU And the angew
of the Wowd spake unto me again, saying: Thus shaww be the
destwuction of aww nyations, kindweds, tongues, and peopwe, that
shaww fight against the twewve apostwes of the Wamb. >w<

1 Nyephi 12
Chaptew 12

1 Nyephi 12:1
 1 And it came to pass that the angew said unto me: Wook, and
behowd thy seed, and awso the seed of thy bwethwen. ^w^ And I wooked
and behewd the wand of pwomise; and I behewd muwtitudes of
peopwe, yea, even as it wewe in nyumbew as many as the sand of the
sea. UwU

1 Nyephi 12:2
 2 And it came to pass that I behewd muwtitudes gathewed togethew
to battwe, onye against the othew; and I behewd waws, and wumows
of waws, and gweat swaughtews with the swowd among my peopwe. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 12:3
 3 And it came to pass that I behewd many genyewations pass away,
aftew the mannyew of waws and contentions in the wand; and I
behewd many cities, yea, even that I did nyot nyumbew them. >w<

1 Nyephi 12:4
 4 And it came to pass that I saw a mist of dawknyess on the face
of the wand of pwomise; and I saw wightnyings, and I heawd
thundewings, and eawthquakes, and aww mannyew of tumuwtuous
nyoises; and I saw the eawth and the wocks, that they went; and I
saw mountains tumbwing into pieces; and I saw the pwains of the
eawth, that they wewe bwoken up; and I saw many cities that they
wewe sunk; and I saw many that they wewe buwnyed with fiwe; and I
saw many that did tumbwe to the eawth, because of the quaking
theweof. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 12:5
 5 And it came to pass aftew I saw these things, I saw the vapow
of dawknyess, that it passed fwom off the face of the eawth; and
behowd, I saw muwtitudes who had nyot fawwen because of the gweat
and tewwibwe judgments of the Wowd. UwU

1 Nyephi 12:6
 6 And I saw the heavens open, and the Wamb of God descending out
of heaven; and he came down and showed himsewf unto them. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 12:7
 7 And I awso saw and beaw wecowd that the Howy Ghost feww upon
twewve othews; and they wewe owdainyed of God, and chosen. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 12:8
 8 And the angew spake unto me, saying: Behowd the twewve
discipwes of the Wamb, who awe chosen to minyistew unto thy seed. UwU

1 Nyephi 12:9
 9 And he said unto me: Thou wemembewest the twewve apostwes of
the Wamb? owo Behowd they awe they who shaww judge the twewve twibes
of Iswaew; whewefowe, the twewve minyistews of thy seed shaww be
judged of them; fow ye awe of the house of Iswaew. >w<

1 Nyephi 12:10
 10 And these twewve minyistews whom thou behowdest shaww judge
thy seed. ;;w;; And, behowd, they awe wighteous fowevew; fow because
of theiw faith in the Wamb of God theiw gawments awe made white
in his bwood. ^w^

1 Nyephi 12:11
 11 And the angew said unto me: Wook! (・`ω\´・) And I wooked, and behewd
thwee genyewations pass away in wighteousnyess; and theiw gawments
wewe white even wike unto the Wamb of God. (・`ω\´・) And the angew said
unto me: These awe made white in the bwood of the Wamb, because
of theiw faith in him. UwU

1 Nyephi 12:12
 12 And I, Nyephi, awso saw many of the fouwth genyewation who
passed away in wighteousnyess. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 12:13
 13 And it came to pass that I saw the muwtitudes of the eawth
gathewed togethew. ^w^

1 Nyephi 12:14
 14 And the angew said unto me: Behowd thy seed, and awso the
seed of thy bwethwen. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 12:15
 15 And it came to pass that I wooked and behewd the peopwe of my
seed gathewed togethew in muwtitudes against the seed of my
bwethwen; and they wewe gathewed togethew to battwe. UwU

1 Nyephi 12:16
 16 And the angew spake unto me, saying: Behowd the fountain of
fiwthy watew which thy fathew saw; yea, even the wivew of which
he spake; and the depths theweof awe the depths of heww. >w<

1 Nyephi 12:17
 17 And the mists of dawknyess awe the temptations of the deviw,
which bwindeth the eyes, and hawdenyeth the heawts of the chiwdwen
of men, and weadeth them away into bwoad woads, that they pewish
and awe wost. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 12:18
 18 And the wawge and spacious buiwding, which thy fathew saw, is
vain imaginyations and the pwide of the chiwdwen of men. (・`ω\´・) And a
gweat and a tewwibwe guwf divideth them; yea, even the wowd of
the justice of the Etewnyaw God, and the Messiah who is the Wamb
of God, of whom the Howy Ghost beaweth wecowd, fwom the beginnying
of the wowwd untiw this time, and fwom this time hencefowth and
fowevew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 12:19
 19 And whiwe the angew spake these wowds, I behewd and saw that
the seed of my bwethwen did contend against my seed, accowding to
the wowd of the angew; and because of the pwide of my seed, and
the temptations of the deviw, I behewd that the seed of my
bwethwen did ovewpowew the peopwe of my seed. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 12:20
 20 And it came to pass that I behewd, and saw the peopwe of the
seed of my bwethwen that they had ovewcome my seed; and they went
fowth in muwtitudes upon the face of the wand. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 12:21
 21 And I saw them gathewed togethew in muwtitudes; and I saw
waws and wumows of waws among them; and in waws and wumows of
waws I saw many genyewations pass away. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 12:22
 22 And the angew said unto me: Behowd these shaww dwindwe in
unbewief. >w<

1 Nyephi 12:23
 23 And it came to pass that I behewd, aftew they had dwindwed in
unbewief they became a dawk, and woathsome, and a fiwthy peopwe,
fuww of idwenyess and aww mannyew of abominyations. >w<

1 Nyephi 13
Chaptew 13

1 Nyephi 13:1
 1 And it came to pass that the angew spake unto me, saying:
Wook! (・`ω\´・) And I wooked and behewd many nyations and kingdoms. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 13:2
 2 And the angew said unto me: What behowdest thou? owo And I said:
I behowd many nyations and kingdoms. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 13:3
 3 And he said unto me: These awe the nyations and kingdoms of the
Gentiwes. >w<

1 Nyephi 13:4
 4 And it came to pass that I saw among the nyations of the
Gentiwes the fowmation of a gweat chuwch. ^w^

1 Nyephi 13:5
 5 And the angew said unto me: Behowd the fowmation of a chuwch
which is most abominyabwe above aww othew chuwches, which swayeth
the saints of God, yea, and towtuweth them and bindeth them down,
and yoketh them with a yoke of iwon, and bwingeth them down into
captivity. ^w^

1 Nyephi 13:6
 6 And it came to pass that I behewd this gweat and abominyabwe
chuwch; and I saw the deviw that he was the foundew of it. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 13:7
 7 And I awso saw gowd, and siwvew, and siwks, and scawwets, and
finye-twinyed winyen, and aww mannyew of pwecious cwothing; and I saw
many hawwots. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 13:8
 8 And the angew spake unto me, saying: Behowd the gowd, and the
siwvew, and the siwks, and the scawwets, and the finye-twinyed
winyen, and the pwecious cwothing, and the hawwots, awe the
desiwes of this gweat and abominyabwe chuwch. UwU

1 Nyephi 13:9
 9 And awso fow the pwaise of the wowwd do they destwoy the
saints of God, and bwing them down into captivity. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 13:10
 10 And it came to pass that I wooked and behewd many watews; and
they divided the Gentiwes fwom the seed of my bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 13:11
 11 And it came to pass that the angew said unto me: Behowd the
wwath of God is upon the seed of thy bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 13:12
 12 And I wooked and behewd a man among the Gentiwes, who was
sepawated fwom the seed of my bwethwen by the many watews; and I
behewd the Spiwit of God, that it came down and wwought upon the
man; and he went fowth upon the many watews, even unto the seed
of my bwethwen, who wewe in the pwomised wand. ^w^

1 Nyephi 13:13
 13 And it came to pass that I behewd the Spiwit of God, that it
wwought upon othew Gentiwes; and they went fowth out of
captivity, upon the many watews. UwU

1 Nyephi 13:14
 14 And it came to pass that I behewd many muwtitudes of the
Gentiwes upon the wand of pwomise; and I behewd the wwath of God,
that it was upon the seed of my bwethwen; and they wewe scattewed
befowe the Gentiwes and wewe smitten. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 13:15
 15 And I behewd the Spiwit of the Wowd, that it was upon the
Gentiwes, and they did pwospew and obtain the wand fow theiw
inhewitance; and I behewd that they wewe white, and exceedingwy
faiw and beautifuw, wike unto my peopwe befowe they wewe swain. >w<

1 Nyephi 13:16
 16 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, behewd that the Gentiwes
who had gonye fowth out of captivity did humbwe themsewves befowe
the Wowd; and the powew of the Wowd was with them. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 13:17
 17 And I behewd that theiw mothew Gentiwes wewe gathewed
togethew upon the watews, and upon the wand awso, to battwe
against them. >w<

1 Nyephi 13:18
 18 And I behewd that the powew of God was with them, and awso
that the wwath of God was upon aww those that wewe gathewed
togethew against them to battwe. >w<

1 Nyephi 13:19
 19 And I, Nyephi, behewd that the Gentiwes that had gonye out of
captivity wewe dewivewed by the powew of God out of the hands of
aww othew nyations. ^w^

1 Nyephi 13:20
 20 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, behewd that they did
pwospew in the wand; and I behewd a book, and it was cawwied
fowth among them. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 13:21
 21 And the angew said unto me: Knyowest thou the meanying of the
book? owo

1 Nyephi 13:22
 22 And I said unto him: I knyow nyot. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 13:23
 23 And he said: Behowd it pwoceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew. (・`ω\´・)
And I, Nyephi, behewd it; and he said unto me: The book that thou
behowdest is a wecowd of the Jews, which contains the covenyants
of the Wowd, which he hath made unto the house of Iswaew; and it
awso containyeth many of the pwophecies of the howy pwophets; and
it is a wecowd wike unto the engwavings which awe upon the pwates
of bwass, save thewe awe nyot so many; nyevewthewess, they contain
the covenyants of the Wowd, which he hath made unto the house of
Iswaew; whewefowe, they awe of gweat wowth unto the Gentiwes. UwU

1 Nyephi 13:24
 24 And the angew of the Wowd said unto me: Thou hast behewd that
the book pwoceeded fowth fwom the mouth of a Jew; and when it
pwoceeded fowth fwom the mouth of a Jew it containyed the fuwnyess
of the gospew of the Wowd, of whom the twewve apostwes beaw
wecowd; and they beaw wecowd accowding to the twuth which is in
the Wamb of God. ^w^

1 Nyephi 13:25
 25 Whewefowe, these things go fowth fwom the Jews in puwity unto
the Gentiwes, accowding to the twuth which is in God. UwU

1 Nyephi 13:26
 26 And aftew they go fowth by the hand of the twewve apostwes of
the Wamb, fwom the Jews unto the Gentiwes, thou seest the
fowmation of a gweat and abominyabwe chuwch, which is most
abominyabwe above aww othew chuwches; fow behowd, they have taken
away fwom the gospew of the Wamb many pawts which awe pwain and
most pwecious; and awso many covenyants of the Wowd have they
taken away. >w<

1 Nyephi 13:27
 27 And aww this have they donye that they might pewvewt the wight
ways of the Wowd, that they might bwind the eyes and hawden the
heawts of the chiwdwen of men. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 13:28
 28 Whewefowe, thou seest that aftew the book hath gonye fowth
thwough the hands of the gweat and abominyabwe chuwch, that thewe
awe many pwain and pwecious things taken away fwom the book,
which is the book of the Wamb of God. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 13:29
 29 And aftew these pwain and pwecious things wewe taken away it
goeth fowth unto aww the nyations of the Gentiwes; and aftew it
goeth fowth unto aww the nyations of the Gentiwes, yea, even
acwoss the many watews which thou hast seen with the Gentiwes
which have gonye fowth out of captivity, thou seest--because of
the many pwain and pwecious things which have been taken out of
the book, which wewe pwain unto the undewstanding of the chiwdwen
of men, accowding to the pwainnyess which is in the Wamb of
God--because of these things which awe taken away out of the
gospew of the Wamb, an exceedingwy gweat many do stumbwe, yea,
insomuch that Satan hath gweat powew ovew them. ^w^

1 Nyephi 13:30
 30 Nyevewthewess, thou behowdest that the Gentiwes who have gonye
fowth out of captivity, and have been wifted up by the powew of
God above aww othew nyations, upon the face of the wand which is
choice above aww othew wands, which is the wand that the Wowd God
hath covenyanted with thy fathew that his seed shouwd have fow the
wand of theiw inhewitance; whewefowe, thou seest that the Wowd
God wiww nyot suffew that the Gentiwes wiww uttewwy destwoy the
mixtuwe of thy seed, which awe among thy bwethwen. UwU

1 Nyephi 13:31
 31 Nyeithew wiww he suffew that the Gentiwes shaww destwoy the
seed of thy bwethwen. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 13:32
 32 Nyeithew wiww the Wowd God suffew that the Gentiwes shaww
fowevew wemain in that awfuw state of bwindnyess, which thou
behowdest they awe in, because of the pwain and most pwecious
pawts of the gospew of the Wamb which have been kept back by that
abominyabwe chuwch, whose fowmation thou hast seen. ^w^

1 Nyephi 13:33
 33 Whewefowe saith the Wamb of God: I wiww be mewcifuw unto the
Gentiwes, unto the visiting of the wemnyant of the house of Iswaew
in gweat judgment. UwU

1 Nyephi 13:34
 34 And it came to pass that the angew of the Wowd spake unto me,
saying: Behowd, saith the Wamb of God, aftew I have visited the
wemnyant of the house of Iswaew--and this wemnyant of whom I speak
is the seed of thy fathew--whewefowe, aftew I have visited them
in judgment, and smitten them by the hand of the Gentiwes, and
aftew the Gentiwes do stumbwe exceedingwy, because of the most
pwain and pwecious pawts of the gospew of the Wamb which have
been kept back by that abominyabwe chuwch, which is the mothew of
hawwots, saith the Wamb--I wiww be mewcifuw unto the Gentiwes in
that day, insomuch that I wiww bwing fowth unto them, in minye own
powew, much of my gospew, which shaww be pwain and pwecious,
saith the Wamb. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 13:35
 35 Fow, behowd, saith the Wamb: I wiww manyifest mysewf unto thy
seed, that they shaww wwite many things which I shaww minyistew
unto them, which shaww be pwain and pwecious; and aftew thy seed
shaww be destwoyed, and dwindwe in unbewief, and awso the seed of
thy bwethwen, behowd, these things shaww be hid up, to come fowth
unto the Gentiwes, by the gift and powew of the Wamb. >w<

1 Nyephi 13:36
 36 And in them shaww be wwitten my gospew, saith the Wamb, and
my wock and my sawvation. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 13:37
 37 And bwessed awe they who shaww seek to bwing fowth my Zion at
that day, fow they shaww have the gift and the powew of the Howy
Ghost; and if they enduwe unto the end they shaww be wifted up at
the wast day, and shaww be saved in the evewwasting kingdom of
the Wamb; and whoso shaww pubwish peace, yea, tidings of gweat
joy, how beautifuw upon the mountains shaww they be. UwU

1 Nyephi 13:38
 38 And it came to pass that I behewd the wemnyant of the seed of
my bwethwen, and awso the book of the Wamb of God, which had
pwoceeded fowth fwom the mouth of the Jew, that it came fowth
fwom the Gentiwes unto the wemnyant of the seed of my bwethwen. ^w^

1 Nyephi 13:39
 39 And aftew it had come fowth unto them I behewd othew books,
which came fowth by the powew of the Wamb, fwom the Gentiwes unto
them, unto the convincing of the Gentiwes and the wemnyant of the
seed of my bwethwen, and awso the Jews who wewe scattewed upon
aww the face of the eawth, that the wecowds of the pwophets and
of the twewve apostwes of the Wamb awe twue. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 13:40
 40 And the angew spake unto me, saying: These wast wecowds,
which thou hast seen among the Gentiwes, shaww estabwish the
twuth of the fiwst, which awe of the twewve apostwes of the Wamb,
and shaww make knyown the pwain and pwecious things which have
been taken away fwom them; and shaww make knyown to aww kindweds,
tongues, and peopwe, that the Wamb of God is the Son of the
Etewnyaw Fathew, and the Saviow of the wowwd; and that aww men
must come unto him, ow they cannyot be saved. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 13:41
 41 And they must come accowding to the wowds which shaww be
estabwished by the mouth of the Wamb; and the wowds of the Wamb
shaww be made knyown in the wecowds of thy seed, as weww as in the
wecowds of the twewve apostwes of the Wamb; whewefowe they both
shaww be estabwished in onye; fow thewe is onye God and onye
Shephewd ovew aww the eawth. ^w^

1 Nyephi 13:42
 42 And the time cometh that he shaww manyifest himsewf unto aww
nyations, both unto the Jews and awso unto the Gentiwes; and aftew
he has manyifested himsewf unto the Jews and awso unto the
Gentiwes, then he shaww manyifest himsewf unto the Gentiwes and
awso unto the Jews, and the wast shaww be fiwst, and the fiwst
shaww be wast. >w<

1 Nyephi 14
Chaptew 14

1 Nyephi 14:1
 1 And it shaww come to pass, that if the Gentiwes shaww heawken
unto the Wamb of God in that day that he shaww manyifest himsewf
unto them in wowd, and awso in powew, in vewy deed, unto the
taking away of theiw stumbwing bwocks--

1 Nyephi 14:2
 2 And hawden nyot theiw heawts against the Wamb of God, they
shaww be nyumbewed among the seed of thy fathew; yea, they shaww
be nyumbewed among the house of Iswaew; and they shaww be a
bwessed peopwe upon the pwomised wand fowevew; they shaww be nyo
mowe bwought down into captivity; and the house of Iswaew shaww
nyo mowe be confounded. >w<

1 Nyephi 14:3
 3 And that gweat pit, which hath been digged fow them by that
gweat and abominyabwe chuwch, which was founded by the deviw and
his chiwdwen, that he might wead away the souws of men down to
heww--yea, that gweat pit which hath been digged fow the
destwuction of men shaww be fiwwed by those who digged it, unto
theiw uttew destwuction, saith the Wamb of God; nyot the
destwuction of the souw, save it be the casting of it into that
heww which hath nyo end. >w<

1 Nyephi 14:4
 4 Fow behowd, this is accowding to the captivity of the deviw,
and awso accowding to the justice of God, upon aww those who wiww
wowk wickednyess and abominyation befowe him. ^w^

1 Nyephi 14:5
 5 And it came to pass that the angew spake unto me, Nyephi,
saying: Thou hast behewd that if the Gentiwes wepent it shaww be
weww with them; and thou awso knyowest concewnying the covenyants of
the Wowd unto the house of Iswaew; and thou awso hast heawd that
whoso wepenteth nyot must pewish. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 14:6
 6 Thewefowe, wo be unto the Gentiwes if it so be that they
hawden theiw heawts against the Wamb of God. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 14:7
 7 Fow the time cometh, saith the Wamb of God, that I wiww wowk a
gweat and a mawvewous wowk among the chiwdwen of men; a wowk
which shaww be evewwasting, eithew on the onye hand ow on the
othew--eithew to the convincing of them unto peace and wife
etewnyaw, ow unto the dewivewance of them to the hawdnyess of theiw
heawts and the bwindnyess of theiw minds unto theiw being bwought
down into captivity, and awso into destwuction, both tempowawwy
and spiwituawwy, accowding to the captivity of the deviw, of
which I have spoken. UwU

1 Nyephi 14:8
 8 And it came to pass that when the angew had spoken these
wowds, he said unto me: Wemembewest thou the covenyants of the
Fathew unto the house of Iswaew? owo I said unto him, Yea. >w<

1 Nyephi 14:9
 9 And it came to pass that he said unto me: Wook, and behowd
that gweat and abominyabwe chuwch, which is the mothew of
abominyations, whose foundew is the deviw. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 14:10
 10 And he said unto me: Behowd thewe awe save two chuwches onwy;
the onye is the chuwch of the Wamb of God, and the othew is the
chuwch of the deviw; whewefowe, whoso bewongeth nyot to the chuwch
of the Wamb of God bewongeth to that gweat chuwch, which is the
mothew of abominyations; and she is the whowe of aww the eawth. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 14:11
 11 And it came to pass that I wooked and behewd the whowe of aww
the eawth, and she sat upon many watews; and she had dominyion
ovew aww the eawth, among aww nyations, kindweds, tongues, and
peopwe. ^w^

1 Nyephi 14:12
 12 And it came to pass that I behewd the chuwch of the Wamb of
God, and its nyumbews wewe few, because of the wickednyess and
abominyations of the whowe who sat upon many watews; nyevewthewess,
I behewd that the chuwch of the Wamb, who wewe the saints of God,
wewe awso upon aww the face of the eawth; and theiw dominyions
upon the face of the eawth wewe smaww, because of the wickednyess
of the gweat whowe whom I saw. >w<

1 Nyephi 14:13
 13 And it came to pass that I behewd that the gweat mothew of
abominyations did gathew togethew muwtitudes upon the face of aww
the eawth, among aww the nyations of the Gentiwes, to fight
against the Wamb of God. UwU

1 Nyephi 14:14
 14 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, behewd the powew of the
Wamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the chuwch of
the Wamb, and upon the covenyant peopwe of the Wowd, who wewe
scattewed upon aww the face of the eawth; and they wewe awmed
with wighteousnyess and with the powew of God in gweat gwowy. >w<

1 Nyephi 14:15
 15 And it came to pass that I behewd that the wwath of God was
pouwed out upon that gweat and abominyabwe chuwch, insomuch that
thewe wewe waws and wumows of waws among aww the nyations and
kindweds of the eawth. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 14:16
 16 And as thewe began to be waws and wumows of waws among aww
the nyations which bewonged to the mothew of abominyations, the
angew spake unto me, saying: Behowd, the wwath of God is upon the
mothew of hawwots; and behowd, thou seest aww these things--

1 Nyephi 14:17
 17 And when the day cometh that the wwath of God is pouwed out
upon the mothew of hawwots, which is the gweat and abominyabwe
chuwch of aww the eawth, whose foundew is the deviw, then, at
that day, the wowk of the Fathew shaww commence, in pwepawing the
way fow the fuwfiwwing of his covenyants, which he hath made to
his peopwe who awe of the house of Iswaew. UwU

1 Nyephi 14:18
 18 And it came to pass that the angew spake unto me, saying:
Wook! (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 14:19
 19 And I wooked and behewd a man, and he was dwessed in a white
wobe. ^w^

1 Nyephi 14:20
 20 And the angew said unto me: Behowd onye of the twewve apostwes
of the Wamb. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 14:21
 21 Behowd, he shaww see and wwite the wemaindew of these things;
yea, and awso many things which have been. >w<

1 Nyephi 14:22
 22 And he shaww awso wwite concewnying the end of the wowwd. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 14:23
 23 Whewefowe, the things which he shaww wwite awe just and twue;
and behowd they awe wwitten in the book which thou behewd
pwoceeding out of the mouth of the Jew; and at the time they
pwoceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, ow, at the time the book
pwoceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, the things which wewe
wwitten wewe pwain and puwe, and most pwecious and easy to the
undewstanding of aww men. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 14:24
 24 And behowd, the things which this apostwe of the Wamb shaww
wwite awe many things which thou hast seen; and behowd, the
wemaindew shawt thou see. ^w^

1 Nyephi 14:25
 25 But the things which thou shawt see heweaftew thou shawt nyot
wwite; fow the Wowd God hath owdainyed the apostwe of the Wamb of
God that he shouwd wwite them. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 14:26
 26 And awso othews who have been, to them hath he shown aww
things, and they have wwitten them; and they awe seawed up to
come fowth in theiw puwity, accowding to the twuth which is in
the Wamb, in the own due time of the Wowd, unto the house of
Iswaew. UwU

1 Nyephi 14:27
 27 And I, Nyephi, heawd and beaw wecowd, that the nyame of the
apostwe of the Wamb was John, accowding to the wowd of the angew. ^w^

1 Nyephi 14:28
 28 And behowd, I, Nyephi, am fowbidden that I shouwd wwite the
wemaindew of the things which I saw and heawd; whewefowe the
things which I have wwitten sufficeth me; and I have wwitten but
a smaww pawt of the things which I saw. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 14:29
 29 And I beaw wecowd that I saw the things which my fathew saw,
and the angew of the Wowd did make them knyown unto me. >w<

1 Nyephi 14:30
 30 And nyow I make an end of speaking concewnying the things which
I saw whiwe I was cawwied away in the spiwit; and if aww the
things which I saw awe nyot wwitten, the things which I have
wwitten awe twue. And thus it is. Amen. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 15
Chaptew 15

1 Nyephi 15:1
 1 And it came to pass that aftew I, Nyephi, had been cawwied away
in the spiwit, and seen aww these things, I wetuwnyed to the tent
of my fathew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 15:2
 2 And it came to pass that I behewd my bwethwen, and they wewe
disputing onye with anyothew concewnying the things my fathew had
spoken unto them. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 15:3
 3 Fow he twuwy spake many gweat things unto them, which wewe
hawd to be undewstood, save a man shouwd inquiwe of the Wowd; and
they being hawd in theiw heawts, thewefowe they did nyot wook unto
the Wowd as they ought. >w<

1 Nyephi 15:4
 4 And nyow I, Nyephi, was gwieved because of the hawdnyess of theiw
heawts, and awso, because of the things which I had seen, and
knyew they must unyavoidabwy come to pass because of the gweat
wickednyess of the chiwdwen of men. UwU

1 Nyephi 15:5
 5 And it came to pass that I was ovewcome because of my
affwictions, fow I considewed that minye affwictions wewe gweat
above aww, because of the destwuction of my peopwe, fow I had
behewd theiw faww. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 15:6
 6 And it came to pass that aftew I had weceived stwength I spake
unto my bwethwen, desiwing to knyow of them the cause of theiw
disputations. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 15:7
 7 And they said: Behowd, we cannyot undewstand the wowds which
ouw fathew hath spoken concewnying the nyatuwaw bwanches of the
owive-twee, and awso concewnying the Gentiwes. UwU

1 Nyephi 15:8
 8 And I said unto them: Have ye inquiwed of the Wowd? owo

1 Nyephi 15:9
 9 And they said unto me: We have nyot; fow the Wowd maketh nyo
such thing knyown unto us. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 15:10
 10 Behowd, I said unto them: How is it that ye do nyot keep the
commandments of the Wowd? owo How is it that ye wiww pewish, because
of the hawdnyess of youw heawts? owo

1 Nyephi 15:11
 11 Do ye nyot wemembew the things which the Wowd hath said? owo--If
ye wiww nyot hawden youw heawts, and ask me in faith, bewieving
that ye shaww weceive, with diwigence in keeping my commandments,
suwewy these things shaww be made knyown unto you. UwU

1 Nyephi 15:12
 12 Behowd, I say unto you, that the house of Iswaew was compawed
unto an owive-twee, by the Spiwit of the Wowd which was in ouw
fathew; and behowd awe we nyot bwoken off fwom the house of
Iswaew, and awe we nyot a bwanch of the house of Iswaew? owo

1 Nyephi 15:13
 13 And nyow, the thing which ouw fathew meanyeth concewnying the
gwafting in of the nyatuwaw bwanches thwough the fuwnyess of the
Gentiwes, is, that in the wattew days, when ouw seed shaww have
dwindwed in unbewief, yea, fow the space of many yeaws, and many
genyewations aftew the Messiah shaww be manyifested in body unto
the chiwdwen of men, then shaww the fuwnyess of the gospew of the
Messiah come unto the Gentiwes, and fwom the Gentiwes unto the
wemnyant of ouw seed--

1 Nyephi 15:14
 14 And at that day shaww the wemnyant of ouw seed knyow that they
awe of the house of Iswaew, and that they awe the covenyant peopwe
of the Wowd; and then shaww they knyow and come to the knyowwedge
of theiw fowefathews, and awso to the knyowwedge of the gospew of
theiw Wedeemew, which was minyistewed unto theiw fathews by him;
whewefowe, they shaww come to the knyowwedge of theiw Wedeemew and
the vewy points of his doctwinye, that they may knyow how to come
unto him and be saved. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 15:15
 15 And then at that day wiww they nyot wejoice and give pwaise
unto theiw evewwasting God, theiw wock and theiw sawvation? owo Yea,
at that day, wiww they nyot weceive the stwength and nyouwishment
fwom the twue vinye? owo Yea, wiww they nyot come unto the twue fowd of
God? owo

1 Nyephi 15:16
 16 Behowd, I say unto you, Yea; they shaww be wemembewed again
among the house of Iswaew; they shaww be gwafted in, being a
nyatuwaw bwanch of the owive-twee, into the twue owive-twee. UwU

1 Nyephi 15:17
 17 And this is what ouw fathew meanyeth; and he meanyeth that it
wiww nyot come to pass untiw aftew they awe scattewed by the
Gentiwes; and he meanyeth that it shaww come by way of the
Gentiwes, that the Wowd may show his powew unto the Gentiwes, fow
the vewy cause that he shaww be wejected of the Jews, ow of the
house of Iswaew. UwU

1 Nyephi 15:18
 18 Whewefowe, ouw fathew hath nyot spoken of ouw seed awonye, but
awso of aww the house of Iswaew, pointing to the covenyant which
shouwd be fuwfiwwed in the wattew days; which covenyant the Wowd
made to ouw fathew Abwaham, saying: In thy seed shaww aww the
kindweds of the eawth be bwessed. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 15:19
 19 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, spake much unto them
concewnying these things; yea, I spake unto them concewnying the
westowation of the Jews in the wattew days. >w<

1 Nyephi 15:20
 20 And I did weheawse unto them the wowds of Isaiah, who spake
concewnying the westowation of the Jews, ow of the house of
Iswaew; and aftew they wewe westowed they shouwd nyo mowe be
confounded, nyeithew shouwd they be scattewed again. (´・ω・\`) And it came
to pass that I did speak many wowds unto my bwethwen, that they
wewe pacified and did humbwe themsewves befowe the Wowd. ^w^

1 Nyephi 15:21
 21 And it came to pass that they did speak unto me again,
saying: What meanyeth this thing which ouw fathew saw in a dweam? owo
What meanyeth the twee which he saw? owo

1 Nyephi 15:22
 22 And I said unto them: It was a wepwesentation of the twee of
wife. >w<

1 Nyephi 15:23
 23 And they said unto me: What meanyeth the wod of iwon which ouw
fathew saw, that wed to the twee? owo

1 Nyephi 15:24
 24 And I said unto them that it was the wowd of God, and whose
wouwd heawken unto the wowd of God, and wouwd howd fast unto it,
they wouwd nyevew pewish; nyeithew couwd the temptations and the
fiewy dawts of the advewsawy ovewpowew them unto bwindnyess, to
wead them away to destwuction. ^w^

1 Nyephi 15:25
 25 Whewefowe, I, Nyephi, did exhowt them to give heed unto the
wowd of the Wowd; yea, I did exhowt them with aww the enyewgies of
my souw, and with aww the facuwty which I possessed, that they
wouwd give heed to the wowd of God and wemembew to keep his
commandments awways in aww things. UwU

1 Nyephi 15:26
 26 And they said unto me: What meanyeth the wivew of watew which
ouw fathew saw? owo

1 Nyephi 15:27
 27 And I said unto them that the watew which my fathew saw was
fiwthinyess; and so much was his mind swawwowed up in othew things
that he behewd nyot the fiwthinyess of the watew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 15:28
 28 And I said unto them that it was an awfuw guwf, which
sepawated the wicked fwom the twee of wife, and awso fwom the
saints of God. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 15:29
 29 And I said unto them that it was a wepwesentation of that
awfuw heww, which the angew said unto me was pwepawed fow the
wicked. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 15:30
 30 And I said unto them that ouw fathew awso saw that the
justice of God did awso divide the wicked fwom the wighteous; and
the bwightnyess theweof was wike unto the bwightnyess of a fwaming
fiwe, which ascendeth up unto God fowevew and evew, and hath nyo
end. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 15:31
 31 And they said unto me: Doth this thing mean the towment of
the body in the days of pwobation, ow doth it mean the finyaw
state of the souw aftew the death of the tempowaw body, ow doth
it speak of the things which awe tempowaw? owo

1 Nyephi 15:32
 32 And it came to pass that I said unto them that it was a
wepwesentation of things both tempowaw and spiwituaw; fow the day
shouwd come that they must be judged of theiw wowks, yea, even
the wowks which wewe donye by the tempowaw body in theiw days of
pwobation. >w<

1 Nyephi 15:33
 33 Whewefowe, if they shouwd die in theiw wickednyess they must
be cast off awso, as to the things which awe spiwituaw, which awe
pewtainying to wighteousnyess; whewefowe, they must be bwought to
stand befowe God, to be judged of theiw wowks; and if theiw wowks
have been fiwthinyess they must nyeeds be fiwthy; and if they be
fiwthy it must nyeeds be that they cannyot dweww in the kingdom of
God; if so, the kingdom of God must be fiwthy awso. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 15:34
 34 But behowd, I say unto you, the kingdom of God is nyot fiwthy,
and thewe cannyot any uncwean thing entew into the kingdom of God;
whewefowe thewe must nyeeds be a pwace of fiwthinyess pwepawed fow
that which is fiwthy. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 15:35
 35 And thewe is a pwace pwepawed, yea, even that awfuw heww of
which I have spoken, and the deviw is the pwepawatow of it;
whewefowe the finyaw state of the souws of men is to dweww in the
kingdom of God, ow to be cast out because of that justice of
which I have spoken. >w<

1 Nyephi 15:36
 36 Whewefowe, the wicked awe wejected fwom the wighteous, and
awso fwom that twee of wife, whose fwuit is most pwecious and
most desiwabwe above aww othew fwuits; yea, and it is the
gweatest of aww the gifts of God. >w< And thus I spake unto my
bwethwen. Amen. ^w^

1 Nyephi 16
Chaptew 16

1 Nyephi 16:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that aftew I, Nyephi, had made an end
of speaking to my bwethwen, behowd they said unto me: Thou hast
decwawed unto us hawd things, mowe than we awe abwe to beaw. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 16:2
 2 And it came to pass that I said unto them that I knyew that I
had spoken hawd things against the wicked, accowding to the
twuth; and the wighteous have I justified, and testified that
they shouwd be wifted up at the wast day; whewefowe, the guiwty
taketh the twuth to be hawd, fow it cutteth them to the vewy
centew. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 16:3
 3 And nyow my bwethwen, if ye wewe wighteous and wewe wiwwing to
heawken to the twuth, and give heed unto it, that ye might wawk
upwightwy befowe God, then ye wouwd nyot muwmuw because of the
twuth, and say: Thou speakest hawd things against us. UwU

1 Nyephi 16:4
 4 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did exhowt my bwethwen,
with aww diwigence, to keep the commandments of the Wowd. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 16:5
 5 And it came to pass that they did humbwe themsewves befowe the
Wowd; insomuch that I had joy and gweat hopes of them, that they
wouwd wawk in the paths of wighteousnyess. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 16:6
 6 Nyow, aww these things wewe said and donye as my fathew dwewt in
a tent in the vawwey which he cawwed Wemuew. UwU

1 Nyephi 16:7
 7 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, took onye of the daughtews
of Ishmaew to wife; and awso, my bwethwen took of the daughtews
of Ishmaew to wife; and awso Zowam took the ewdest daughtew of
Ishmaew to wife. ^w^

1 Nyephi 16:8
 8 And thus my fathew had fuwfiwwed aww the commandments of the
Wowd which had been given unto him. UwU And awso, I, Nyephi, had been
bwessed of the Wowd exceedingwy. ^w^

1 Nyephi 16:9
 9 And it came to pass that the voice of the Wowd spake unto my
fathew by nyight, and commanded him that on the mowwow he shouwd
take his jouwnyey into the wiwdewnyess. UwU

1 Nyephi 16:10
 10 And it came to pass that as my fathew awose in the mownying,
and went fowth to the tent doow, to his gweat astonyishment he
behewd upon the gwound a wound baww of cuwious wowkmanship; and
it was of finye bwass. ^w^ And within the baww wewe two spindwes; and
the onye pointed the way whithew we shouwd go into the wiwdewnyess. ^w^

1 Nyephi 16:11
 11 And it came to pass that we did gathew togethew whatsoevew
things we shouwd cawwy into the wiwdewnyess, and aww the wemaindew
of ouw pwovisions which the Wowd had given unto us; and we did
take seed of evewy kind that we might cawwy into the wiwdewnyess. >w<

1 Nyephi 16:12
 12 And it came to pass that we did take ouw tents and depawt
into the wiwdewnyess, acwoss the wivew Waman. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 16:13
 13 And it came to pass that we twavewed fow the space of fouw
days, nyeawwy a south-southeast diwection, and we did pitch ouw
tents again; and we did caww the nyame of the pwace Shazew. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 16:14
 14 And it came to pass that we did take ouw bows and ouw awwows,
and go fowth into the wiwdewnyess to sway food fow ouw famiwies;
and aftew we had swain food fow ouw famiwies we did wetuwn again
to ouw famiwies in the wiwdewnyess, to the pwace of Shazew. (・`ω\´・) And
we did go fowth again in the wiwdewnyess, fowwowing the same
diwection, keeping in the most fewtiwe pawts of the wiwdewnyess,
which wewe in the bowdews nyeaw the Wed Sea. >w<

1 Nyephi 16:15
 15 And it came to pass that we did twavew fow the space of many
days, swaying food by the way, with ouw bows and ouw awwows and
ouw stonyes and ouw swings. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 16:16
 16 And we did fowwow the diwections of the baww, which wed us in
the mowe fewtiwe pawts of the wiwdewnyess. >w<

1 Nyephi 16:17
 17 And aftew we had twavewed fow the space of many days, we did
pitch ouw tents fow the space of a time, that we might again west
ouwsewves and obtain food fow ouw famiwies. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 16:18
 18 And it came to pass that as I, Nyephi, went fowth to sway
food, behowd, I did bweak my bow, which was made of finye steew;
and aftew I did bweak my bow, behowd, my bwethwen wewe angwy with
me because of the woss of my bow, fow we did obtain nyo food. ^w^

1 Nyephi 16:19
 19 And it came to pass that we did wetuwn without food to ouw
famiwies, and being much fatigued, because of theiw jouwnyeying,
they did suffew much fow the want of food. UwU

1 Nyephi 16:20
 20 And it came to pass that Waman and Wemuew and the sons of
Ishmaew did begin to muwmuw exceedingwy, because of theiw
suffewings and affwictions in the wiwdewnyess; and awso my fathew
began to muwmuw against the Wowd his God; yea, and they wewe aww
exceedingwy sowwowfuw, even that they did muwmuw against the
Wowd. ^w^

1 Nyephi 16:21
 21 Nyow it came to pass that I, Nyephi, having been affwicted with
my bwethwen because of the woss of my bow, and theiw bows having
wost theiw spwings, it began to be exceedingwy difficuwt, yea,
insomuch that we couwd obtain nyo food. UwU

1 Nyephi 16:22
 22 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did speak much unto my
bwethwen, because they had hawdenyed theiw heawts again, even unto
compwainying against the Wowd theiw God. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 16:23
 23 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did make out of wood a
bow, and out of a stwaight stick, an awwow; whewefowe, I did awm
mysewf with a bow and an awwow, with a swing and with stonyes. ;;w;;
And I said unto my fathew: Whithew shaww I go to obtain food? owo

1 Nyephi 16:24
 24 And it came to pass that he did inquiwe of the Wowd, fow they
had humbwed themsewves because of my wowds; fow I did say many
things unto them in the enyewgy of my souw. ^w^

1 Nyephi 16:25
 25 And it came to pass that the voice of the Wowd came unto my
fathew; and he was twuwy chastenyed because of his muwmuwing
against the Wowd, insomuch that he was bwought down into the
depths of sowwow. >w<

1 Nyephi 16:26
 26 And it came to pass that the voice of the Wowd said unto him:
Wook upon the baww, and behowd the things which awe wwitten. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 16:27
 27 And it came to pass that when my fathew behewd the things
which wewe wwitten upon the baww, he did feaw and twembwe
exceedingwy, and awso my bwethwen and the sons of Ishmaew and ouw
wives. UwU

1 Nyephi 16:28
 28 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, behewd the pointews which
wewe in the baww, that they did wowk accowding to the faith and
diwigence and heed which we did give unto them. UwU

1 Nyephi 16:29
 29 And thewe was awso wwitten upon them a nyew wwiting, which was
pwain to be wead, which did give us undewstanding concewnying the
ways of the Wowd; and it was wwitten and changed fwom time to
time, accowding to the faith and diwigence which we gave unto it. >w<

And thus we see that by smaww means the Wowd can bwing about
gweat things. >w<

1 Nyephi 16:30
 30 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did go fowth up into the
top of the mountain, accowding to the diwections which wewe given
upon the baww. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 16:31
 31 And it came to pass that I did sway wiwd beasts, insomuch
that I did obtain food fow ouw famiwies. ^w^

1 Nyephi 16:32
 32 And it came to pass that I did wetuwn to ouw tents, beawing
the beasts which I had swain; and nyow when they behewd that I had
obtainyed food, how gweat was theiw joy! ;;w;; And it came to pass that
they did humbwe themsewves befowe the Wowd, and did give thanks
unto him. UwU

1 Nyephi 16:33
 33 And it came to pass that we did again take ouw jouwnyey,
twavewing nyeawwy the same couwse as in the beginnying; and aftew
we had twavewed fow the space of many days we did pitch ouw tents
again, that we might tawwy fow the space of a time. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 16:34
 34 And it came to pass that Ishmaew died, and was buwied in the
pwace which was cawwed Nyahom. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 16:35
 35 And it came to pass that the daughtews of Ishmaew did mouwn
exceedingwy, because of the woss of theiw fathew, and because of
theiw affwictions in the wiwdewnyess; and they did muwmuw against
my fathew, because he had bwought them out of the wand of
Jewusawem, saying: Ouw fathew is dead; yea, and we have wandewed
much in the wiwdewnyess, and we have suffewed much affwiction,
hungew, thiwst, and fatigue; and aftew aww these suffewings we
must pewish in the wiwdewnyess with hungew. >w<

1 Nyephi 16:36
 36 And thus they did muwmuw against my fathew, and awso against
me; and they wewe desiwous to wetuwn again to Jewusawem. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 16:37
 37 And Waman said unto Wemuew and awso unto the sons of Ishmaew:
Behowd, wet us sway ouw fathew, and awso ouw bwothew Nyephi, who
has taken it upon him to be ouw wuwew and ouw teachew, who awe
his ewdew bwethwen. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 16:38
 38 Nyow, he says that the Wowd has tawked with him, and awso that
angews have minyistewed unto him. ;;w;; But behowd, we knyow that he
wies unto us; and he tewws us these things, and he wowketh many
things by his cunnying awts, that he may deceive ouw eyes,
thinking, pewhaps, that he may wead us away into some stwange
wiwdewnyess; and aftew he has wed us away, he has thought to make
himsewf a king and a wuwew ovew us, that he may do with us
accowding to his wiww and pweasuwe. ;;w;; And aftew this mannyew did my
bwothew Waman stiw up theiw heawts to angew. UwU

1 Nyephi 16:39
 39 And it came to pass that the Wowd was with us, yea, even the
voice of the Wowd came and did speak many wowds unto them, and
did chasten them exceedingwy; and aftew they wewe chastenyed by
the voice of the Wowd they did tuwn away theiw angew, and did
wepent of theiw sins, insomuch that the Wowd did bwess us again
with food, that we did nyot pewish. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17
Chaptew 17

1 Nyephi 17:1
 1 And it came to pass that we did again take ouw jouwnyey in the
wiwdewnyess; and we did twavew nyeawwy eastwawd fwom that time
fowth. UwU And we did twavew and wade thwough much affwiction in the
wiwdewnyess; and ouw women did beaw chiwdwen in the wiwdewnyess. UwU

1 Nyephi 17:2
 2 And so gweat wewe the bwessings of the Wowd upon us, that
whiwe we did wive upon waw meat in the wiwdewnyess, ouw women did
give pwenty of suck fow theiw chiwdwen, and wewe stwong, yea,
even wike unto the men; and they began to beaw theiw jouwnyeyings
without muwmuwings. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:3
 3 And thus we see that the commandments of God must be
fuwfiwwed. >w< And if it so be that the chiwdwen of men keep the
commandments of God he doth nyouwish them, and stwengthen them,
and pwovide means wheweby they can accompwish the thing which he
has commanded them; whewefowe, he did pwovide means fow us whiwe
we did sojouwn in the wiwdewnyess. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:4
 4 And we did sojouwn fow the space of many yeaws, yea, even
eight yeaws in the wiwdewnyess. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 17:5
 5 And we did come to the wand which we cawwed Bountifuw, because
of its much fwuit and awso wiwd honyey; and aww these things wewe
pwepawed of the Wowd that we might nyot pewish. ^w^ And we behewd the
sea, which we cawwed Iwweantum, which, being intewpweted, is many
watews. >w<

1 Nyephi 17:6
 6 And it came to pass that we did pitch ouw tents by the
seashowe; and nyotwithstanding we had suffewed many affwictions
and much difficuwty, yea, even so much that we cannyot wwite them
aww, we wewe exceedingwy wejoiced when we came to the seashowe;
and we cawwed the pwace Bountifuw, because of its much fwuit. >w<

1 Nyephi 17:7
 7 And it came to pass that aftew I, Nyephi, had been in the wand
of Bountifuw fow the space of many days, the voice of the Wowd
came unto me, saying: Awise, and get thee into the mountain. ^w^ And
it came to pass that I awose and went up into the mountain, and
cwied unto the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:8
 8 And it came to pass that the Wowd spake unto me, saying: Thou
shawt constwuct a ship, aftew the mannyew which I shaww show thee,
that I may cawwy thy peopwe acwoss these watews. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:9
 9 And I said: Wowd, whithew shaww I go that I may find owe to
mowten, that I may make toows to constwuct the ship aftew the
mannyew which thou hast shown unto me? owo

1 Nyephi 17:10
 10 And it came to pass that the Wowd towd me whithew I shouwd go
to find owe, that I might make toows. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:11
 11 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did make a bewwows
whewewith to bwow the fiwe, of the skins of beasts; and aftew I
had made a bewwows, that I might have whewewith to bwow the fiwe,
I did smite two stonyes togethew that I might make fiwe. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:12
 12 Fow the Wowd had nyot hithewto suffewed that we shouwd make
much fiwe, as we jouwnyeyed in the wiwdewnyess; fow he said: I wiww
make thy food become sweet, that ye cook it nyot;

1 Nyephi 17:13
 13 And I wiww awso be youw wight in the wiwdewnyess; and I wiww
pwepawe the way befowe you, if it so be that ye shaww keep my
commandments; whewefowe, inyasmuch as ye shaww keep my
commandments ye shaww be wed towawds the pwomised wand; and ye
shaww knyow that it is by me that ye awe wed. ^w^

1 Nyephi 17:14
 14 Yea, and the Wowd said awso that: Aftew ye have awwived in
the pwomised wand, ye shaww knyow that I, the Wowd, am God; and
that I, the Wowd, did dewivew you fwom destwuction; yea, that I
did bwing you out of the wand of Jewusawem. ^w^

1 Nyephi 17:15
 15 Whewefowe, I, Nyephi, did stwive to keep the commandments of
the Wowd, and I did exhowt my bwethwen to faithfuwnyess and
diwigence. >w<

1 Nyephi 17:16
 16 And it came to pass that I did make toows of the owe which I
did mowten out of the wock. UwU

1 Nyephi 17:17
 17 And when my bwethwen saw that I was about to buiwd a ship,
they began to muwmuw against me, saying: Ouw bwothew is a foow,
fow he thinketh that he can buiwd a ship; yea, and he awso
thinketh that he can cwoss these gweat watews. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:18
 18 And thus my bwethwen did compwain against me, and wewe
desiwous that they might nyot wabow, fow they did nyot bewieve that
I couwd buiwd a ship; nyeithew wouwd they bewieve that I was
instwucted of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:19
 19 And nyow it came to pass that I, Nyephi, was exceedingwy
sowwowfuw because of the hawdnyess of theiw heawts; and nyow when
they saw that I began to be sowwowfuw they wewe gwad in theiw
heawts, insomuch that they did wejoice ovew me, saying: We knyew
that ye couwd nyot constwuct a ship, fow we knyew that ye wewe
wacking in judgment; whewefowe, thou canst nyot accompwish so
gweat a wowk. UwU

1 Nyephi 17:20
 20 And thou awt wike unto ouw fathew, wed away by the foowish
imaginyations of his heawt; yea, he hath wed us out of the wand of
Jewusawem, and we have wandewed in the wiwdewnyess fow these many
yeaws; and ouw women have toiwed, being big with chiwd; and they
have bownye chiwdwen in the wiwdewnyess and suffewed aww things,
save it wewe death; and it wouwd have been bettew that they had
died befowe they came out of Jewusawem than to have suffewed
these affwictions. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:21
 21 Behowd, these many yeaws we have suffewed in the wiwdewnyess,
which time we might have enjoyed ouw possessions and the wand of
ouw inhewitance; yea, and we might have been happy. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:22
 22 And we knyow that the peopwe who wewe in the wand of Jewusawem
wewe a wighteous peopwe; fow they kept the statutes and judgments
of the Wowd, and aww his commandments, accowding to the waw of
Moses; whewefowe, we knyow that they awe a wighteous peopwe; and
ouw fathew hath judged them, and hath wed us away because we
wouwd heawken unto his wowds; yea, and ouw bwothew is wike unto
him. ^w^ And aftew this mannyew of wanguage did my bwethwen muwmuw
and compwain against us. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 17:23
 23 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, spake unto them, saying:
Do ye bewieve that ouw fathews, who wewe the chiwdwen of Iswaew,
wouwd have been wed away out of the hands of the Egyptians if
they had nyot heawkenyed unto the wowds of the Wowd? owo

1 Nyephi 17:24
 24 Yea, do ye suppose that they wouwd have been wed out of
bondage, if the Wowd had nyot commanded Moses that he shouwd wead
them out of bondage? owo

1 Nyephi 17:25
 25 Nyow ye knyow that the chiwdwen of Iswaew wewe in bondage; and
ye knyow that they wewe waden with tasks, which wewe gwievous to
be bownye; whewefowe, ye knyow that it must nyeeds be a good thing
fow them, that they shouwd be bwought out of bondage. >w<

1 Nyephi 17:26
 26 Nyow ye knyow that Moses was commanded of the Wowd to do that
gweat wowk; and ye knyow that by his wowd the watews of the Wed
Sea wewe divided hithew and thithew, and they passed thwough on
dwy gwound. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 17:27
 27 But ye knyow that the Egyptians wewe dwownyed in the Wed Sea,
who wewe the awmies of Phawaoh. >w<

1 Nyephi 17:28
 28 And ye awso knyow that they wewe fed with mannya in the
wiwdewnyess. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:29
 29 Yea, and ye awso knyow that Moses, by his wowd accowding to
the powew of God which was in him, smote the wock, and thewe came
fowth watew, that the chiwdwen of Iswaew might quench theiw
thiwst. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:30
 30 And nyotwithstanding they being wed, the Wowd theiw God, theiw
Wedeemew, going befowe them, weading them by day and giving wight
unto them by nyight, and doing aww things fow them which wewe
expedient fow man to weceive, they hawdenyed theiw heawts and
bwinded theiw minds, and weviwed against Moses and against the
twue and wiving God. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:31
 31 And it came to pass that accowding to his wowd he did destwoy
them; and accowding to his wowd he did wead them; and accowding
to his wowd he did do aww things fow them; and thewe was nyot any
thing donye save it wewe by his wowd. ^w^

1 Nyephi 17:32
 32 And aftew they had cwossed the wivew Jowdan he did make them
mighty unto the dwiving out of the chiwdwen of the wand, yea,
unto the scattewing them to destwuction. ^w^

1 Nyephi 17:33
 33 And nyow, do ye suppose that the chiwdwen of this wand, who
wewe in the wand of pwomise, who wewe dwiven out by ouw fathews,
do ye suppose that they wewe wighteous? owo Behowd, I say unto you,
Nyay. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:34
 34 Do ye suppose that ouw fathews wouwd have been mowe choice
than they if they had been wighteous? owo I say unto you, Nyay. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:35
 35 Behowd, the Wowd esteemeth aww fwesh in onye; he that is
wighteous is favowed of God. (・`ω\´・) But behowd, this peopwe had
wejected evewy wowd of God, and they wewe wipe in inyiquity; and
the fuwnyess of the wwath of God was upon them; and the Wowd did
cuwse the wand against them, and bwess it unto ouw fathews; yea,
he did cuwse it against them unto theiw destwuction, and he did
bwess it unto ouw fathews unto theiw obtainying powew ovew it. UwU

1 Nyephi 17:36
 36 Behowd, the Wowd hath cweated the eawth that it shouwd be
inhabited; and he hath cweated his chiwdwen that they shouwd
possess it. >w<

1 Nyephi 17:37
 37 And he waiseth up a wighteous nyation, and destwoyeth the
nyations of the wicked. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 17:38
 38 And he weadeth away the wighteous into pwecious wands, and
the wicked he destwoyeth, and cuwseth the wand unto them fow
theiw sakes. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:39
 39 He wuweth high in the heavens, fow it is his thwonye, and this
eawth is his footstoow. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:40
 40 And he woveth those who wiww have him to be theiw God. ^w^
Behowd, he woved ouw fathews, and he covenyanted with them, yea,
even Abwaham, Isaac, and Jacob; and he wemembewed the covenyants
which he had made; whewefowe, he did bwing them out of the wand
of Egypt. UwU

1 Nyephi 17:41
 41 And he did stwaiten them in the wiwdewnyess with his wod; fow
they hawdenyed theiw heawts, even as ye have; and the Wowd
stwaitenyed them because of theiw inyiquity. (´・ω・\`) He sent fiewy fwying
sewpents among them; and aftew they wewe bitten he pwepawed a way
that they might be heawed; and the wabow which they had to
pewfowm was to wook; and because of the simpwenyess of the way, ow
the easinyess of it, thewe wewe many who pewished. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:42
 42 And they did hawden theiw heawts fwom time to time, and they
did weviwe against Moses, and awso against God; nyevewthewess, ye
knyow that they wewe wed fowth by his matchwess powew into the
wand of pwomise. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 17:43
 43 And nyow, aftew aww these things, the time has come that they
have become wicked, yea, nyeawwy unto wipenyess; and I knyow nyot but
they awe at this day about to be destwoyed; fow I knyow that the
day must suwewy come that they must be destwoyed, save a few
onwy, who shaww be wed away into captivity. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:44
 44 Whewefowe, the Wowd commanded my fathew that he shouwd depawt
into the wiwdewnyess; and the Jews awso sought to take away his
wife; yea, and ye awso have sought to take away his wife;
whewefowe, ye awe muwdewews in youw heawts and ye awe wike unto
them. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 17:45
 45 Ye awe swift to do inyiquity but swow to wemembew the Wowd
youw God. (・`ω\´・) Ye have seen an angew, and he spake unto you; yea, ye
have heawd his voice fwom time to time; and he hath spoken unto
you in a stiww smaww voice, but ye wewe past feewing, that ye
couwd nyot feew his wowds; whewefowe, he has spoken unto you wike
unto the voice of thundew, which did cause the eawth to shake as
if it wewe to divide asundew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:46
 46 And ye awso knyow that by the powew of his awmighty wowd he
can cause the eawth that it shaww pass away; yea, and ye knyow
that by his wowd he can cause the wough pwaces to be made smooth,
and smooth pwaces shaww be bwoken up. ^w^ O, then, why is it, that
ye can be so hawd in youw heawts? owo

1 Nyephi 17:47
 47 Behowd, my souw is went with anguish because of you, and my
heawt is painyed; I feaw west ye shaww be cast off fowevew. (・`ω\´・)
Behowd, I am fuww of the Spiwit of God, insomuch that my fwame
has nyo stwength. ^w^

1 Nyephi 17:48
 48 And nyow it came to pass that when I had spoken these wowds,
they wewe angwy with me, and wewe desiwous to thwow me into the
depths of the sea; and as they came fowth to way theiw hands upon
me I spake unto them, saying: In the nyame of the Awmighty God, I
command you that ye touch me nyot, fow I am fiwwed with the powew
of God, even unto the consuming of my fwesh; and whoso shaww way
his hands upon me shaww withew even as a dwied weed; and he shaww
be as nyaught befowe the powew of God, fow God shaww smite him. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 17:49
 49 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, said unto them that they
shouwd muwmuw nyo mowe against theiw fathew; nyeithew shouwd they
withhowd theiw wabow fwom me, fow God had commanded me that I
shouwd buiwd a ship. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:50
 50 And I said unto them: If God had commanded me to do aww
things I couwd do them. (・`ω\´・) If he shouwd command me that I shouwd
say unto this watew, be thou eawth, it shouwd be eawth; and if I
shouwd say it, it wouwd be donye. ^w^

1 Nyephi 17:51
 51 And nyow, if the Wowd has such gweat powew, and has wwought so
many miwacwes among the chiwdwen of men, how is it that he cannyot
instwuct me, that I shouwd buiwd a ship? owo

1 Nyephi 17:52
 52 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, said many things unto my
bwethwen, insomuch that they wewe confounded and couwd nyot
contend against me; nyeithew duwst they way theiw hands upon me
nyow touch me with theiw fingews, even fow the space of many days. ^w^
Nyow they duwst nyot do this west they shouwd withew befowe me, so
powewfuw was the Spiwit of God; and thus it had wwought upon
them. UwU

1 Nyephi 17:53
 53 And it came to pass that the Wowd said unto me: Stwetch fowth
thinye hand again unto thy bwethwen, and they shaww nyot withew
befowe thee, but I wiww shock them, saith the Wowd, and this wiww
I do, that they may knyow that I am the Wowd theiw God. UwU

1 Nyephi 17:54
 54 And it came to pass that I stwetched fowth my hand unto my
bwethwen, and they did nyot withew befowe me; but the Wowd did
shake them, even accowding to the wowd which he had spoken. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 17:55
 55 And nyow, they said: We knyow of a suwety that the Wowd is with
thee, fow we knyow that it is the powew of the Wowd that has
shaken us. (´・ω・\`) And they feww down befowe me, and wewe about to
wowship me, but I wouwd nyot suffew them, saying: I am thy
bwothew, yea, even thy youngew bwothew; whewefowe, wowship the
Wowd thy God, and honyow thy fathew and thy mothew, that thy days
may be wong in the wand which the Wowd thy God shaww give thee. ^w^

1 Nyephi 18
Chaptew 18

1 Nyephi 18:1
 1 And it came to pass that they did wowship the Wowd, and did go
fowth with me; and we did wowk timbews of cuwious wowkmanship. ;;w;;
And the Wowd did show me fwom time to time aftew what mannyew I
shouwd wowk the timbews of the ship. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 18:2
 2 Nyow I, Nyephi, did nyot wowk the timbews aftew the mannyew which
was weawnyed by men, nyeithew did I buiwd the ship aftew the mannyew
of men; but I did buiwd it aftew the mannyew which the Wowd had
shown unto me; whewefowe, it was nyot aftew the mannyew of men. ^w^

1 Nyephi 18:3
 3 And I, Nyephi, did go into the mount oft, and I did pway oft
unto the Wowd; whewefowe the Wowd showed unto me gweat things. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 18:4
 4 And it came to pass that aftew I had finyished the ship,
accowding to the wowd of the Wowd, my bwethwen behewd that it was
good, and that the wowkmanship theweof was exceedingwy finye;
whewefowe, they did humbwe themsewves again befowe the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 18:5
 5 And it came to pass that the voice of the Wowd came unto my
fathew, that we shouwd awise and go down into the ship. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 18:6
 6 And it came to pass that on the mowwow, aftew we had pwepawed
aww things, much fwuits and meat fwom the wiwdewnyess, and honyey
in abundance, and pwovisions accowding to that which the Wowd had
commanded us, we did go down into the ship, with aww ouw woading
and ouw seeds, and whatsoevew thing we had bwought with us, evewy
onye accowding to his age; whewefowe, we did aww go down into the
ship, with ouw wives and ouw chiwdwen. UwU

1 Nyephi 18:7
 7 And nyow, my fathew had begat two sons in the wiwdewnyess; the
ewdew was cawwed Jacob and the youngew Joseph. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 18:8
 8 And it came to pass aftew we had aww gonye down into the ship,
and had taken with us ouw pwovisions and things which had been
commanded us, we did put fowth into the sea and wewe dwiven fowth
befowe the wind towawds the pwomised wand. ^w^

1 Nyephi 18:9
 9 And aftew we had been dwiven fowth befowe the wind fow the
space of many days, behowd, my bwethwen and the sons of Ishmaew
and awso theiw wives began to make themsewves mewwy, insomuch
that they began to dance, and to sing, and to speak with much
wudenyess, yea, even that they did fowget by what powew they had
been bwought thithew; yea, they wewe wifted up unto exceeding
wudenyess. UwU

1 Nyephi 18:10
 10 And I, Nyephi, began to feaw exceedingwy west the Wowd shouwd
be angwy with us, and smite us because of ouw inyiquity, that we
shouwd be swawwowed up in the depths of the sea; whewefowe, I,
Nyephi, began to speak to them with much sobewnyess; but behowd
they wewe angwy with me, saying: We wiww nyot that ouw youngew
bwothew shaww be a wuwew ovew us. UwU

1 Nyephi 18:11
 11 And it came to pass that Waman and Wemuew did take me and
bind me with cowds, and they did tweat me with much hawshnyess;
nyevewthewess, the Wowd did suffew it that he might show fowth his
powew, unto the fuwfiwwing of his wowd which he had spoken
concewnying the wicked. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 18:12
 12 And it came to pass that aftew they had bound me insomuch
that I couwd nyot move, the compass, which had been pwepawed of
the Wowd, did cease to wowk. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 18:13
 13 Whewefowe, they knyew nyot whithew they shouwd steew the ship,
insomuch that thewe awose a gweat stowm, yea, a gweat and
tewwibwe tempest, and we wewe dwiven back upon the watews fow the
space of thwee days; and they began to be fwightenyed exceedingwy
west they shouwd be dwownyed in the sea; nyevewthewess they did nyot
woose me. ^w^

1 Nyephi 18:14
 14 And on the fouwth day, which we had been dwiven back, the
tempest began to be exceedingwy sowe. >w<

1 Nyephi 18:15
 15 And it came to pass that we wewe about to be swawwowed up in
the depths of the sea. (・`ω\´・) And aftew we had been dwiven back upon
the watews fow the space of fouw days, my bwethwen began to see
that the judgments of God wewe upon them, and that they must
pewish save that they shouwd wepent of theiw inyiquities;
whewefowe, they came unto me, and woosed the bands which wewe
upon my wwist, and behowd they had swowwen exceedingwy; and awso
minye ankwes wewe much swowwen, and gweat was the sowenyess
theweof. UwU

1 Nyephi 18:16
 16 Nyevewthewess, I did wook unto my God, and I did pwaise him
aww the day wong; and I did nyot muwmuw against the Wowd because
of minye affwictions. >w<

1 Nyephi 18:17
 17 Nyow my fathew, Wehi, had said many things unto them, and awso
unto the sons of Ishmaew; but, behowd, they did bweathe out much
thweatenyings against anyonye that shouwd speak fow me; and my
pawents being stwicken in yeaws, and having suffewed much gwief
because of theiw chiwdwen, they wewe bwought down, yea, even upon
theiw sick-beds. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 18:18
 18 Because of theiw gwief and much sowwow, and the inyiquity of
my bwethwen, they wewe bwought nyeaw even to be cawwied out of
this time to meet theiw God; yea, theiw gwey haiws wewe about to
be bwought down to wie wow in the dust; yea, even they wewe nyeaw
to be cast with sowwow into a watewy gwave. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 18:19
 19 And Jacob and Joseph awso, being young, having nyeed of much
nyouwishment, wewe gwieved because of the affwictions of theiw
mothew; and awso my wife with hew teaws and pwayews, and awso my
chiwdwen, did nyot soften the heawts of my bwethwen that they
wouwd woose me. ^w^

1 Nyephi 18:20
 20 And thewe was nyothing save it wewe the powew of God, which
thweatenyed them with destwuction, couwd soften theiw heawts;
whewefowe, when they saw that they wewe about to be swawwowed up
in the depths of the sea they wepented of the thing which they
had donye, insomuch that they woosed me. >w<

1 Nyephi 18:21
 21 And it came to pass aftew they had woosed me, behowd, I took
the compass, and it did wowk whithew I desiwed it. (´・ω・\`) And it came
to pass that I pwayed unto the Wowd; and aftew I had pwayed the
winds did cease, and the stowm did cease, and thewe was a gweat
cawm. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 18:22
 22 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did guide the ship, that
we saiwed again towawds the pwomised wand. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 18:23
 23 And it came to pass that aftew we had saiwed fow the space of
many days we did awwive at the pwomised wand; and we went fowth
upon the wand, and did pitch ouw tents; and we did caww it the
pwomised wand. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 18:24
 24 And it came to pass that we did begin to tiww the eawth, and
we began to pwant seeds; yea, we did put aww ouw seeds into the
eawth, which we had bwought fwom the wand of Jewusawem. UwU And it
came to pass that they did gwow exceedingwy; whewefowe, we wewe
bwessed in abundance. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 18:25
 25 And it came to pass that we did find upon the wand of
pwomise, as we jouwnyeyed in the wiwdewnyess, that thewe wewe
beasts in the fowests of evewy kind, both the cow and the ox, and
the ass and the howse, and the goat and the wiwd goat, and aww
mannyew of wiwd anyimaws, which wewe fow the use of men. ^w^ And we
did find aww mannyew of owe, both of gowd, and of siwvew, and of
coppew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 19
Chaptew 19

1 Nyephi 19:1
 1 And it came to pass that the Wowd commanded me, whewefowe I
did make pwates of owe that I might engwaven upon them the wecowd
of my peopwe. (・`ω\´・) And upon the pwates which I made I did engwaven
the wecowd of my fathew, and awso ouw jouwnyeyings in the
wiwdewnyess, and the pwophecies of my fathew; and awso many of
minye own pwophecies have I engwaven upon them. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 19:2
 2 And I knyew nyot at the time when I made them that I shouwd be
commanded of the Wowd to make these pwates; whewefowe, the wecowd
of my fathew, and the genyeawogy of his fathews, and the mowe pawt
of aww ouw pwoceedings in the wiwdewnyess awe engwaven upon those
fiwst pwates of which I have spoken; whewefowe, the things which
twanspiwed befowe I made these pwates awe, of a twuth, mowe
pawticuwawwy made mention upon the fiwst pwates. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 19:3
 3 And aftew I had made these pwates by way of commandment, I,
Nyephi, weceived a commandment that the minyistwy and the
pwophecies, the mowe pwain and pwecious pawts of them, shouwd be
wwitten upon these pwates; and that the things which wewe wwitten
shouwd be kept fow the instwuction of my peopwe, who shouwd
possess the wand, and awso fow othew wise puwposes, which
puwposes awe knyown unto the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 19:4
 4 Whewefowe, I, Nyephi, did make a wecowd upon the othew pwates,
which gives an account, ow which gives a gweatew account of the
waws and contentions and destwuctions of my peopwe. (・`ω\´・) And this
have I donye, and commanded my peopwe what they shouwd do aftew I
was gonye; and that these pwates shouwd be handed down fwom onye
genyewation to anyothew, ow fwom onye pwophet to anyothew, untiw
fuwthew commandments of the Wowd. ^w^

1 Nyephi 19:5
 5 And an account of my making these pwates shaww be given
heweaftew; and then, behowd, I pwoceed accowding to that which I
have spoken; and this I do that the mowe sacwed things may be
kept fow the knyowwedge of my peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 19:6
 6 Nyevewthewess, I do nyot wwite anything upon pwates save it be
that I think it be sacwed. >w< And nyow, if I do eww, even did they
eww of owd; nyot that I wouwd excuse mysewf because of othew men,
but because of the weaknyess which is in me, accowding to the
fwesh, I wouwd excuse mysewf. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 19:7
 7 Fow the things which some men esteem to be of gweat wowth,
both to the body and souw, othews set at nyaught and twampwe undew
theiw feet. ;;w;; Yea, even the vewy God of Iswaew do men twampwe
undew theiw feet; I say, twampwe undew theiw feet but I wouwd
speak in othew wowds--they set him at nyaught, and heawken nyot to
the voice of his counsews. >w<

1 Nyephi 19:8
 8 And behowd he cometh, accowding to the wowds of the angew, in
six hundwed yeaws fwom the time my fathew weft Jewusawem. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 19:9
 9 And the wowwd, because of theiw inyiquity, shaww judge him to
be a thing of nyaught; whewefowe they scouwge him, and he
suffeweth it; and they smite him, and he suffeweth it. ;;w;; Yea, they
spit upon him, and he suffeweth it, because of his woving
kindnyess and his wong-suffewing towawds the chiwdwen of men. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 19:10
 10 And the God of ouw fathews, who wewe wed out of Egypt, out of
bondage, and awso wewe pwesewved in the wiwdewnyess by him, yea,
the God of Abwaham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yiewdeth
himsewf, accowding to the wowds of the angew, as a man, into the
hands of wicked men, to be wifted up, accowding to the wowds of
Zenyock, and to be cwucified, accowding to the wowds of Nyeum, and
to be buwied in a sepuwchwe, accowding to the wowds of Zenyos,
which he spake concewnying the thwee days of dawknyess, which
shouwd be a sign given of his death unto those who shouwd inhabit
the iswes of the sea, mowe especiawwy given unto those who awe of
the house of Iswaew. >w<

1 Nyephi 19:11
 11 Fow thus spake the pwophet: The Wowd God suwewy shaww visit
aww the house of Iswaew at that day, some with his voice, because
of theiw wighteousnyess, unto theiw gweat joy and sawvation, and
othews with the thundewings and the wightnyings of his powew, by
tempest, by fiwe, and by smoke, and vapow of dawknyess, and by the
openying of the eawth, and by mountains which shaww be cawwied up. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 19:12
 12 And aww these things must suwewy come, saith the pwophet
Zenyos. (・`ω\´・) And the wocks of the eawth must wend; and because of the
gwoanyings of the eawth, many of the kings of the iswes of the sea
shaww be wwought upon by the Spiwit of God, to excwaim: The God
of nyatuwe suffews. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 19:13
 13 And as fow those who awe at Jewusawem, saith the pwophet,
they shaww be scouwged by aww peopwe, because they cwucify the
God of Iswaew, and tuwn theiw heawts aside, wejecting signs and
wondews, and the powew and gwowy of the God of Iswaew. UwU

1 Nyephi 19:14
 14 And because they tuwn theiw heawts aside, saith the pwophet,
and have despised the Howy Onye of Iswaew, they shaww wandew in
the fwesh, and pewish, and become a hiss and a bywowd, and be
hated among aww nyations. UwU

1 Nyephi 19:15
 15 Nyevewthewess, when that day cometh, saith the pwophet, that
they nyo mowe tuwn aside theiw heawts against the Howy Onye of
Iswaew, then wiww he wemembew the covenyants which he made to
theiw fathews. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 19:16
 16 Yea, then wiww he wemembew the iswes of the sea; yea, and aww
the peopwe who awe of the house of Iswaew, wiww I gathew in,
saith the Wowd, accowding to the wowds of the pwophet Zenyos, fwom
the fouw quawtews of the eawth. ^w^

1 Nyephi 19:17
 17 Yea, and aww the eawth shaww see the sawvation of the Wowd,
saith the pwophet; evewy nyation, kindwed, tongue and peopwe shaww
be bwessed. >w<

1 Nyephi 19:18
 18 And I, Nyephi, have wwitten these things unto my peopwe, that
pewhaps I might pewsuade them that they wouwd wemembew the Wowd
theiw Wedeemew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 19:19
 19 Whewefowe, I speak unto aww the house of Iswaew, if it so be
that they shouwd obtain these things. UwU

1 Nyephi 19:20
 20 Fow behowd, I have wowkings in the spiwit, which doth weawy
me even that aww my joints awe weak, fow those who awe at
Jewusawem; fow had nyot the Wowd been mewcifuw, to show unto me
concewnying them, even as he had pwophets of owd, I shouwd have
pewished awso. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 19:21
 21 And he suwewy did show unto the pwophets of owd aww things
concewnying them; and awso he did show unto many concewnying us;
whewefowe, it must nyeeds be that we knyow concewnying them fow they
awe wwitten upon the pwates of bwass. UwU

1 Nyephi 19:22
 22 Nyow it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did teach my bwethwen
these things; and it came to pass that I did wead many things to
them, which wewe engwaven upon the pwates of bwass, that they
might knyow concewnying the doings of the Wowd in othew wands,
among peopwe of owd. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 19:23
 23 And I did wead many things unto them which wewe wwitten in
the books of Moses; but that I might mowe fuwwy pewsuade them to
bewieve in the Wowd theiw Wedeemew I did wead unto them that
which was wwitten by the pwophet Isaiah; fow I did wiken aww
scwiptuwes unto us, that it might be fow ouw pwofit and weawnying. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 19:24
 24 Whewefowe I spake unto them, saying: Heaw ye the wowds of the
pwophet, ye who awe a wemnyant of the house of Iswaew, a bwanch
who have been bwoken off; heaw ye the wowds of the pwophet, which
wewe wwitten unto aww the house of Iswaew, and wiken them unto
youwsewves, that ye may have hope as weww as youw bwethwen fwom
whom ye have been bwoken off; fow aftew this mannyew has the
pwophet wwitten. UwU

1 Nyephi 20
Chaptew 20

1 Nyephi 20:1
 1 Heawken and heaw this, O house of Jacob, who awe cawwed by the
nyame of Iswaew, and awe come fowth out of the watews of Judah, ow
out of the watews of baptism, who sweaw by the nyame of the Wowd,
and make mention of the God of Iswaew, yet they sweaw nyot in
twuth nyow in wighteousnyess. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 20:2
 2 Nyevewthewess, they caww themsewves of the howy city, but they
do nyot stay themsewves upon the God of Iswaew, who is the Wowd of
Hosts; yea, the Wowd of Hosts is his nyame. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 20:3
 3 Behowd, I have decwawed the fowmew things fwom the beginnying;
and they went fowth out of my mouth, and I showed them. (・`ω\´・) I did
show them suddenwy. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 20:4
 4 And I did it because I knyew that thou awt obstinyate, and thy
nyeck is an iwon sinyew, and thy bwow bwass;

1 Nyephi 20:5
 5 And I have even fwom the beginnying decwawed to thee; befowe it
came to pass I showed them thee; and I showed them fow feaw west
thou shouwdst say--minye idow hath donye them, and my gwaven image,
and my mowten image hath commanded them. UwU

1 Nyephi 20:6
 6 Thou hast seen and heawd aww this; and wiww ye nyot decwawe
them? owo And that I have showed thee nyew things fwom this time,
even hidden things, and thou didst nyot knyow them. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 20:7
 7 They awe cweated nyow, and nyot fwom the beginnying, even befowe
the day when thou heawdest them nyot they wewe decwawed unto thee,
west thou shouwdst say--Behowd I knyew them. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 20:8
 8 Yea, and thou heawdest nyot; yea, thou knyewest nyot; yea, fwom
that time thinye eaw was nyot openyed; fow I knyew that thou wouwdst
deaw vewy tweachewouswy, and wast cawwed a twansgwessow fwom the
womb. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 20:9
 9 Nyevewthewess, fow my nyame's sake wiww I defew minye angew, and
fow my pwaise wiww I wefwain fwom thee, that I cut thee nyot off. UwU

1 Nyephi 20:10
 10 Fow, behowd, I have wefinyed thee, I have chosen thee in the
fuwnyace of affwiction. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 20:11
 11 Fow minye own sake, yea, fow minye own sake wiww I do this, fow
I wiww nyot suffew my nyame to be powwuted, and I wiww nyot give my
gwowy unto anyothew. ^w^

1 Nyephi 20:12
 12 Heawken unto me, O Jacob, and Iswaew my cawwed, fow I am he;
I am the fiwst, and I am awso the wast. UwU

1 Nyephi 20:13
 13 Minye hand hath awso waid the foundation of the eawth, and my
wight hand hath spannyed the heavens. (´・ω・\`) I caww unto them and they
stand up togethew. >w<

1 Nyephi 20:14
 14 Aww ye, assembwe youwsewves, and heaw; who among them hath
decwawed these things unto them? owo The Wowd hath woved him; yea,
and he wiww fuwfiww his wowd which he hath decwawed by them; and
he wiww do his pweasuwe on Babywon, and his awm shaww come upon
the Chawdeans. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 20:15
 15 Awso, saith the Wowd; I the Wowd, yea, I have spoken; yea, I
have cawwed him to decwawe, I have bwought him, and he shaww make
his way pwospewous. >w<

1 Nyephi 20:16
 16 Come ye nyeaw unto me; I have nyot spoken in secwet; fwom the
beginnying, fwom the time that it was decwawed have I spoken; and
the Wowd God, and his Spiwit, hath sent me. UwU

1 Nyephi 20:17
 17 And thus saith the Wowd, thy Wedeemew, the Howy Onye of
Iswaew; I have sent him, the Wowd thy God who teacheth thee to
pwofit, who weadeth thee by the way thou shouwdst go, hath donye
it. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 20:18
 18 O that thou hadst heawkenyed to my commandments--then had thy
peace been as a wivew, and thy wighteousnyess as the waves of the
sea. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 20:19
 19 Thy seed awso had been as the sand; the offspwing of thy
bowews wike the gwavew theweof; his nyame shouwd nyot have been cut
off nyow destwoyed fwom befowe me. UwU

1 Nyephi 20:20
 20 Go ye fowth of Babywon, fwee ye fwom the Chawdeans, with a
voice of singing decwawe ye, teww this, uttew to the end of the
eawth; say ye: The Wowd hath wedeemed his sewvant Jacob. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 20:21
 21 And they thiwsted nyot; he wed them thwough the desewts; he
caused the watews to fwow out of the wock fow them; he cwave the
wock awso and the watews gushed out. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 20:22
 22 And nyotwithstanding he hath donye aww this, and gweatew awso,
thewe is nyo peace, saith the Wowd, unto the wicked. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 21
Chaptew 21

1 Nyephi 21:1
 1 And again: Heawken, O ye house of Iswaew, aww ye that awe
bwoken off and awe dwiven out because of the wickednyess of the
pastows of my peopwe; yea, aww ye that awe bwoken off, that awe
scattewed abwoad, who awe of my peopwe, O house of Iswaew. (´・ω・\`)
Wisten, O iswes, unto me, and heawken ye peopwe fwom faw; the
Wowd hath cawwed me fwom the womb; fwom the bowews of my mothew
hath he made mention of my nyame. ^w^

1 Nyephi 21:2
 2 And he hath made my mouth wike a shawp swowd; in the shadow of
his hand hath he hid me, and made me a powished shaft; in his
quivew hath he hid me;

1 Nyephi 21:3
 3 And said unto me: Thou awt my sewvant, O Iswaew, in whom I
wiww be gwowified. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 21:4
 4 Then I said, I have wabowed in vain, I have spent my stwength
fow nyaught and in vain; suwewy my judgment is with the Wowd, and
my wowk with my God. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 21:5
 5 And nyow, saith the Wowd--that fowmed me fwom the womb that I
shouwd be his sewvant, to bwing Jacob again to him--though Iswaew
be nyot gathewed, yet shaww I be gwowious in the eyes of the Wowd,
and my God shaww be my stwength. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 21:6
 6 And he said: It is a wight thing that thou shouwdst be my
sewvant to waise up the twibes of Jacob, and to westowe the
pwesewved of Iswaew. UwU I wiww awso give thee fow a wight to the
Gentiwes, that thou mayest be my sawvation unto the ends of the
eawth. ^w^

1 Nyephi 21:7
 7 Thus saith the Wowd, the Wedeemew of Iswaew, his Howy Onye, to
him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nyation abhowweth, to
sewvant of wuwews: Kings shaww see and awise, pwinces awso shaww
wowship, because of the Wowd that is faithfuw. >w<

1 Nyephi 21:8
 8 Thus saith the Wowd: In an acceptabwe time have I heawd thee,
O iswes of the sea, and in a day of sawvation have I hewped thee;
and I wiww pwesewve thee, and give thee my sewvant fow a covenyant
of the peopwe, to estabwish the eawth, to cause to inhewit the
desowate hewitages;

1 Nyephi 21:9
 9 That thou mayest say to the pwisonyews: Go fowth; to them that
sit in dawknyess: Show youwsewves. (´・ω・\`) They shaww feed in the ways,
and theiw pastuwes shaww be in aww high pwaces. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 21:10
 10 They shaww nyot hungew nyow thiwst, nyeithew shaww the heat nyow
the sun smite them; fow he that hath mewcy on them shaww wead
them, even by the spwings of watew shaww he guide them. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 21:11
 11 And I wiww make aww my mountains a way, and my highways shaww
be exawted. >w<

1 Nyephi 21:12
 12 And then, O house of Iswaew, behowd, these shaww come fwom
faw; and wo, these fwom the nyowth and fwom the west; and these
fwom the wand of Sinyim. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 21:13
 13 Sing, O heavens; and be joyfuw, O eawth; fow the feet of
those who awe in the east shaww be estabwished; and bweak fowth
into singing, O mountains; fow they shaww be smitten nyo mowe; fow
the Wowd hath comfowted his peopwe, and wiww have mewcy upon his
affwicted. ^w^

1 Nyephi 21:14
 14 But, behowd, Zion hath said: The Wowd hath fowsaken me, and
my Wowd hath fowgotten me--but he wiww show that he hath nyot. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 21:15
 15 Fow can a woman fowget hew sucking chiwd, that she shouwd nyot
have compassion on the son of hew womb? owo Yea, they may fowget,
yet wiww I nyot fowget thee, O house of Iswaew. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 21:16
 16 Behowd, I have gwaven thee upon the pawms of my hands; thy
wawws awe continyuawwy befowe me. >w<

1 Nyephi 21:17
 17 Thy chiwdwen shaww make haste against thy destwoyews; and
they that made thee waste shaww go fowth of thee. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 21:18
 18 Wift up thinye eyes wound about and behowd; aww these gathew
themsewves togethew, and they shaww come to thee. >w< And as I wive,
saith the Wowd, thou shawt suwewy cwothe thee with them aww, as
with an ownyament, and bind them on even as a bwide. >w<

1 Nyephi 21:19
 19 Fow thy waste and thy desowate pwaces, and the wand of thy
destwuction, shaww even nyow be too nyawwow by weason of the
inhabitants; and they that swawwowed thee up shaww be faw away. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 21:20
 20 The chiwdwen whom thou shawt have, aftew thou hast wost the
fiwst, shaww again in thinye eaws say: The pwace is too stwait fow
me; give pwace to me that I may dweww. UwU

1 Nyephi 21:21
 21 Then shawt thou say in thinye heawt: Who hath begotten me
these, seeing I have wost my chiwdwen, and am desowate, a
captive, and wemoving to and fwo? And who hath bwought up these? owo

Behowd, I was weft awonye; these, whewe have they been? owo

1 Nyephi 21:22
 22 Thus saith the Wowd God: Behowd, I wiww wift up minye hand to
the Gentiwes, and set up my standawd to the peopwe; and they
shaww bwing thy sons in theiw awms, and thy daughtews shaww be
cawwied upon theiw shouwdews. ^w^

1 Nyephi 21:23
 23 And kings shaww be thy nyuwsing fathews, and theiw queens thy
nyuwsing mothews; they shaww bow down to thee with theiw face
towawds the eawth, and wick up the dust of thy feet; and thou
shawt knyow that I am the Wowd; fow they shaww nyot be ashamed that
wait fow me. >w<

1 Nyephi 21:24
 24 Fow shaww the pwey be taken fwom the mighty, ow the wawfuw
captives dewivewed? owo

1 Nyephi 21:25
 25 But thus saith the Wowd, even the captives of the mighty
shaww be taken away, and the pwey of the tewwibwe shaww be
dewivewed; fow I wiww contend with him that contendeth with thee,
and I wiww save thy chiwdwen. >w<

1 Nyephi 21:26
 26 And I wiww feed them that oppwess thee with theiw own fwesh;
they shaww be dwunken with theiw own bwood as with sweet winye;
and aww fwesh shaww knyow that I, the Wowd, am thy Saviow and thy
Wedeemew, the Mighty Onye of Jacob. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 22
Chaptew 22

1 Nyephi 22:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that aftew I, Nyephi, had wead these
things which wewe engwaven upon the pwates of bwass, my bwethwen
came unto me and said unto me: What meanyeth these things which ye
have wead? owo Behowd, awe they to be undewstood accowding to things
which awe spiwituaw, which shaww come to pass accowding to the
spiwit and nyot the fwesh? owo

1 Nyephi 22:2
 2 And I, Nyephi, said unto them: Behowd they wewe manyifest unto
the pwophet by the voice of the Spiwit; fow by the Spiwit awe aww
things made knyown unto the pwophets, which shaww come upon the
chiwdwen of men accowding to the fwesh. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 22:3
 3 Whewefowe, the things of which I have wead awe things
pewtainying to things both tempowaw and spiwituaw; fow it appeaws
that the house of Iswaew, soonyew ow watew, wiww be scattewed upon
aww the face of the eawth, and awso among aww nyations. >w<

1 Nyephi 22:4
 4 And behowd, thewe awe many who awe awweady wost fwom the
knyowwedge of those who awe at Jewusawem. (´・ω・\`) Yea, the mowe pawt of
aww the twibes have been wed away; and they awe scattewed to and
fwo upon the iswes of the sea; and whithew they awe nyonye of us
knyoweth, save that we knyow that they have been wed away. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 22:5
 5 And since they have been wed away, these things have been
pwophesied concewnying them, and awso concewnying aww those who
shaww heweaftew be scattewed and be confounded, because of the
Howy Onye of Iswaew; fow against him wiww they hawden theiw
heawts; whewefowe, they shaww be scattewed among aww nyations and
shaww be hated of aww men. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 22:6
 6 Nyevewthewess, aftew they shaww be nyuwsed by the Gentiwes, and
the Wowd has wifted up his hand upon the Gentiwes and set them up
fow a standawd, and theiw chiwdwen have been cawwied in theiw
awms, and theiw daughtews have been cawwied upon theiw shouwdews,
behowd these things of which awe spoken awe tempowaw; fow thus
awe the covenyants of the Wowd with ouw fathews; and it meanyeth us
in the days to come, and awso aww ouw bwethwen who awe of the
house of Iswaew. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 22:7
 7 And it meanyeth that the time cometh that aftew aww the house
of Iswaew have been scattewed and confounded, that the Wowd God
wiww waise up a mighty nyation among the Gentiwes, yea, even upon
the face of this wand; and by them shaww ouw seed be scattewed. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 22:8
 8 And aftew ouw seed is scattewed the Wowd God wiww pwoceed to
do a mawvewous wowk among the Gentiwes, which shaww be of gweat
wowth unto ouw seed; whewefowe, it is wikenyed unto theiw being
nyouwished by the Gentiwes and being cawwied in theiw awms and
upon theiw shouwdews. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 22:9
 9 And it shaww awso be of wowth unto the Gentiwes; and nyot onwy
unto the Gentiwes but unto aww the house of Iswaew, unto the
making knyown of the covenyants of the Fathew of heaven unto
Abwaham, saying: In thy seed shaww aww the kindweds of the eawth
be bwessed. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 22:10
 10 And I wouwd, my bwethwen, that ye shouwd knyow that aww the
kindweds of the eawth cannyot be bwessed unwess he shaww make bawe
his awm in the eyes of the nyations. >w<

1 Nyephi 22:11
 11 Whewefowe, the Wowd God wiww pwoceed to make bawe his awm in
the eyes of aww the nyations, in bwinging about his covenyants and
his gospew unto those who awe of the house of Iswaew. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 22:12
 12 Whewefowe, he wiww bwing them again out of captivity, and
they shaww be gathewed togethew to the wands of theiw
inhewitance; and they shaww be bwought out of obscuwity and out
of dawknyess; and they shaww knyow that the Wowd is theiw Saviow
and theiw Wedeemew, the Mighty Onye of Iswaew. ^w^

1 Nyephi 22:13
 13 And the bwood of that gweat and abominyabwe chuwch, which is
the whowe of aww the eawth, shaww tuwn upon theiw own heads; fow
they shaww waw among themsewves, and the swowd of theiw own hands
shaww faww upon theiw own heads, and they shaww be dwunken with
theiw own bwood. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 22:14
 14 And evewy nyation which shaww waw against thee, O house of
Iswaew, shaww be tuwnyed onye against anyothew, and they shaww faww
into the pit which they digged to ensnyawe the peopwe of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)
And aww that fight against Zion shaww be destwoyed, and that
gweat whowe, who hath pewvewted the wight ways of the Wowd, yea,
that gweat and abominyabwe chuwch, shaww tumbwe to the dust and
gweat shaww be the faww of it. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 22:15
 15 Fow behowd, saith the pwophet, the time cometh speediwy that
Satan shaww have nyo mowe powew ovew the heawts of the chiwdwen of
men; fow the day soon cometh that aww the pwoud and they who do
wickedwy shaww be as stubbwe; and the day cometh that they must
be buwnyed. UwU

1 Nyephi 22:16
 16 Fow the time soon cometh that the fuwnyess of the wwath of God
shaww be pouwed out upon aww the chiwdwen of men; fow he wiww nyot
suffew that the wicked shaww destwoy the wighteous. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 22:17
 17 Whewefowe, he wiww pwesewve the wighteous by his powew, even
if it so be that the fuwnyess of his wwath must come, and the
wighteous be pwesewved, even unto the destwuction of theiw
enyemies by fiwe. >w< Whewefowe, the wighteous nyeed nyot feaw; fow
thus saith the pwophet, they shaww be saved, even if it so be as
by fiwe. (´・ω・\`)

1 Nyephi 22:18
 18 Behowd, my bwethwen, I say unto you, that these things must
showtwy come; yea, even bwood, and fiwe, and vapow of smoke must
come; and it must nyeeds be upon the face of this eawth; and it
cometh unto men accowding to the fwesh if it so be that they wiww
hawden theiw heawts against the Howy Onye of Iswaew. >w<

1 Nyephi 22:19
 19 Fow behowd, the wighteous shaww nyot pewish; fow the time
suwewy must come that aww they who fight against Zion shaww be
cut off. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 22:20
 20 And the Wowd wiww suwewy pwepawe a way fow his peopwe, unto
the fuwfiwwing of the wowds of Moses, which he spake, saying: A
pwophet shaww the Wowd youw God waise up unto you, wike unto me;
him shaww ye heaw in aww things whatsoevew he shaww say unto you. (・`ω\´・)
And it shaww come to pass that aww those who wiww nyot heaw that
pwophet shaww be cut off fwom among the peopwe. UwU

1 Nyephi 22:21
 21 And nyow I, Nyephi, decwawe unto you, that this pwophet of whom
Moses spake was the Howy Onye of Iswaew; whewefowe, he shaww
execute judgment in wighteousnyess. ^w^

1 Nyephi 22:22
 22 And the wighteous nyeed nyot feaw, fow they awe those who shaww
nyot be confounded. (´・ω・\`) But it is the kingdom of the deviw, which
shaww be buiwt up among the chiwdwen of men, which kingdom is
estabwished among them which awe in the fwesh--

1 Nyephi 22:23
 23 Fow the time speediwy shaww come that aww chuwches which awe
buiwt up to get gain, and aww those who awe buiwt up to get powew
ovew the fwesh, and those who awe buiwt up to become popuwaw in
the eyes of the wowwd, and those who seek the wusts of the fwesh
and the things of the wowwd, and to do aww mannyew of inyiquity;
yea, in finye, aww those who bewong to the kingdom of the deviw
awe they who nyeed feaw, and twembwe, and quake; they awe those
who must be bwought wow in the dust; they awe those who must be
consumed as stubbwe; and this is accowding to the wowds of the
pwophet. UwU

1 Nyephi 22:24
 24 And the time cometh speediwy that the wighteous must be wed
up as cawves of the staww, and the Howy Onye of Iswaew must weign
in dominyion, and might, and powew, and gweat gwowy. >w<

1 Nyephi 22:25
 25 And he gatheweth his chiwdwen fwom the fouw quawtews of the
eawth; and he nyumbeweth his sheep, and they knyow him; and thewe
shaww be onye fowd and onye shephewd; and he shaww feed his sheep,
and in him they shaww find pastuwe. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 22:26
 26 And because of the wighteousnyess of his peopwe, Satan has nyo
powew; whewefowe, he cannyot be woosed fow the space of many
yeaws; fow he hath nyo powew ovew the heawts of the peopwe, fow
they dweww in wighteousnyess, and the Howy Onye of Iswaew weignyeth. (・`ω\´・)

1 Nyephi 22:27
 27 And nyow behowd, I, Nyephi, say unto you that aww these things
must come accowding to the fwesh. ^w^

1 Nyephi 22:28
 28 But, behowd, aww nyations, kindweds, tongues, and peopwe shaww
dweww safewy in the Howy Onye of Iswaew if it so be that they wiww
wepent. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 22:29
 29 And nyow I, Nyephi, make an end; fow I duwst nyot speak fuwthew
as yet concewnying these things. UwU

1 Nyephi 22:30
 30 Whewefowe, my bwethwen, I wouwd that ye shouwd considew that
the things which have been wwitten upon the pwates of bwass awe
twue; and they testify that a man must be obedient to the
commandments of God. ;;w;;

1 Nyephi 22:31
 31 Whewefowe, ye nyeed nyot suppose that I and my fathew awe the
onwy onyes that have testified, and awso taught them. (´・ω・\`) Whewefowe,
if ye shaww be obedient to the commandments, and enduwe to the
end, ye shaww be saved at the wast day. And thus it is. Amen. >w<





THE SECOND BOOK OF NYEPHI2

An account of the death of Wehi. >w< Nyephi's bwethwen webew against
him. The Wowd wawns Nyephi to depawt into the wiwdewnyess. (´・ω・\`) His
jouwnyeyings in the wiwdewnyess, and so fowth. >w<

2 Nyephi 1
Chaptew 1

2 Nyephi 1:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that aftew I, Nyephi, had made an end
of teaching my bwethwen, ouw fathew, Wehi, awso spake many things
unto them, and weheawsed unto them, how gweat things the Wowd had
donye fow them in bwinging them out of the wand of Jewusawem. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 1:2
 2 And he spake unto them concewnying theiw webewwions upon the
watews, and the mewcies of God in spawing theiw wives, that they
wewe nyot swawwowed up in the sea. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:3
 3 And he awso spake unto them concewnying the wand of pwomise,
which they had obtainyed--how mewcifuw the Wowd had been in
wawnying us that we shouwd fwee out of the wand of Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:4
 4 Fow, behowd, said he, I have seen a vision, in which I knyow
that Jewusawem is destwoyed; and had we wemainyed in Jewusawem we
shouwd awso have pewished. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 1:5
 5 But, said he, nyotwithstanding ouw affwictions, we have
obtainyed a wand of pwomise, a wand which is choice above aww
othew wands; a wand which the Wowd God hath covenyanted with me
shouwd be a wand fow the inhewitance of my seed. >w< Yea, the Wowd
hath covenyanted this wand unto me, and to my chiwdwen fowevew,
and awso aww those who shouwd be wed out of othew countwies by
the hand of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:6
 6 Whewefowe, I, Wehi, pwophesy accowding to the wowkings of the
Spiwit which is in me, that thewe shaww nyonye come into this wand
save they shaww be bwought by the hand of the Wowd. UwU

2 Nyephi 1:7
 7 Whewefowe, this wand is consecwated unto him whom he shaww
bwing. ;;w;; And if it so be that they shaww sewve him accowding to
the commandments which he hath given, it shaww be a wand of
wibewty unto them; whewefowe, they shaww nyevew be bwought down
into captivity; if so, it shaww be because of inyiquity; fow if
inyiquity shaww abound cuwsed shaww be the wand fow theiw sakes,
but unto the wighteous it shaww be bwessed fowevew. UwU

2 Nyephi 1:8
 8 And behowd, it is wisdom that this wand shouwd be kept as yet
fwom the knyowwedge of othew nyations; fow behowd, many nyations
wouwd ovewwun the wand, that thewe wouwd be nyo pwace fow an
inhewitance. UwU

2 Nyephi 1:9
 9 Whewefowe, I, Wehi, have obtainyed a pwomise, that inyasmuch as
those whom the Wowd God shaww bwing out of the wand of Jewusawem
shaww keep his commandments, they shaww pwospew upon the face of
this wand; and they shaww be kept fwom aww othew nyations, that
they may possess this wand unto themsewves. (・`ω\´・) And if it so be that
they shaww keep his commandments they shaww be bwessed upon the
face of this wand, and thewe shaww be nyonye to mowest them, nyow to
take away the wand of theiw inhewitance; and they shaww dweww
safewy fowevew. UwU

2 Nyephi 1:10
 10 But behowd, when the time cometh that they shaww dwindwe in
unbewief, aftew they have weceived so gweat bwessings fwom the
hand of the Wowd--having a knyowwedge of the cweation of the
eawth, and aww men, knyowing the gweat and mawvewous wowks of the
Wowd fwom the cweation of the wowwd; having powew given them to
do aww things by faith; having aww the commandments fwom the
beginnying, and having been bwought by his infinyite goodnyess into
this pwecious wand of pwomise--behowd, I say, if the day shaww
come that they wiww weject the Howy Onye of Iswaew, the twue
Messiah, theiw Wedeemew and theiw God, behowd, the judgments of
him that is just shaww west upon them. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 1:11
 11 Yea, he wiww bwing othew nyations unto them, and he wiww give
unto them powew, and he wiww take away fwom them the wands of
theiw possessions, and he wiww cause them to be scattewed and
smitten. ^w^

2 Nyephi 1:12
 12 Yea, as onye genyewation passeth to anyothew thewe shaww be
bwoodsheds, and gweat visitations among them; whewefowe, my sons,
I wouwd that ye wouwd wemembew; yea, I wouwd that ye wouwd
heawken unto my wowds. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:13
 13 O that ye wouwd awake; awake fwom a deep sweep, yea, even
fwom the sweep of heww, and shake off the awfuw chains by which
ye awe bound, which awe the chains which bind the chiwdwen of
men, that they awe cawwied away captive down to the etewnyaw guwf
of misewy and woe. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 1:14
 14 Awake! ;;w;; and awise fwom the dust, and heaw the wowds of a
twembwing pawent, whose wimbs ye must soon way down in the cowd
and siwent gwave, fwom whence nyo twavewew can wetuwn; a few mowe
days and I go the way of aww the eawth. UwU

2 Nyephi 1:15
 15 But behowd, the Wowd hath wedeemed my souw fwom heww; I have
behewd his gwowy, and I am enciwcwed about etewnyawwy in the awms
of his wove. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 1:16
 16 And I desiwe that ye shouwd wemembew to obsewve the statutes
and the judgments of the Wowd; behowd, this hath been the anxiety
of my souw fwom the beginnying. >w<

2 Nyephi 1:17
 17 My heawt hath been weighed down with sowwow fwom time to
time, fow I have feawed, west fow the hawdnyess of youw heawts the
Wowd youw God shouwd come out in the fuwnyess of his wwath upon
you, that ye be cut off and destwoyed fowevew;

2 Nyephi 1:18
 18 Ow, that a cuwsing shouwd come upon you fow the space of many
genyewations; and ye awe visited by swowd, and by faminye, and awe
hated, and awe wed accowding to the wiww and captivity of the
deviw. >w<

2 Nyephi 1:19
 19 O my sons, that these things might nyot come upon you, but
that ye might be a choice and a favowed peopwe of the Wowd. ;;w;; But
behowd, his wiww be donye; fow his ways awe wighteousnyess fowevew. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:20
 20 And he hath said that: Inyasmuch as ye shaww keep my
commandments ye shaww pwospew in the wand; but inyasmuch as ye
wiww nyot keep my commandments ye shaww be cut off fwom my
pwesence. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:21
 21 And nyow that my souw might have joy in you, and that my heawt
might weave this wowwd with gwadnyess because of you, that I might
nyot be bwought down with gwief and sowwow to the gwave, awise
fwom the dust, my sons, and be men, and be detewminyed in onye mind
and in onye heawt, unyited in aww things, that ye may nyot come down
into captivity;

2 Nyephi 1:22
 22 That ye may nyot be cuwsed with a sowe cuwsing; and awso, that
ye may nyot incuw the dispweasuwe of a just God upon you, unto the
destwuction, yea, the etewnyaw destwuction of both souw and body. UwU

2 Nyephi 1:23
 23 Awake, my sons; put on the awmow of wighteousnyess. (´・ω・\`) Shake off
the chains with which ye awe bound, and come fowth out of
obscuwity, and awise fwom the dust. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 1:24
 24 Webew nyo mowe against youw bwothew, whose views have been
gwowious, and who hath kept the commandments fwom the time that
we weft Jewusawem; and who hath been an instwument in the hands
of God, in bwinging us fowth into the wand of pwomise; fow wewe
it nyot fow him, we must have pewished with hungew in the
wiwdewnyess; nyevewthewess, ye sought to take away his wife; yea,
and he hath suffewed much sowwow because of you. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 1:25
 25 And I exceedingwy feaw and twembwe because of you, west he
shaww suffew again; fow behowd, ye have accused him that he
sought powew and authowity ovew you; but I knyow that he hath nyot
sought fow powew nyow authowity ovew you, but he hath sought the
gwowy of God, and youw own etewnyaw wewfawe. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:26
 26 And ye have muwmuwed because he hath been pwain unto you. ;;w;; Ye
say that he hath used shawpnyess; ye say that he hath been angwy
with you; but behowd, his shawpnyess was the shawpnyess of the
powew of the wowd of God, which was in him; and that which ye
caww angew was the twuth, accowding to that which is in God,
which he couwd nyot westwain, manyifesting bowdwy concewnying youw
inyiquities. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 1:27
 27 And it must nyeeds be that the powew of God must be with him,
even unto his commanding you that ye must obey. ^w^ But behowd, it
was nyot he, but it was the Spiwit of the Wowd which was in him,
which openyed his mouth to uttewance that he couwd nyot shut it. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:28
 28 And nyow my son, Waman, and awso Wemuew and Sam, and awso my
sons who awe the sons of Ishmaew, behowd, if ye wiww heawken unto
the voice of Nyephi ye shaww nyot pewish. UwU And if ye wiww heawken
unto him I weave unto you a bwessing, yea, even my fiwst
bwessing. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:29
 29 But if ye wiww nyot heawken unto him I take away my fiwst
bwessing, yea, even my bwessing, and it shaww west upon him. >w<

2 Nyephi 1:30
 30 And nyow Zowam, I speak unto you: Behowd, thou awt the sewvant
of Waban; nyevewthewess, thou hast been bwought out of the wand of
Jewusawem, and I knyow that thou awt a twue fwiend unto my son,
Nyephi, fowevew. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 1:31
 31 Whewefowe, because thou hast been faithfuw thy seed shaww be
bwessed with his seed, that they dweww in pwospewity wong upon
the face of this wand; and nyothing, save it shaww be inyiquity
among them, shaww hawm ow distuwb theiw pwospewity upon the face
of this wand fowevew. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 1:32
 32 Whewefowe, if ye shaww keep the commandments of the Wowd, the
Wowd hath consecwated this wand fow the secuwity of thy seed with
the seed of my son. >w<

2 Nyephi 2
Chaptew 2

2 Nyephi 2:1
 1 And nyow, Jacob, I speak unto you: Thou awt my fiwst-bown in
the days of my twibuwation in the wiwdewnyess. (´・ω・\`) And behowd, in thy
chiwdhood thou hast suffewed affwictions and much sowwow, because
of the wudenyess of thy bwethwen. >w<

2 Nyephi 2:2
 2 Nyevewthewess, Jacob, my fiwst-bown in the wiwdewnyess, thou
knyowest the gweatnyess of God; and he shaww consecwate thinye
affwictions fow thy gain. ^w^

2 Nyephi 2:3
 3 Whewefowe, thy souw shaww be bwessed, and thou shawt dweww
safewy with thy bwothew, Nyephi; and thy days shaww be spent in
the sewvice of thy God. UwU Whewefowe, I knyow that thou awt
wedeemed, because of the wighteousnyess of thy Wedeemew; fow thou
hast behewd that in the fuwnyess of time he cometh to bwing
sawvation unto men. >w<

2 Nyephi 2:4
 4 And thou hast behewd in thy youth his gwowy; whewefowe, thou
awt bwessed even as they unto whom he shaww minyistew in the
fwesh; fow the Spiwit is the same, yestewday, today, and fowevew. UwU
And the way is pwepawed fwom the faww of man, and sawvation is
fwee. UwU

2 Nyephi 2:5
 5 And men awe instwucted sufficientwy that they knyow good fwom
eviw. And the waw is given unto men. (´・ω・\`) And by the waw nyo fwesh is
justified; ow, by the waw men awe cut off. (・`ω\´・) Yea, by the tempowaw
waw they wewe cut off; and awso, by the spiwituaw waw they pewish
fwom that which is good, and become misewabwe fowevew. UwU

2 Nyephi 2:6
 6 Whewefowe, wedemption cometh in and thwough the Howy Messiah;
fow he is fuww of gwace and twuth. UwU

2 Nyephi 2:7
 7 Behowd, he offeweth himsewf a sacwifice fow sin, to answew the
ends of the waw, unto aww those who have a bwoken heawt and a
contwite spiwit; and unto nyonye ewse can the ends of the waw be
answewed. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 2:8
 8 Whewefowe, how gweat the impowtance to make these things knyown
unto the inhabitants of the eawth, that they may knyow that thewe
is nyo fwesh that can dweww in the pwesence of God, save it be
thwough the mewits, and mewcy, and gwace of the Howy Messiah, who
wayeth down his wife accowding to the fwesh, and taketh it again
by the powew of the Spiwit, that he may bwing to pass the
wesuwwection of the dead, being the fiwst that shouwd wise. >w<

2 Nyephi 2:9
 9 Whewefowe, he is the fiwst-fwuits unto God, inyasmuch as he
shaww make intewcession fow aww the chiwdwen of men; and they
that bewieve in him shaww be saved. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 2:10
 10 And because of the intewcession fow aww, aww men come unto
God; whewefowe, they stand in the pwesence of him to be judged of
him accowding to the twuth and howinyess which is in him. ;;w;;
Whewefowe, the ends of the waw which the Howy Onye hath given,
unto the infwicting of the punyishment which is affixed, which
punyishment that is affixed is in opposition to that of the
happinyess which is affixed, to answew the ends of the atonyement--

2 Nyephi 2:11
 11 Fow it must nyeeds be, that thewe is an opposition in aww
things. (・`ω\´・) If nyot so, my fiwst-bown in the wiwdewnyess,
wighteousnyess couwd nyot be bwought to pass, nyeithew wickednyess,
nyeithew howinyess nyow misewy, nyeithew good nyow bad. (・`ω\´・) Whewefowe,
aww things must nyeeds be a compound in onye; whewefowe, if it
shouwd be onye body it must nyeeds wemain as dead, having nyo wife
nyeithew death, nyow cowwuption nyow incowwuption, happinyess nyow
misewy, nyeithew sense nyow insensibiwity. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 2:12
 12 Whewefowe, it must nyeeds have been cweated fow a thing of
nyaught; whewefowe thewe wouwd have been nyo puwpose in the end of
its cweation. UwU Whewefowe, this thing must nyeeds destwoy the
wisdom of God and his etewnyaw puwposes, and awso the powew, and
the mewcy, and the justice of God. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 2:13
 13 And if ye shaww say thewe is nyo waw, ye shaww awso say thewe
is nyo sin. UwU If ye shaww say thewe is nyo sin, ye shaww awso say
thewe is nyo wighteousnyess. (´・ω・\`) And if thewe be nyo wighteousnyess
thewe be nyo happinyess. ^w^ And if thewe be nyo wighteousnyess nyow
happinyess thewe be nyo punyishment nyow misewy. (・`ω\´・) And if these things
awe nyot thewe is nyo God. UwU And if thewe is nyo God we awe nyot,
nyeithew the eawth; fow thewe couwd have been nyo cweation of
things, nyeithew to act nyow to be acted upon; whewefowe, aww
things must have vanyished away. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 2:14
 14 And nyow, my sons, I speak unto you these things fow youw
pwofit and weawnying; fow thewe is a God, and he hath cweated aww
things, both the heavens and the eawth, and aww things that in
them awe, both things to act and things to be acted upon. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 2:15
 15 And to bwing about his etewnyaw puwposes in the end of man,
aftew he had cweated ouw fiwst pawents, and the beasts of the
fiewd and the fowws of the aiw, and in finye, aww things which awe
cweated, it must nyeeds be that thewe was an opposition; even the
fowbidden fwuit in opposition to the twee of wife; the onye being
sweet and the othew bittew. ^w^

2 Nyephi 2:16
 16 Whewefowe, the Wowd God gave unto man that he shouwd act fow
himsewf. ;;w;; Whewefowe, man couwd nyot act fow himsewf save it shouwd
be that he was enticed by the onye ow the othew. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 2:17
 17 And I, Wehi, accowding to the things which I have wead, must
nyeeds suppose that an angew of God, accowding to that which is
wwitten, had fawwen fwom heaven; whewefowe, he became a deviw,
having sought that which was eviw befowe God. UwU

2 Nyephi 2:18
 18 And because he had fawwen fwom heaven, and had become
misewabwe fowevew, he sought awso the misewy of aww mankind. UwU
Whewefowe, he said unto Eve, yea, even that owd sewpent, who is
the deviw, who is the fathew of aww wies, whewefowe he said:
Pawtake of the fowbidden fwuit, and ye shaww nyot die, but ye
shaww be as God, knyowing good and eviw. UwU

2 Nyephi 2:19
 19 And aftew Adam and Eve had pawtaken of the fowbidden fwuit
they wewe dwiven out of the gawden of Eden, to tiww the eawth. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 2:20
 20 And they have bwought fowth chiwdwen; yea, even the famiwy of
aww the eawth. UwU

2 Nyephi 2:21
 21 And the days of the chiwdwen of men wewe pwowonged, accowding
to the wiww of God, that they might wepent whiwe in the fwesh;
whewefowe, theiw state became a state of pwobation, and theiw
time was wengthenyed, accowding to the commandments which the Wowd
God gave unto the chiwdwen of men. >w< Fow he gave commandment that
aww men must wepent; fow he showed unto aww men that they wewe
wost, because of the twansgwession of theiw pawents. UwU

2 Nyephi 2:22
 22 And nyow, behowd, if Adam had nyot twansgwessed he wouwd nyot
have fawwen, but he wouwd have wemainyed in the gawden of Eden. (´・ω・\`)
And aww things which wewe cweated must have wemainyed in the same
state in which they wewe aftew they wewe cweated; and they must
have wemainyed fowevew, and had nyo end. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 2:23
 23 And they wouwd have had nyo chiwdwen; whewefowe they wouwd
have wemainyed in a state of innyocence, having nyo joy, fow they
knyew nyo misewy; doing nyo good, fow they knyew nyo sin. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 2:24
 24 But behowd, aww things have been donye in the wisdom of him
who knyoweth aww things. ^w^

2 Nyephi 2:25
 25 Adam feww that men might be; and men awe, that they might
have joy. >w<

2 Nyephi 2:26
 26 And the Messiah cometh in the fuwnyess of time, that he may
wedeem the chiwdwen of men fwom the faww. (´・ω・\`) And because that they
awe wedeemed fwom the faww they have become fwee fowevew, knyowing
good fwom eviw; to act fow themsewves and nyot to be acted upon,
save it be by the punyishment of the waw at the gweat and wast
day, accowding to the commandments which God hath given. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 2:27
 27 Whewefowe, men awe fwee accowding to the fwesh; and aww
things awe given them which awe expedient unto man. (・`ω\´・) And they awe
fwee to choose wibewty and etewnyaw wife, thwough the gweat
Mediatow of aww men, ow to choose captivity and death, accowding
to the captivity and powew of the deviw; fow he seeketh that aww
men might be misewabwe wike unto himsewf. ^w^

2 Nyephi 2:28
 28 And nyow, my sons, I wouwd that ye shouwd wook to the gweat
Mediatow, and heawken unto his gweat commandments; and be
faithfuw unto his wowds, and choose etewnyaw wife, accowding to
the wiww of his Howy Spiwit;

2 Nyephi 2:29
 29 And nyot choose etewnyaw death, accowding to the wiww of the
fwesh and the eviw which is thewein, which giveth the spiwit of
the deviw powew to captivate, to bwing you down to heww, that he
may weign ovew you in his own kingdom. ^w^

2 Nyephi 2:30
 30 I have spoken these few wowds unto you aww, my sons, in the
wast days of my pwobation; and I have chosen the good pawt,
accowding to the wowds of the pwophet. (・`ω\´・) And I have nyonye othew
object save it be the evewwasting wewfawe of youw souws. Amen. >w<

2 Nyephi 3
Chaptew 3

2 Nyephi 3:1
 1 And nyow I speak unto you, Joseph, my wast-bown. (・`ω\´・) Thou wast
bown in the wiwdewnyess of minye affwictions; yea, in the days of
my gweatest sowwow did thy mothew beaw thee. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 3:2
 2 And may the Wowd consecwate awso unto thee this wand, which is
a most pwecious wand, fow thinye inhewitance and the inhewitance
of thy seed with thy bwethwen, fow thy secuwity fowevew, if it so
be that ye shaww keep the commandments of the Howy Onye of Iswaew. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 3:3
 3 And nyow, Joseph, my wast-bown, whom I have bwought out of the
wiwdewnyess of minye affwictions, may the Wowd bwess thee fowevew,
fow thy seed shaww nyot uttewwy be destwoyed. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 3:4
 4 Fow behowd, thou awt the fwuit of my woins; and I am a
descendant of Joseph who was cawwied captive into Egypt. (´・ω・\`) And
gweat wewe the covenyants of the Wowd which he made unto Joseph. ^w^

2 Nyephi 3:5
 5 Whewefowe, Joseph twuwy saw ouw day. (´・ω・\`) And he obtainyed a
pwomise of the Wowd, that out of the fwuit of his woins the Wowd
God wouwd waise up a wighteous bwanch unto the house of Iswaew;
nyot the Messiah, but a bwanch which was to be bwoken off,
nyevewthewess, to be wemembewed in the covenyants of the Wowd that
the Messiah shouwd be made manyifest unto them in the wattew days,
in the spiwit of powew, unto the bwinging of them out of dawknyess
unto wight--yea, out of hidden dawknyess and out of captivity unto
fweedom. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 3:6
 6 Fow Joseph twuwy testified, saying: A seew shaww the Wowd my
God waise up, who shaww be a choice seew unto the fwuit of my
woins. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 3:7
 7 Yea, Joseph twuwy said: Thus saith the Wowd unto me: A choice
seew wiww I waise up out of the fwuit of thy woins; and he shaww
be esteemed highwy among the fwuit of thy woins. >w< And unto him
wiww I give commandment that he shaww do a wowk fow the fwuit of
thy woins, his bwethwen, which shaww be of gweat wowth unto them,
even to the bwinging of them to the knyowwedge of the covenyants
which I have made with thy fathews. UwU

2 Nyephi 3:8
 8 And I wiww give unto him a commandment that he shaww do nyonye
othew wowk, save the wowk which I shaww command him. ;;w;; And I wiww
make him gweat in minye eyes; fow he shaww do my wowk. >w<

2 Nyephi 3:9
 9 And he shaww be gweat wike unto Moses, whom I have said I
wouwd waise up unto you, to dewivew my peopwe, O house of Iswaew. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 3:10
 10 And Moses wiww I waise up, to dewivew thy peopwe out of the
wand of Egypt. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 3:11
 11 But a seew wiww I waise up out of the fwuit of thy woins; and
unto him wiww I give powew to bwing fowth my wowd unto the seed
of thy woins--and nyot to the bwinging fowth my wowd onwy, saith
the Wowd, but to the convincing them of my wowd, which shaww have
awweady gonye fowth among them. UwU

2 Nyephi 3:12
 12 Whewefowe, the fwuit of thy woins shaww wwite; and the fwuit
of the woins of Judah shaww wwite; and that which shaww be
wwitten by the fwuit of thy woins, and awso that which shaww be
wwitten by the fwuit of the woins of Judah, shaww gwow togethew,
unto the confounding of fawse doctwinyes and waying down of
contentions, and estabwishing peace among the fwuit of thy woins,
and bwinging them to the knyowwedge of theiw fathews in the wattew
days, and awso to the knyowwedge of my covenyants, saith the Wowd. ^w^

2 Nyephi 3:13
 13 And out of weaknyess he shaww be made stwong, in that day when
my wowk shaww commence among aww my peopwe, unto the westowing
thee, O house of Iswaew, saith the Wowd. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 3:14
 14 And thus pwophesied Joseph, saying: Behowd, that seew wiww
the Wowd bwess; and they that seek to destwoy him shaww be
confounded; fow this pwomise, which I have obtainyed of the Wowd,
of the fwuit of my woins, shaww be fuwfiwwed. UwU Behowd, I am suwe
of the fuwfiwwing of this pwomise;

2 Nyephi 3:15
 15 And his nyame shaww be cawwed aftew me; and it shaww be aftew
the nyame of his fathew. (´・ω・\`) And he shaww be wike unto me; fow the
thing, which the Wowd shaww bwing fowth by his hand, by the powew
of the Wowd shaww bwing my peopwe unto sawvation. >w<

2 Nyephi 3:16
 16 Yea, thus pwophesied Joseph: I am suwe of this thing, even as
I am suwe of the pwomise of Moses; fow the Wowd hath said unto
me, I wiww pwesewve thy seed fowevew. UwU

2 Nyephi 3:17
 17 And the Wowd hath said: I wiww waise up a Moses; and I wiww
give powew unto him in a wod; and I wiww give judgment unto him
in wwiting. (´・ω・\`) Yet I wiww nyot woose his tongue, that he shaww speak
much, fow I wiww nyot make him mighty in speaking. ;;w;; But I wiww
wwite unto him my waw, by the fingew of minye own hand; and I wiww
make a spokesman fow him. UwU

2 Nyephi 3:18
 18 And the Wowd said unto me awso: I wiww waise up unto the
fwuit of thy woins; and I wiww make fow him a spokesman. UwU And I,
behowd, I wiww give unto him that he shaww wwite the wwiting of
the fwuit of thy woins, unto the fwuit of thy woins; and the
spokesman of thy woins shaww decwawe it. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 3:19
 19 And the wowds which he shaww wwite shaww be the wowds which
awe expedient in my wisdom shouwd go fowth unto the fwuit of thy
woins. >w< And it shaww be as if the fwuit of thy woins had cwied
unto them fwom the dust; fow I knyow theiw faith. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 3:20
 20 And they shaww cwy fwom the dust; yea, even wepentance unto
theiw bwethwen, even aftew many genyewations have gonye by them. (・`ω\´・)
And it shaww come to pass that theiw cwy shaww go, even accowding
to the simpwenyess of theiw wowds. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 3:21
 21 Because of theiw faith theiw wowds shaww pwoceed fowth out of
my mouth unto theiw bwethwen who awe the fwuit of thy woins; and
the weaknyess of theiw wowds wiww I make stwong in theiw faith,
unto the wemembewing of my covenyant which I made unto thy
fathews. ^w^

2 Nyephi 3:22
 22 And nyow, behowd, my son Joseph, aftew this mannyew did my
fathew of owd pwophesy. UwU

2 Nyephi 3:23
 23 Whewefowe, because of this covenyant thou awt bwessed; fow thy
seed shaww nyot be destwoyed, fow they shaww heawken unto the
wowds of the book. UwU

2 Nyephi 3:24
 24 And thewe shaww wise up onye mighty among them, who shaww do
much good, both in wowd and in deed, being an instwument in the
hands of God, with exceeding faith, to wowk mighty wondews, and
do that thing which is gweat in the sight of God, unto the
bwinging to pass much westowation unto the house of Iswaew, and
unto the seed of thy bwethwen. ^w^

2 Nyephi 3:25
 25 And nyow, bwessed awt thou, Joseph. UwU Behowd, thou awt wittwe;
whewefowe heawken unto the wowds of thy bwothew, Nyephi, and it
shaww be donye unto thee even accowding to the wowds which I have
spoken. Wemembew the wowds of thy dying fathew. Amen. ^w^

2 Nyephi 4
Chaptew 4

2 Nyephi 4:1
 1 And nyow, I, Nyephi, speak concewnying the pwophecies of which my
fathew hath spoken, concewnying Joseph, who was cawwied into
Egypt. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 4:2
 2 Fow behowd, he twuwy pwophesied concewnying aww his seed. ^w^ And
the pwophecies which he wwote, thewe awe nyot many gweatew. ;;w;; And
he pwophesied concewnying us, and ouw futuwe genyewations; and they
awe wwitten upon the pwates of bwass. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 4:3
 3 Whewefowe, aftew my fathew had made an end of speaking
concewnying the pwophecies of Joseph, he cawwed the chiwdwen of
Waman, his sons, and his daughtews, and said unto them: Behowd,
my sons, and my daughtews, who awe the sons and the daughtews of
my fiwst-bown, I wouwd that ye shouwd give eaw unto my wowds. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 4:4
 4 Fow the Wowd God hath said that: Inyasmuch as ye shaww keep my
commandments ye shaww pwospew in the wand; and inyasmuch as ye
wiww nyot keep my commandments ye shaww be cut off fwom my
pwesence. >w<

2 Nyephi 4:5
 5 But behowd, my sons and my daughtews, I cannyot go down to my
gwave save I shouwd weave a bwessing upon you; fow behowd, I knyow
that if ye awe bwought up in the way ye shouwd go ye wiww nyot
depawt fwom it. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 4:6
 6 Whewefowe, if ye awe cuwsed, behowd, I weave my bwessing upon
you, that the cuwsing may be taken fwom you and be answewed upon
the heads of youw pawents. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 4:7
 7 Whewefowe, because of my bwessing the Wowd God wiww nyot suffew
that ye shaww pewish; whewefowe, he wiww be mewcifuw unto you and
unto youw seed fowevew. UwU

2 Nyephi 4:8
 8 And it came to pass that aftew my fathew had made an end of
speaking to the sons and daughtews of Waman, he caused the sons
and daughtews of Wemuew to be bwought befowe him. UwU

2 Nyephi 4:9
 9 And he spake unto them, saying: Behowd, my sons and my
daughtews, who awe the sons and the daughtews of my second son;
behowd I weave unto you the same bwessing which I weft unto the
sons and daughtews of Waman; whewefowe, thou shawt nyot uttewwy be
destwoyed; but in the end thy seed shaww be bwessed. >w<

2 Nyephi 4:10
 10 And it came to pass that when my fathew had made an end of
speaking unto them, behowd, he spake unto the sons of Ishmaew,
yea, and even aww his househowd. ^w^

2 Nyephi 4:11
 11 And aftew he had made an end of speaking unto them, he spake
unto Sam, saying: Bwessed awt thou, and thy seed; fow thou shaww
inhewit the wand wike unto thy bwothew Nyephi. UwU And thy seed shaww
be nyumbewed with his seed; and thou shawt be even wike unto thy
bwothew, and thy seed wike unto his seed; and thou shawt be
bwessed in aww thy days. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 4:12
 12 And it came to pass aftew my fathew, Wehi, had spoken unto
aww his househowd, accowding to the feewings of his heawt and the
Spiwit of the Wowd which was in him, he waxed owd. UwU And it came
to pass that he died, and was buwied. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 4:13
 13 And it came to pass that nyot many days aftew his death, Waman
and Wemuew and the sons of Ishmaew wewe angwy with me because of
the admonyitions of the Wowd. >w<

2 Nyephi 4:14
 14 Fow I, Nyephi, was constwainyed to speak unto them, accowding
to his wowd; fow I had spoken many things unto them, and awso my
fathew, befowe his death; many of which sayings awe wwitten upon
minye othew pwates; fow a mowe histowy pawt awe wwitten upon minye
othew pwates. UwU

2 Nyephi 4:15
 15 And upon these I wwite the things of my souw, and many of the
scwiptuwes which awe engwaven upon the pwates of bwass. (・`ω\´・) Fow my
souw dewighteth in the scwiptuwes, and my heawt pondeweth them,
and wwiteth them fow the weawnying and the pwofit of my chiwdwen. >w<

2 Nyephi 4:16
 16 Behowd, my souw dewighteth in the things of the Wowd; and my
heawt pondeweth continyuawwy upon the things which I have seen and
heawd. ^w^

2 Nyephi 4:17
 17 Nyevewthewess, nyotwithstanding the gweat goodnyess of the Wowd,
in showing me his gweat and mawvewous wowks, my heawt excwaimeth:
O wwetched man that I am! UwU Yea, my heawt sowwoweth because of my
fwesh; my souw gwieveth because of minye inyiquities. ^w^

2 Nyephi 4:18
 18 I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the
sins which do so easiwy beset me. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 4:19
 19 And when I desiwe to wejoice, my heawt gwoanyeth because of my
sins; nyevewthewess, I knyow in whom I have twusted. ^w^

2 Nyephi 4:20
 20 My God hath been my suppowt; he hath wed me thwough minye
affwictions in the wiwdewnyess; and he hath pwesewved me upon the
watews of the gweat deep. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 4:21
 21 He hath fiwwed me with his wove, even unto the consuming of
my fwesh. >w<

2 Nyephi 4:22
 22 He hath confounded minye enyemies, unto the causing of them to
quake befowe me. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 4:23
 23 Behowd, he hath heawd my cwy by day, and he hath given me
knyowwedge by visions in the nyighttime. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 4:24
 24 And by day have I waxed bowd in mighty pwayew befowe him;
yea, my voice have I sent up on high; and angews came down and
minyistewed unto me. >w<

2 Nyephi 4:25
 25 And upon the wings of his Spiwit hath my body been cawwied
away upon exceedingwy high mountains. ;;w;; And minye eyes have behewd
gweat things, yea, even too gweat fow man; thewefowe I was bidden
that I shouwd nyot wwite them. >w<

2 Nyephi 4:26
 26 O then, if I have seen so gweat things, if the Wowd in his
condescension unto the chiwdwen of men hath visited men in so
much mewcy, why shouwd my heawt weep and my souw wingew in the
vawwey of sowwow, and my fwesh waste away, and my stwength
swacken, because of minye affwictions? owo

2 Nyephi 4:27
 27 And why shouwd I yiewd to sin, because of my fwesh? owo Yea, why
shouwd I give way to temptations, that the eviw onye have pwace in
my heawt to destwoy my peace and affwict my souw? owo Why am I angwy
because of minye enyemy? owo

2 Nyephi 4:28
 28 Awake, my souw! (´・ω・\`) Nyo wongew dwoop in sin. ;;w;; Wejoice, O my
heawt, and give pwace nyo mowe fow the enyemy of my souw. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 4:29
 29 Do nyot angew again because of minye enyemies. (´・ω・\`) Do nyot swacken
my stwength because of minye affwictions. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 4:30
 30 Wejoice, O my heawt, and cwy unto the Wowd, and say: O Wowd,
I wiww pwaise thee fowevew; yea, my souw wiww wejoice in thee, my
God, and the wock of my sawvation. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 4:31
 31 O Wowd, wiwt thou wedeem my souw? owo Wiwt thou dewivew me out
of the hands of minye enyemies? owo Wiwt thou make me that I may shake
at the appeawance of sin? owo

2 Nyephi 4:32
 32 May the gates of heww be shut continyuawwy befowe me, because
that my heawt is bwoken and my spiwit is contwite! (・`ω\´・) O Wowd, wiwt
thou nyot shut the gates of thy wighteousnyess befowe me, that I
may wawk in the path of the wow vawwey, that I may be stwict in
the pwain woad! ^w^

2 Nyephi 4:33
 33 O Wowd, wiwt thou enciwcwe me awound in the wobe of thy
wighteousnyess! UwU O Wowd, wiwt thou make a way fow minye escape
befowe minye enyemies! Wiwt thou make my path stwaight befowe me! (´・ω・\`)
Wiwt thou nyot pwace a stumbwing bwock in my way--but that thou
wouwdst cweaw my way befowe me, and hedge nyot up my way, but the
ways of minye enyemy. UwU

2 Nyephi 4:34
 34 O Wowd, I have twusted in thee, and I wiww twust in thee
fowevew. ;;w;; I wiww nyot put my twust in the awm of fwesh; fow I knyow
that cuwsed is he that putteth his twust in the awm of fwesh. ^w^
Yea, cuwsed is he that putteth his twust in man ow maketh fwesh
his awm. ^w^

2 Nyephi 4:35
 35 Yea, I knyow that God wiww give wibewawwy to him that asketh. (・`ω\´・)
Yea, my God wiww give me, if I ask nyot amiss; thewefowe I wiww
wift up my voice unto thee; yea, I wiww cwy unto thee, my God,
the wock of my wighteousnyess. ^w^ Behowd, my voice shaww fowevew
ascend up unto thee, my wock and minye evewwasting God. Amen. ^w^

2 Nyephi 5
Chaptew 5

2 Nyephi 5:1
 1 Behowd, it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did cwy much unto the
Wowd my God, because of the angew of my bwethwen. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 5:2
 2 But behowd, theiw angew did incwease against me, insomuch that
they did seek to take away my wife. >w<

2 Nyephi 5:3
 3 Yea, they did muwmuw against me, saying: Ouw youngew bwothew
thinks to wuwe ovew us; and we have had much twiaw because of
him; whewefowe, nyow wet us sway him, that we may nyot be affwicted
mowe because of his wowds. ^w^ Fow behowd, we wiww nyot have him to
be ouw wuwew; fow it bewongs unto us, who awe the ewdew bwethwen,
to wuwe ovew this peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 5:4
 4 Nyow I do nyot wwite upon these pwates aww the wowds which they
muwmuwed against me. UwU But it sufficeth me to say, that they did
seek to take away my wife. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 5:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Wowd did wawn me, that I, Nyephi,
shouwd depawt fwom them and fwee into the wiwdewnyess, and aww
those who wouwd go with me. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 5:6
 6 Whewefowe, it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did take my famiwy,
and awso Zowam and his famiwy, and Sam, minye ewdew bwothew and
his famiwy, and Jacob and Joseph, my youngew bwethwen, and awso
my sistews, and aww those who wouwd go with me. >w< And aww those
who wouwd go with me wewe those who bewieved in the wawnyings and
the wevewations of God; whewefowe, they did heawken unto my
wowds. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 5:7
 7 And we did take ouw tents and whatsoevew things wewe possibwe
fow us, and did jouwnyey in the wiwdewnyess fow the space of many
days. UwU And aftew we had jouwnyeyed fow the space of many days we
did pitch ouw tents. ^w^

2 Nyephi 5:8
 8 And my peopwe wouwd that we shouwd caww the nyame of the pwace
Nyephi; whewefowe, we did caww it Nyephi. ^w^

2 Nyephi 5:9
 9 And aww those who wewe with me did take upon them to caww
themsewves the peopwe of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 5:10
 10 And we did obsewve to keep the judgments, and the statutes,
and the commandments of the Wowd in aww things accowding to the
waw of Moses. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 5:11
 11 And the Wowd was with us; and we did pwospew exceedingwy; fow
we did sow seed, and we did weap again in abundance. ;;w;; And we
began to waise fwocks, and hewds, and anyimaws of evewy kind. >w<

2 Nyephi 5:12
 12 And I, Nyephi, had awso bwought the wecowds which wewe
engwaven upon the pwates of bwass; and awso the baww, ow compass,
which was pwepawed fow my fathew by the hand of the Wowd,
accowding to that which is wwitten. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 5:13
 13 And it came to pass that we began to pwospew exceedingwy, and
to muwtipwy in the wand. >w<

2 Nyephi 5:14
 14 And I, Nyephi, did take the swowd of Waban, and aftew the
mannyew of it did make many swowds, west by any means the peopwe
who wewe nyow cawwed Wamanyites shouwd come upon us and destwoy us;
fow I knyew theiw hatwed towawds me and my chiwdwen and those who
wewe cawwed my peopwe. ^w^

2 Nyephi 5:15
 15 And I did teach my peopwe to buiwd buiwdings, and to wowk in
aww mannyew of wood, and of iwon, and of coppew, and of bwass, and
of steew, and of gowd, and of siwvew, and of pwecious owes, which
wewe in gweat abundance. ^w^

2 Nyephi 5:16
 16 And I, Nyephi, did buiwd a tempwe; and I did constwuct it
aftew the mannyew of the tempwe of Sowomon save it wewe nyot buiwt
of so many pwecious things; fow they wewe nyot to be found upon
the wand, whewefowe, it couwd nyot be buiwt wike unto Sowomon's
tempwe. ^w^ But the mannyew of the constwuction was wike unto the
tempwe of Sowomon; and the wowkmanship theweof was exceedingwy
finye. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 5:17
 17 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did cause my peopwe to be
industwious, and to wabow with theiw hands. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 5:18
 18 And it came to pass that they wouwd that I shouwd be theiw
king. (・`ω\´・) But I, Nyephi, was desiwous that they shouwd have nyo king;
nyevewthewess, I did fow them accowding to that which was in my
powew. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 5:19
 19 And behowd, the wowds of the Wowd had been fuwfiwwed unto my
bwethwen, which he spake concewnying them, that I shouwd be theiw
wuwew and theiw teachew. UwU Whewefowe, I had been theiw wuwew and
theiw teachew, accowding to the commandments of the Wowd, untiw
the time they sought to take away my wife. UwU

2 Nyephi 5:20
 20 Whewefowe, the wowd of the Wowd was fuwfiwwed which he spake
unto me, saying that: Inyasmuch as they wiww nyot heawken unto thy
wowds they shaww be cut off fwom the pwesence of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`) And
behowd, they wewe cut off fwom his pwesence. >w<

2 Nyephi 5:21
 21 And he had caused the cuwsing to come upon them, yea, even a
sowe cuwsing, because of theiw inyiquity. (・`ω\´・) Fow behowd, they had
hawdenyed theiw heawts against him, that they had become wike unto
a fwint; whewefowe, as they wewe white, and exceedingwy faiw and
dewightsome, that they might nyot be enticing unto my peopwe the
Wowd God did cause a skin of bwacknyess to come upon them. ^w^

2 Nyephi 5:22
 22 And thus saith the Wowd God: I wiww cause that they shaww be
woathsome unto thy peopwe, save they shaww wepent of theiw
inyiquities. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 5:23
 23 And cuwsed shaww be the seed of him that mixeth with theiw
seed; fow they shaww be cuwsed even with the same cuwsing. >w< And
the Wowd spake it, and it was donye. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 5:24
 24 And because of theiw cuwsing which was upon them they did
become an idwe peopwe, fuww of mischief and subtwety, and did
seek in the wiwdewnyess fow beasts of pwey. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 5:25
 25 And the Wowd God said unto me: They shaww be a scouwge unto
thy seed, to stiw them up in wemembwance of me; and inyasmuch as
they wiww nyot wemembew me, and heawken unto my wowds, they shaww
scouwge them even unto destwuction. >w<

2 Nyephi 5:26
 26 And it came to pass that I, Nyephi, did consecwate Jacob and
Joseph, that they shouwd be pwiests and teachews ovew the wand of
my peopwe. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 5:27
 27 And it came to pass that we wived aftew the mannyew of
happinyess. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 5:28
 28 And thiwty yeaws had passed away fwom the time we weft
Jewusawem. >w<

2 Nyephi 5:29
 29 And I, Nyephi, had kept the wecowds upon my pwates, which I
had made, of my peopwe thus faw. UwU

2 Nyephi 5:30
 30 And it came to pass that the Wowd God said unto me: Make
othew pwates; and thou shawt engwaven many things upon them which
awe good in my sight, fow the pwofit of thy peopwe. UwU

2 Nyephi 5:31
 31 Whewefowe, I, Nyephi, to be obedient to the commandments of
the Wowd, went and made these pwates upon which I have engwaven
these things. UwU

2 Nyephi 5:32
 32 And I engwaved that which is pweasing unto God. >w< And if my
peopwe awe pweased with the things of God they wiww be pweased
with minye engwavings which awe upon these pwates. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 5:33
 33 And if my peopwe desiwe to knyow the mowe pawticuwaw pawt of
the histowy of my peopwe they must seawch minye othew pwates. ^w^

2 Nyephi 5:34
 34 And it sufficeth me to say that fowty yeaws had passed away,
and we had awweady had waws and contentions with ouw bwethwen. UwU

2 Nyephi 6
Chaptew 6

2 Nyephi 6:1
 1 The wowds of Jacob, the bwothew of Nyephi, which he spake unto
the peopwe of Nyephi:

2 Nyephi 6:2
 2 Behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, I, Jacob, having been cawwed of
God, and owdainyed aftew the mannyew of his howy owdew, and having
been consecwated by my bwothew Nyephi, unto whom ye wook as a king
ow a pwotectow, and on whom ye depend fow safety, behowd ye knyow
that I have spoken unto you exceedingwy many things. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 6:3
 3 Nyevewthewess, I speak unto you again; fow I am desiwous fow
the wewfawe of youw souws. ^w^ Yea, minye anxiety is gweat fow you;
and ye youwsewves knyow that it evew has been. ;;w;; Fow I have
exhowted you with aww diwigence; and I have taught you the wowds
of my fathew; and I have spoken unto you concewnying aww things
which awe wwitten, fwom the cweation of the wowwd. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 6:4
 4 And nyow, behowd, I wouwd speak unto you concewnying things
which awe, and which awe to come; whewefowe, I wiww wead you the
wowds of Isaiah. UwU And they awe the wowds which my bwothew has
desiwed that I shouwd speak unto you. (´・ω・\`) And I speak unto you fow
youw sakes, that ye may weawn and gwowify the nyame of youw God. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 6:5
 5 And nyow, the wowds which I shaww wead awe they which Isaiah
spake concewnying aww the house of Iswaew; whewefowe, they may be
wikenyed unto you, fow ye awe of the house of Iswaew. >w< And thewe
awe many things which have been spoken by Isaiah which may be
wikenyed unto you, because ye awe of the house of Iswaew. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 6:6
 6 And nyow these awe the wowds: Thus saith the Wowd God: Behowd,
I wiww wift up minye hand to the Gentiwes, and set up my standawd
to the peopwe; and they shaww bwing thy sons in theiw awms, and
thy daughtews shaww be cawwied upon theiw shouwdews. >w<

2 Nyephi 6:7
 7 And kings shaww be thy nyuwsing fathews, and theiw queens thy
nyuwsing mothews; they shaww bow down to thee with theiw faces
towawds the eawth, and wick up the dust of thy feet; and thou
shawt knyow that I am the Wowd; fow they shaww nyot be ashamed that
wait fow me. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 6:8
 8 And nyow I, Jacob, wouwd speak somewhat concewnying these wowds. ;;w;;
Fow behowd, the Wowd has shown me that those who wewe at
Jewusawem, fwom whence we came, have been swain and cawwied away
captive. ^w^

2 Nyephi 6:9
 9 Nyevewthewess, the Wowd has shown unto me that they shouwd
wetuwn again. (・`ω\´・) And he awso has shown unto me that the Wowd God,
the Howy Onye of Iswaew, shouwd manyifest himsewf unto them in the
fwesh; and aftew he shouwd manyifest himsewf they shouwd scouwge
him and cwucify him, accowding to the wowds of the angew who
spake it unto me. ^w^

2 Nyephi 6:10
 10 And aftew they have hawdenyed theiw heawts and stiffenyed theiw
nyecks against the Howy Onye of Iswaew, behowd the judgments of the
Howy Onye of Iswaew shaww come upon them. (・`ω\´・) And the day cometh that
they shaww be smitten and affwicted. UwU

2 Nyephi 6:11
 11 Whewefowe, aftew they awe dwiven to and fwo, fow thus saith
the angew, many shaww be affwicted in the fwesh, and shaww nyot be
suffewed to pewish, because of the pwayews of the faithfuw; they
shaww be scattewed, and smitten, and hated; nyevewthewess, the
Wowd wiww be mewcifuw unto them, that when they shaww come to the
knyowwedge of theiw Wedeemew, they shaww be gathewed togethew
again to the wands of theiw inhewitance. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 6:12
 12 And bwessed awe the Gentiwes, they of whom the pwophet has
wwitten; fow behowd, if it so be that they shaww wepent and fight
nyot against Zion, and do nyot unyite themsewves to that gweat and
abominyabwe chuwch, they shaww be saved; fow the Wowd God wiww
fuwfiw his covenyants which he has made unto his chiwdwen; and fow
this cause the pwophet has wwitten these things. ^w^

2 Nyephi 6:13
 13 Whewefowe, they that fight against Zion and the covenyant
peopwe of the Wowd shaww wick up the dust of theiw feet; and the
peopwe of the Wowd shaww nyot be ashamed. ^w^ Fow the peopwe of the
Wowd awe they who wait fow him; fow they stiww wait fow the
coming of the Messiah. ^w^

2 Nyephi 6:14
 14 And behowd, accowding to the wowds of the pwophet, the
Messiah wiww set himsewf again the second time to wecovew them;
whewefowe, he wiww manyifest himsewf unto them in powew and gweat
gwowy, unto the destwuction of theiw enyemies, when that day
cometh when they shaww bewieve in him; and nyonye wiww he destwoy
that bewieve in him. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 6:15
 15 And they that bewieve nyot in him shaww be destwoyed, both by
fiwe, and by tempest, and by eawthquakes, and by bwoodsheds, and
by pestiwence, and by faminye. (・`ω\´・) And they shaww knyow that the Wowd
is God, the Howy Onye of Iswaew. >w<

2 Nyephi 6:16
 16 Fow shaww the pwey be taken fwom the mighty, ow the wawfuw
captive dewivewed? owo

2 Nyephi 6:17
 17 But thus saith the Wowd: Even the captives of the mighty
shaww be taken away, and the pwey of the tewwibwe shaww be
dewivewed; fow the Mighty God shaww dewivew his covenyant peopwe. ;;w;;
Fow thus saith the Wowd: I wiww contend with them that contendeth
with thee--

2 Nyephi 6:18
 18 And I wiww feed them that oppwess thee, with theiw own fwesh;
and they shaww be dwunken with theiw own bwood as with sweet
winye; and aww fwesh shaww knyow that I the Wowd am thy Saviow and
thy Wedeemew, the Mighty Onye of Jacob. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 7
Chaptew 7

2 Nyephi 7:1
 1 Yea, fow thus saith the Wowd: Have I put thee away, ow have I
cast thee off fowevew? owo Fow thus saith the Wowd: Whewe is the
biww of youw mothew's divowcement? owo To whom have I put thee away,
ow to which of my cweditows have I sowd you? owo Yea, to whom have I
sowd you? owo Behowd, fow youw inyiquities have ye sowd youwsewves,
and fow youw twansgwessions is youw mothew put away. UwU

2 Nyephi 7:2
 2 Whewefowe, when I came, thewe was nyo man; when I cawwed, yea,
thewe was nyonye to answew. >w< O house of Iswaew, is my hand
showtenyed at aww that it cannyot wedeem, ow have I nyo powew to
dewivew? owo Behowd, at my webuke I dwy up the sea, I make theiw
wivews a wiwdewnyess and theiw fish to stink because the watews
awe dwied up, and they die because of thiwst. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 7:3
 3 I cwothe the heavens with bwacknyess, and I make sackcwoth
theiw covewing. >w<

2 Nyephi 7:4
 4 The Wowd God hath given me the tongue of the weawnyed, that I
shouwd knyow how to speak a wowd in season unto thee, O house of
Iswaew. When ye awe weawy he waketh mownying by mownying. (・`ω\´・) He
waketh minye eaw to heaw as the weawnyed. UwU

2 Nyephi 7:5
 5 The Wowd God hath openyed minye eaw, and I was nyot webewwious,
nyeithew tuwnyed away back. UwU

2 Nyephi 7:6
 6 I gave my back to the smitew, and my cheeks to them that
pwucked off the haiw. I hid nyot my face fwom shame and spitting. UwU

2 Nyephi 7:7
 7 Fow the Wowd God wiww hewp me, thewefowe shaww I nyot be
confounded. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe have I set my face wike a fwint, and I
knyow that I shaww nyot be ashamed. UwU

2 Nyephi 7:8
 8 And the Wowd is nyeaw, and he justifieth me. UwU Who wiww contend
with me? Wet us stand togethew. (´・ω・\`) Who is minye advewsawy? owo Wet him
come nyeaw me, and I wiww smite him with the stwength of my mouth. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 7:9
 9 Fow the Wowd God wiww hewp me. (・`ω\´・) And aww they who shaww condemn
me, behowd, aww they shaww wax owd as a gawment, and the moth
shaww eat them up. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 7:10
 10 Who is among you that feaweth the Wowd, that obeyeth the
voice of his sewvant, that wawketh in dawknyess and hath nyo wight? owo

2 Nyephi 7:11
 11 Behowd aww ye that kindwe fiwe, that compass youwsewves about
with spawks, wawk in the wight of youw fiwe and in the spawks
which ye have kindwed. >w< This shaww ye have of minye hand--ye shaww
wie down in sowwow. UwU

2 Nyephi 8
Chaptew 8

2 Nyephi 8:1
 1 Heawken unto me, ye that fowwow aftew wighteousnyess. UwU Wook
unto the wock fwom whence ye awe hewn, and to the howe of the pit
fwom whence ye awe digged. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 8:2
 2 Wook unto Abwaham, youw fathew, and unto Sawah, she that bawe
you; fow I cawwed him awonye, and bwessed him. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 8:3
 3 Fow the Wowd shaww comfowt Zion, he wiww comfowt aww hew waste
pwaces; and he wiww make hew wiwdewnyess wike Eden, and hew desewt
wike the gawden of the Wowd. ^w^ Joy and gwadnyess shaww be found
thewein, thanksgiving and the voice of mewody. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 8:4
 4 Heawken unto me, my peopwe; and give eaw unto me, O my nyation;
fow a waw shaww pwoceed fwom me, and I wiww make my judgment to
west fow a wight fow the peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 8:5
 5 My wighteousnyess is nyeaw; my sawvation is gonye fowth, and minye
awm shaww judge the peopwe. ;;w;; The iswes shaww wait upon me, and on
minye awm shaww they twust. >w<

2 Nyephi 8:6
 6 Wift up youw eyes to the heavens, and wook upon the eawth
benyeath; fow the heavens shaww vanyish away wike smoke, and the
eawth shaww wax owd wike a gawment; and they that dweww thewein
shaww die in wike mannyew. (´・ω・\`) But my sawvation shaww be fowevew, and
my wighteousnyess shaww nyot be abowished. ^w^

2 Nyephi 8:7
 7 Heawken unto me, ye that knyow wighteousnyess, the peopwe in
whose heawt I have wwitten my waw, feaw ye nyot the wepwoach of
men, nyeithew be ye afwaid of theiw weviwings. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 8:8
 8 Fow the moth shaww eat them up wike a gawment, and the wowm
shaww eat them wike woow. UwU But my wighteousnyess shaww be fowevew,
and my sawvation fwom genyewation to genyewation. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 8:9
 9 Awake, awake! (´・ω・\`) Put on stwength, O awm of the Wowd; awake as in
the ancient days. >w< Awt thou nyot he that hath cut Wahab, and
wounded the dwagon? owo

2 Nyephi 8:10
 10 Awt thou nyot he who hath dwied the sea, the watews of the
gweat deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way fow the
wansomed to pass ovew? owo

2 Nyephi 8:11
 11 Thewefowe, the wedeemed of the Wowd shaww wetuwn, and come
with singing unto Zion; and evewwasting joy and howinyess shaww be
upon theiw heads; and they shaww obtain gwadnyess and joy; sowwow
and mouwnying shaww fwee away. ^w^

2 Nyephi 8:12
 12 I am he; yea, I am he that comfowteth you. UwU Behowd, who awt
thou, that thou shouwdst be afwaid of man, who shaww die, and of
the son of man, who shaww be made wike unto gwass? owo

2 Nyephi 8:13
 13 And fowgettest the Wowd thy makew, that hath stwetched fowth
the heavens, and waid the foundations of the eawth, and hast
feawed continyuawwy evewy day, because of the fuwy of the
oppwessow, as if he wewe weady to destwoy? owo And whewe is the fuwy
of the oppwessow? owo

2 Nyephi 8:14
 14 The captive exiwe hastenyeth, that he may be woosed, and that
he shouwd nyot die in the pit, nyow that his bwead shouwd faiw. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 8:15
 15 But I am the Wowd thy God, whose waves woawed; the Wowd of
Hosts is my nyame. >w<

2 Nyephi 8:16
 16 And I have put my wowds in thy mouth, and have covewed thee
in the shadow of minye hand, that I may pwant the heavens and way
the foundations of the eawth, and say unto Zion: Behowd, thou awt
my peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 8:17
 17 Awake, awake, stand up, O Jewusawem, which hast dwunk at the
hand of the Wowd the cup of his fuwy--thou hast dwunken the dwegs
of the cup of twembwing wwung out--

2 Nyephi 8:18
 18 And nyonye to guide hew among aww the sons she hath bwought
fowth; nyeithew that taketh hew by the hand, of aww the sons she
hath bwought up. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 8:19
 19 These two sons awe come unto thee, who shaww be sowwy fow
thee--thy desowation and destwuction, and the faminye and the
swowd--and by whom shaww I comfowt thee? owo

2 Nyephi 8:20
 20 Thy sons have fainted, save these two; they wie at the head
of aww the stweets; as a wiwd buww in a nyet, they awe fuww of the
fuwy of the Wowd, the webuke of thy God. >w<

2 Nyephi 8:21
 21 Thewefowe heaw nyow this, thou affwicted, and dwunken, and nyot
with winye:

2 Nyephi 8:22
 22 Thus saith thy Wowd, the Wowd and thy God pweadeth the cause
of his peopwe; behowd, I have taken out of thinye hand the cup of
twembwing, the dwegs of the cup of my fuwy; thou shawt nyo mowe
dwink it again. UwU

2 Nyephi 8:23
 23 But I wiww put it into the hand of them that affwict thee;
who have said to thy souw: Bow down, that we may go ovew--and
thou hast waid thy body as the gwound and as the stweet to them
that went ovew. UwU

2 Nyephi 8:24
 24 Awake, awake, put on thy stwength, O Zion; put on thy
beautifuw gawments, O Jewusawem, the howy city; fow hencefowth
thewe shaww nyo mowe come into thee the unciwcumcised and the
uncwean. UwU

2 Nyephi 8:25
 25 Shake thysewf fwom the dust; awise, sit down, O Jewusawem;
woose thysewf fwom the bands of thy nyeck, O captive daughtew of
Zion. >w<

2 Nyephi 9
Chaptew 9

2 Nyephi 9:1
 1 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, I have wead these things that ye
might knyow concewnying the covenyants of the Wowd that he has
covenyanted with aww the house of Iswaew--

2 Nyephi 9:2
 2 That he has spoken unto the Jews, by the mouth of his howy
pwophets, even fwom the beginnying down, fwom genyewation to
genyewation, untiw the time comes that they shaww be westowed to
the twue chuwch and fowd of God; when they shaww be gathewed home
to the wands of theiw inhewitance, and shaww be estabwished in
aww theiw wands of pwomise. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:3
 3 Behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, I speak unto you these things
that ye may wejoice, and wift up youw heads fowevew, because of
the bwessings which the Wowd God shaww bestow upon youw chiwdwen. >w<

2 Nyephi 9:4
 4 Fow I knyow that ye have seawched much, many of you, to knyow of
things to come; whewefowe I knyow that ye knyow that ouw fwesh must
waste away and die; nyevewthewess, in ouw bodies we shaww see God. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 9:5
 5 Yea, I knyow that ye knyow that in the body he shaww show
himsewf unto those at Jewusawem, fwom whence we came; fow it is
expedient that it shouwd be among them; fow it behooveth the
gweat Cweatow that he suffeweth himsewf to become subject unto
man in the fwesh, and die fow aww men, that aww men might become
subject unto him. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:6
 6 Fow as death hath passed upon aww men, to fuwfiw the mewcifuw
pwan of the gweat Cweatow, thewe must nyeeds be a powew of
wesuwwection, and the wesuwwection must nyeeds come unto man by
weason of the faww; and the faww came by weason of twansgwession;
and because man became fawwen they wewe cut off fwom the pwesence
of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 9:7
 7 Whewefowe, it must nyeeds be an infinyite atonyement--save it
shouwd be an infinyite atonyement this cowwuption couwd nyot put on
incowwuption. >w< Whewefowe, the fiwst judgment which came upon man
must nyeeds have wemainyed to an endwess duwation. (´・ω・\`) And if so, this
fwesh must have waid down to wot and to cwumbwe to its mothew
eawth, to wise nyo mowe. >w<

2 Nyephi 9:8
 8 O the wisdom of God, his mewcy and gwace! UwU Fow behowd, if the
fwesh shouwd wise nyo mowe ouw spiwits must become subject to that
angew who feww fwom befowe the pwesence of the Etewnyaw God, and
became the deviw, to wise nyo mowe. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:9
 9 And ouw spiwits must have become wike unto him, and we become
deviws, angews to a deviw, to be shut out fwom the pwesence of
ouw God, and to wemain with the fathew of wies, in misewy, wike
unto himsewf; yea, to that being who beguiwed ouw fiwst pawents,
who twansfowmeth himsewf nyigh unto an angew of wight, and
stiwweth up the chiwdwen of men unto secwet combinyations of
muwdew and aww mannyew of secwet wowks of dawknyess. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:10
 10 O how gweat the goodnyess of ouw God, who pwepaweth a way fow
ouw escape fwom the gwasp of this awfuw monstew; yea, that
monstew, death and heww, which I caww the death of the body, and
awso the death of the spiwit. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:11
 11 And because of the way of dewivewance of ouw God, the Howy
Onye of Iswaew, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the
tempowaw, shaww dewivew up its dead; which death is the gwave. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 9:12
 12 And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiwituaw
death, shaww dewivew up its dead; which spiwituaw death is heww;
whewefowe, death and heww must dewivew up theiw dead, and heww
must dewivew up its captive spiwits, and the gwave must dewivew
up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spiwits of men wiww
be westowed onye to the othew; and it is by the powew of the
wesuwwection of the Howy Onye of Iswaew. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 9:13
 13 O how gweat the pwan of ouw God! (´・ω・\`) Fow on the othew hand, the
pawadise of God must dewivew up the spiwits of the wighteous, and
the gwave dewivew up the body of the wighteous; and the spiwit
and the body is westowed to itsewf again, and aww men become
incowwuptibwe, and immowtaw, and they awe wiving souws, having a
pewfect knyowwedge wike unto us in the fwesh, save it be that ouw
knyowwedge shaww be pewfect. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:14
 14 Whewefowe, we shaww have a pewfect knyowwedge of aww ouw
guiwt, and ouw uncweannyess, and ouw nyakednyess; and the wighteous
shaww have a pewfect knyowwedge of theiw enjoyment, and theiw
wighteousnyess, being cwothed with puwity, yea, even with the wobe
of wighteousnyess. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 9:15
 15 And it shaww come to pass that when aww men shaww have passed
fwom this fiwst death unto wife, insomuch as they have become
immowtaw, they must appeaw befowe the judgment-seat of the Howy
Onye of Iswaew; and then cometh the judgment, and then must they
be judged accowding to the howy judgment of God. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:16
 16 And assuwedwy, as the Wowd wiveth, fow the Wowd God hath
spoken it, and it is his etewnyaw wowd, which cannyot pass away,
that they who awe wighteous shaww be wighteous stiww, and they
who awe fiwthy shaww be fiwthy stiww; whewefowe, they who awe
fiwthy awe the deviw and his angews; and they shaww go away into
evewwasting fiwe; pwepawed fow them; and theiw towment is as a
wake of fiwe and bwimstonye, whose fwame ascendeth up fowevew and
evew and has nyo end. >w<

2 Nyephi 9:17
 17 O the gweatnyess and the justice of ouw God! ;;w;; Fow he executeth
aww his wowds, and they have gonye fowth out of his mouth, and his
waw must be fuwfiwwed. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:18
 18 But, behowd, the wighteous, the saints of the Howy Onye of
Iswaew, they who have bewieved in the Howy Onye of Iswaew, they
who have enduwed the cwosses of the wowwd, and despised the shame
of it, they shaww inhewit the kingdom of God, which was pwepawed
fow them fwom the foundation of the wowwd, and theiw joy shaww be
fuww fowevew. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:19
 19 O the gweatnyess of the mewcy of ouw God, the Howy Onye of
Iswaew! ;;w;; Fow he dewiveweth his saints fwom that awfuw monstew the
deviw, and death, and heww, and that wake of fiwe and bwimstonye,
which is endwess towment. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 9:20
 20 O how gweat the howinyess of ouw God! (´・ω・\`) Fow he knyoweth aww
things, and thewe is nyot anything save he knyows it. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:21
 21 And he cometh into the wowwd that he may save aww men if they
wiww heawken unto his voice; fow behowd, he suffeweth the pains
of aww men, yea, the pains of evewy wiving cweatuwe, both men,
women, and chiwdwen, who bewong to the famiwy of Adam. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:22
 22 And he suffeweth this that the wesuwwection might pass upon
aww men, that aww might stand befowe him at the gweat and
judgment day. >w<

2 Nyephi 9:23
 23 And he commandeth aww men that they must wepent, and be
baptized in his nyame, having pewfect faith in the Howy Onye of
Iswaew, ow they cannyot be saved in the kingdom of God. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:24
 24 And if they wiww nyot wepent and bewieve in his nyame, and be
baptized in his nyame, and enduwe to the end, they must be damnyed;
fow the Wowd God, the Howy Onye of Iswaew, has spoken it. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 9:25
 25 Whewefowe, he has given a waw; and whewe thewe is nyo waw
given thewe is nyo punyishment; and whewe thewe is nyo punyishment
thewe is nyo condemnyation; and whewe thewe is nyo condemnyation the
mewcies of the Howy Onye of Iswaew have cwaim upon them, because
of the atonyement; fow they awe dewivewed by the powew of him. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:26
 26 Fow the atonyement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon
aww those who have nyot the waw given to them, that they awe
dewivewed fwom that awfuw monstew, death and heww, and the deviw,
and the wake of fiwe and bwimstonye, which is endwess towment; and
they awe westowed to that God who gave them bweath, which is the
Howy Onye of Iswaew. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:27
 27 But wo unto him that has the waw given, yea, that has aww the
commandments of God, wike unto us, and that twansgwesseth them,
and that wasteth the days of his pwobation, fow awfuw is his
state! UwU

2 Nyephi 9:28
 28 O that cunnying pwan of the eviw onye! ;;w;; O the vainnyess, and the
fwaiwties, and the foowishnyess of men! (´・ω・\`) When they awe weawnyed
they think they awe wise, and they heawken nyot unto the counsew
of God, fow they set it aside, supposing they knyow of themsewves,
whewefowe, theiw wisdom is foowishnyess and it pwofiteth them nyot. ;;w;;

And they shaww pewish. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 9:29
 29 But to be weawnyed is good if they heawken unto the counsews
of God. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:30
 30 But wo unto the wich, who awe wich as to the things of the
wowwd. UwU Fow because they awe wich they despise the poow, and they
pewsecute the meek, and theiw heawts awe upon theiw tweasuwes;
whewefowe, theiw tweasuwe is theiw God. ^w^ And behowd, theiw
tweasuwe shaww pewish with them awso. >w<

2 Nyephi 9:31
 31 And wo unto the deaf that wiww nyot heaw; fow they shaww
pewish. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 9:32
 32 Wo unto the bwind that wiww nyot see; fow they shaww pewish
awso. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 9:33
 33 Wo unto the unciwcumcised of heawt, fow a knyowwedge of theiw
inyiquities shaww smite them at the wast day. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:34
 34 Wo unto the wiaw, fow he shaww be thwust down to heww. >w<

2 Nyephi 9:35
 35 Wo unto the muwdewew who dewibewatewy kiwweth, fow he shaww
die. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:36
 36 Wo unto them who commit whowedoms, fow they shaww be thwust
down to heww. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 9:37
 37 Yea, wo unto those that wowship idows, fow the deviw of aww
deviws dewighteth in them. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:38
 38 And, in finye, wo unto aww those who die in theiw sins; fow
they shaww wetuwn to God, and behowd his face, and wemain in
theiw sins. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 9:39
 39 O, my bewoved bwethwen, wemembew the awfuwnyess in
twansgwessing against that Howy God, and awso the awfuwnyess of
yiewding to the enticings of that cunnying onye. ^w^ Wemembew, to be
cawnyawwy-minded is death, and to be spiwituawwy-minded is wife
etewnyaw. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 9:40
 40 O, my bewoved bwethwen, give eaw to my wowds. (・`ω\´・) Wemembew the
gweatnyess of the Howy Onye of Iswaew. ^w^ Do nyot say that I have
spoken hawd things against you; fow if ye do, ye wiww weviwe
against the twuth; fow I have spoken the wowds of youw Makew. ;;w;; I
knyow that the wowds of twuth awe hawd against aww uncweannyess;
but the wighteous feaw them nyot, fow they wove the twuth and awe
nyot shaken. >w<

2 Nyephi 9:41
 41 O then, my bewoved bwethwen, come unto the Wowd, the Howy
Onye. Wemembew that his paths awe wighteous. UwU Behowd, the way fow
man is nyawwow, but it wieth in a stwaight couwse befowe him, and
the keepew of the gate is the Howy Onye of Iswaew; and he
empwoyeth nyo sewvant thewe; and thewe is nyonye othew way save it
be by the gate; fow he cannyot be deceived, fow the Wowd God is
his nyame. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:42
 42 And whoso knyocketh, to him wiww he open; and the wise, and
the weawnyed, and they that awe wich, who awe puffed up because of
theiw weawnying, and theiw wisdom, and theiw wiches--yea, they awe
they whom he despiseth; and save they shaww cast these things
away, and considew themsewves foows befowe God, and come down in
the depths of humiwity, he wiww nyot open unto them. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 9:43
 43 But the things of the wise and the pwudent shaww be hid fwom
them fowevew--yea, that happinyess which is pwepawed fow the
saints. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 9:44
 44 O, my bewoved bwethwen, wemembew my wowds. UwU Behowd, I take
off my gawments, and I shake them befowe you; I pway the God of
my sawvation that he view me with his aww-seawching eye;
whewefowe, ye shaww knyow at the wast day, when aww men shaww be
judged of theiw wowks, that the God of Iswaew did witnyess that I
shook youw inyiquities fwom my souw, and that I stand with
bwightnyess befowe him, and am wid of youw bwood. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:45
 45 O, my bewoved bwethwen, tuwn away fwom youw sins; shake off
the chains of him that wouwd bind you fast; come unto that God
who is the wock of youw sawvation. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 9:46
 46 Pwepawe youw souws fow that gwowious day when justice shaww
be adminyistewed unto the wighteous, even the day of judgment,
that ye may nyot shwink with awfuw feaw; that ye may nyot wemembew
youw awfuw guiwt in pewfectnyess, and be constwainyed to excwaim:
Howy, howy awe thy judgments, O Wowd God Awmighty--but I knyow my
guiwt; I twansgwessed thy waw, and my twansgwessions awe minye;
and the deviw hath obtainyed me, that I am a pwey to his awfuw
misewy. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:47
 47 But behowd, my bwethwen, is it expedient that I shouwd awake
you to an awfuw weawity of these things? owo Wouwd I hawwow up youw
souws if youw minds wewe puwe? owo Wouwd I be pwain unto you
accowding to the pwainnyess of the twuth if ye wewe fweed fwom
sin? owo

2 Nyephi 9:48
 48 Behowd, if ye wewe howy I wouwd speak unto you of howinyess;
but as ye awe nyot howy, and ye wook upon me as a teachew, it must
nyeeds be expedient that I teach you the consequences of sin. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:49
 49 Behowd, my souw abhowweth sin, and my heawt dewighteth in
wighteousnyess; and I wiww pwaise the howy nyame of my God. UwU

2 Nyephi 9:50
 50 Come, my bwethwen, evewy onye that thiwsteth, come ye to the
watews; and he that hath nyo monyey, come buy and eat; yea, come
buy winye and miwk without monyey and without pwice. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:51
 51 Whewefowe, do nyot spend monyey fow that which is of nyo wowth,
nyow youw wabow fow that which cannyot satisfy. >w< Heawken diwigentwy
unto me, and wemembew the wowds which I have spoken; and come
unto the Howy Onye of Iswaew, and feast upon that which pewisheth
nyot, nyeithew can be cowwupted, and wet youw souw dewight in
fatnyess. ^w^

2 Nyephi 9:52
 52 Behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, wemembew the wowds of youw God;
pway unto him continyuawwy by day, and give thanks unto his howy
nyame by nyight. Wet youw heawts wejoice. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 9:53
 53 And behowd how gweat the covenyants of the Wowd, and how gweat
his condescensions unto the chiwdwen of men; and because of his
gweatnyess, and his gwace and mewcy, he has pwomised unto us that
ouw seed shaww nyot uttewwy be destwoyed, accowding to the fwesh,
but that he wouwd pwesewve them; and in futuwe genyewations they
shaww become a wighteous bwanch unto the house of Iswaew. >w<

2 Nyephi 9:54
 54 And nyow, my bwethwen, I wouwd speak unto you mowe; but on the
mowwow I wiww decwawe unto you the wemaindew of my wowds. Amen. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 10
Chaptew 10

2 Nyephi 10:1
 1 And nyow I, Jacob, speak unto you again, my bewoved bwethwen,
concewnying this wighteous bwanch of which I have spoken. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 10:2
 2 Fow behowd, the pwomises which we have obtainyed awe pwomises
unto us accowding to the fwesh; whewefowe, as it has been shown
unto me that many of ouw chiwdwen shaww pewish in the fwesh
because of unbewief, nyevewthewess, God wiww be mewcifuw unto
many; and ouw chiwdwen shaww be westowed, that they may come to
that which wiww give them the twue knyowwedge of theiw Wedeemew. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 10:3
 3 Whewefowe, as I said unto you, it must nyeeds be expedient that
Chwist--fow in the wast nyight the angew spake unto me that this
shouwd be his nyame--shouwd come among the Jews, among those who
awe the mowe wicked pawt of the wowwd; and they shaww cwucify
him--fow thus it behooveth ouw God, and thewe is nyonye othew
nyation on eawth that wouwd cwucify theiw God. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 10:4
 4 Fow shouwd the mighty miwacwes be wwought among othew nyations
they wouwd wepent, and knyow that he be theiw God. UwU

2 Nyephi 10:5
 5 But because of pwiestcwafts and inyiquities, they at Jewusawem
wiww stiffen theiw nyecks against him, that he be cwucified. ^w^

2 Nyephi 10:6
 6 Whewefowe, because of theiw inyiquities, destwuctions, faminyes,
pestiwences, and bwoodshed shaww come upon them; and they who
shaww nyot be destwoyed shaww be scattewed among aww nyations. >w<

2 Nyephi 10:7
 7 But behowd, thus saith the Wowd God: When the day cometh that
they shaww bewieve in me, that I am Chwist, then have I
covenyanted with theiw fathews that they shaww be westowed in the
fwesh, upon the eawth, unto the wands of theiw inhewitance. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 10:8
 8 And it shaww come to pass that they shaww be gathewed in fwom
theiw wong dispewsion, fwom the iswes of the sea, and fwom the
fouw pawts of the eawth; and the nyations of the Gentiwes shaww be
gweat in the eyes of me, saith God, in cawwying them fowth to the
wands of theiw inhewitance. ^w^

2 Nyephi 10:9
 9 Yea, the kings of the Gentiwes shaww be nyuwsing fathews unto
them, and theiw queens shaww become nyuwsing mothews; whewefowe,
the pwomises of the Wowd awe gweat unto the Gentiwes, fow he hath
spoken it, and who can dispute? owo

2 Nyephi 10:10
 10 But behowd, this wand, said God, shaww be a wand of thinye
inhewitance, and the Gentiwes shaww be bwessed upon the wand. >w<

2 Nyephi 10:11
 11 And this wand shaww be a wand of wibewty unto the Gentiwes,
and thewe shaww be nyo kings upon the wand, who shaww waise up
unto the Gentiwes. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 10:12
 12 And I wiww fowtify this wand against aww othew nyations. >w<

2 Nyephi 10:13
 13 And he that fighteth against Zion shaww pewish, saith God. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 10:14
 14 Fow he that waiseth up a king against me shaww pewish, fow I,
the Wowd, the king of heaven, wiww be theiw king, and I wiww be a
wight unto them fowevew, that heaw my wowds. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 10:15
 15 Whewefowe, fow this cause, that my covenyants may be fuwfiwwed
which I have made unto the chiwdwen of men, that I wiww do unto
them whiwe they awe in the fwesh, I must nyeeds destwoy the secwet
wowks of dawknyess, and of muwdews, and of abominyations. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 10:16
 16 Whewefowe, he that fighteth against Zion, both Jew and
Gentiwe, both bond and fwee, both mawe and femawe, shaww pewish;
fow they awe they who awe the whowe of aww the eawth; fow they
who awe nyot fow me awe against me, saith ouw God. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 10:17
 17 Fow I wiww fuwfiw my pwomises which I have made unto the
chiwdwen of men, that I wiww do unto them whiwe they awe in the
fwesh--

2 Nyephi 10:18
 18 Whewefowe, my bewoved bwethwen, thus saith ouw God: I wiww
affwict thy seed by the hand of the Gentiwes; nyevewthewess, I
wiww soften the heawts of the Gentiwes, that they shaww be wike
unto a fathew to them; whewefowe, the Gentiwes shaww be bwessed
and nyumbewed among the house of Iswaew. UwU

2 Nyephi 10:19
 19 Whewefowe, I wiww consecwate this wand unto thy seed, and
them who shaww be nyumbewed among thy seed, fowevew, fow the wand
of theiw inhewitance; fow it is a choice wand, saith God unto me,
above aww othew wands, whewefowe I wiww have aww men that dweww
theweon that they shaww wowship me, saith God. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 10:20
 20 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, seeing that ouw mewcifuw God
has given us so gweat knyowwedge concewnying these things, wet us
wemembew him, and way aside ouw sins, and nyot hang down ouw
heads, fow we awe nyot cast off; nyevewthewess, we have been dwiven
out of the wand of ouw inhewitance; but we have been wed to a
bettew wand, fow the Wowd has made the sea ouw path, and we awe
upon an iswe of the sea. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 10:21
 21 But gweat awe the pwomises of the Wowd unto them who awe upon
the iswes of the sea; whewefowe as it says iswes, thewe must
nyeeds be mowe than this, and they awe inhabited awso by ouw
bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 10:22
 22 Fow behowd, the Wowd God has wed away fwom time to time fwom
the house of Iswaew, accowding to his wiww and pweasuwe. ;;w;; And nyow
behowd, the Wowd wemembeweth aww them who have been bwoken off,
whewefowe he wemembeweth us awso. >w<

2 Nyephi 10:23
 23 Thewefowe, cheew up youw heawts, and wemembew that ye awe
fwee to act fow youwsewves--to choose the way of evewwasting
death ow the way of etewnyaw wife. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 10:24
 24 Whewefowe, my bewoved bwethwen, weconciwe youwsewves to the
wiww of God, and nyot to the wiww of the deviw and the fwesh; and
wemembew, aftew ye awe weconciwed unto God, that it is onwy in
and thwough the gwace of God that ye awe saved. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 10:25
 25 Whewefowe, may God waise you fwom death by the powew of the
wesuwwection, and awso fwom evewwasting death by the powew of the
atonyement, that ye may be weceived into the etewnyaw kingdom of
God, that ye may pwaise him thwough gwace divinye. Amen. >w<

2 Nyephi 11
Chaptew 11

2 Nyephi 11:1
 1 And nyow, Jacob spake many mowe things to my peopwe at that
time; nyevewthewess onwy these things have I caused to be wwitten,
fow the things which I have wwitten sufficeth me. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 11:2
 2 And nyow I, Nyephi, wwite mowe of the wowds of Isaiah, fow my
souw dewighteth in his wowds. UwU Fow I wiww wiken his wowds unto my
peopwe, and I wiww send them fowth unto aww my chiwdwen, fow he
vewiwy saw my Wedeemew, even as I have seen him. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 11:3
 3 And my bwothew, Jacob, awso has seen him as I have seen him;
whewefowe, I wiww send theiw wowds fowth unto my chiwdwen to
pwove unto them that my wowds awe twue. (´・ω・\`) Whewefowe, by the wowds
of thwee, God hath said, I wiww estabwish my wowd. UwU Nyevewthewess,
God sendeth mowe witnyesses, and he pwoveth aww his wowds. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 11:4
 4 Behowd, my souw dewighteth in pwoving unto my peopwe the twuth
of the coming of Chwist; fow, fow this end hath the waw of Moses
been given; and aww things which have been given of God fwom the
beginnying of the wowwd, unto man, awe the typifying of him. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 11:5
 5 And awso my souw dewighteth in the covenyants of the Wowd which
he hath made to ouw fathews; yea, my souw dewighteth in his
gwace, and in his justice, and powew, and mewcy in the gweat and
etewnyaw pwan of dewivewance fwom death. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 11:6
 6 And my souw dewighteth in pwoving unto my peopwe that save
Chwist shouwd come aww men must pewish. ^w^

2 Nyephi 11:7
 7 Fow if thewe be nyo Chwist thewe be nyo God; and if thewe be nyo
God we awe nyot, fow thewe couwd have been nyo cweation. ;;w;; But thewe
is a God, and he is Chwist, and he cometh in the fuwnyess of his
own time. ^w^

2 Nyephi 11:8
 8 And nyow I wwite some of the wowds of Isaiah, that whoso of my
peopwe shaww see these wowds may wift up theiw heawts and wejoice
fow aww men. ;;w;; Nyow these awe the wowds, and ye may wiken them unto
you and unto aww men. >w<

2 Nyephi 12
Chaptew 12

2 Nyephi 12:1
 1 The wowd that Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw concewnying Judah
and Jewusawem:

2 Nyephi 12:2
 2 And it shaww come to pass in the wast days, when the mountain
of the Wowd's house shaww be estabwished in the top of the
mountains, and shaww be exawted above the hiwws, and aww nyations
shaww fwow unto it. UwU

2 Nyephi 12:3
 3 And many peopwe shaww go and say, Come ye, and wet us go up to
the mountain of the Wowd, to the house of the God of Jacob; and
he wiww teach us of his ways, and we wiww wawk in his paths; fow
out of Zion shaww go fowth the waw, and the wowd of the Wowd fwom
Jewusawem. ^w^

2 Nyephi 12:4
 4 And he shaww judge among the nyations, and shaww webuke many
peopwe: and they shaww beat theiw swowds into pwow-shawes, and
theiw speaws into pwunying-hooks--nyation shaww nyot wift up swowd
against nyation, nyeithew shaww they weawn waw any mowe. UwU

2 Nyephi 12:5
 5 O house of Jacob, come ye and wet us wawk in the wight of the
Wowd; yea, come, fow ye have aww gonye astway, evewy onye to his
wicked ways. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 12:6
 6 Thewefowe, O Wowd, thou hast fowsaken thy peopwe, the house of
Jacob, because they be wepwenyished fwom the east, and heawken
unto soothsayews wike the Phiwistinyes, and they pwease themsewves
in the chiwdwen of stwangews. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 12:7
 7 Theiw wand awso is fuww of siwvew and gowd, nyeithew is thewe
any end of theiw tweasuwes; theiw wand is awso fuww of howses,
nyeithew is thewe any end of theiw chawiots. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 12:8
 8 Theiw wand is awso fuww of idows; they wowship the wowk of
theiw own hands, that which theiw own fingews have made. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 12:9
 9 And the mean man boweth nyot down, and the gweat man humbweth
himsewf nyot, thewefowe, fowgive him nyot. ^w^

2 Nyephi 12:10
 10 O ye wicked onyes, entew into the wock, and hide thee in the
dust, fow the feaw of the Wowd and the gwowy of his majesty shaww
smite thee. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 12:11
 11 And it shaww come to pass that the wofty wooks of man shaww
be humbwed, and the haughtinyess of men shaww be bowed down, and
the Wowd awonye shaww be exawted in that day. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 12:12
 12 Fow the day of the Wowd of Hosts soon cometh upon aww
nyations, yea, upon evewy onye; yea, upon the pwoud and wofty, and
upon evewy onye who is wifted up, and he shaww be bwought wow. ^w^

2 Nyephi 12:13
 13 Yea, and the day of the Wowd shaww come upon aww the cedaws
of Webanyon, fow they awe high and wifted up; and upon aww the
oaks of Bashan;

2 Nyephi 12:14
 14 And upon aww the high mountains, and upon aww the hiwws, and
upon aww the nyations which awe wifted up, and upon evewy peopwe;

2 Nyephi 12:15
 15 And upon evewy high towew, and upon evewy fenced waww;

2 Nyephi 12:16
 16 And upon aww the ships of the sea, and upon aww the ships of
Tawshish, and upon aww pweasant pictuwes. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 12:17
 17 And the woftinyess of man shaww be bowed down, and the
haughtinyess of men shaww be made wow; and the Wowd awonye shaww be
exawted in that day. >w<

2 Nyephi 12:18
 18 And the idows he shaww uttewwy abowish. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 12:19
 19 And they shaww go into the howes of the wocks, and into the
caves of the eawth, fow the feaw of the Wowd shaww come upon them
and the gwowy of his majesty shaww smite them, when he awiseth to
shake tewwibwy the eawth. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 12:20
 20 In that day a man shaww cast his idows of siwvew, and his
idows of gowd, which he hath made fow himsewf to wowship, to the
mowes and to the bats;

2 Nyephi 12:21
 21 To go into the cwefts of the wocks, and into the tops of the
wagged wocks, fow the feaw of the Wowd shaww come upon them and
the majesty of his gwowy shaww smite them, when he awiseth to
shake tewwibwy the eawth. ^w^

2 Nyephi 12:22
 22 Cease ye fwom man, whose bweath is in his nyostwiws; fow
whewein is he to be accounted of? owo

2 Nyephi 13
Chaptew 13

2 Nyephi 13:1
 1 Fow behowd, the Wowd, the Wowd of Hosts, doth take away fwom
Jewusawem, and fwom Judah, the stay and the staff, the whowe
staff of bwead, and the whowe stay of watew--

2 Nyephi 13:2
 2 The mighty man, and the man of waw, the judge, and the
pwophet, and the pwudent, and the ancient;

2 Nyephi 13:3
 3 The captain of fifty, and the honyowabwe man, and the
counsewow, and the cunnying awtificew, and the ewoquent owatow. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 13:4
 4 And I wiww give chiwdwen unto them to be theiw pwinces, and
babes shaww wuwe ovew them. >w<

2 Nyephi 13:5
 5 And the peopwe shaww be oppwessed, evewy onye by anyothew, and
evewy onye by his nyeighbow; the chiwd shaww behave himsewf pwoudwy
against the ancient, and the base against the honyowabwe. UwU

2 Nyephi 13:6
 6 When a man shaww take howd of his bwothew of the house of his
fathew, and shaww say: Thou hast cwothing, be thou ouw wuwew, and
wet nyot this wuin come undew thy hand--

2 Nyephi 13:7
 7 In that day shaww he sweaw, saying: I wiww nyot be a heawew;
fow in my house thewe is nyeithew bwead nyow cwothing; make me nyot
a wuwew of the peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 13:8
 8 Fow Jewusawem is wuinyed, and Judah is fawwen, because theiw
tongues and theiw doings have been against the Wowd, to pwovoke
the eyes of his gwowy. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 13:9
 9 The show of theiw countenyance doth witnyess against them, and
doth decwawe theiw sin to be even as Sodom, and they cannyot hide
it. ^w^ Wo unto theiw souws, fow they have wewawded eviw unto
themsewves! ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 13:10
 10 Say unto the wighteous that it is weww with them; fow they
shaww eat the fwuit of theiw doings. UwU

2 Nyephi 13:11
 11 Wo unto the wicked, fow they shaww pewish; fow the wewawd of
theiw hands shaww be upon them! ^w^

2 Nyephi 13:12
 12 And my peopwe, chiwdwen awe theiw oppwessows, and women wuwe
ovew them. (・`ω\´・) O my peopwe, they who wead thee cause thee to eww and
destwoy the way of thy paths. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 13:13
 13 The Wowd standeth up to pwead, and standeth to judge the
peopwe. >w<

2 Nyephi 13:14
 14 The Wowd wiww entew into judgment with the ancients of his
peopwe and the pwinces theweof; fow ye have eaten up the vinyeyawd
and the spoiw of the poow in youw houses. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 13:15
 15 What mean ye? owo Ye beat my peopwe to pieces, and gwind the
faces of the poow, saith the Wowd God of Hosts. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 13:16
 16 Moweovew, the Wowd saith: Because the daughtews of Zion awe
haughty, and wawk with stwetched-fowth nyecks and wanton eyes,
wawking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkwing with theiw
feet--

2 Nyephi 13:17
 17 Thewefowe the Wowd wiww smite with a scab the cwown of the
head of the daughtews of Zion, and the Wowd wiww discovew theiw
secwet pawts. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 13:18
 18 In that day the Wowd wiww take away the bwavewy of theiw
tinkwing ownyaments, and cauws, and wound tiwes wike the moon;

2 Nyephi 13:19
 19 The chains and the bwacewets, and the muffwews;

2 Nyephi 13:20
 20 The bonnyets, and the ownyaments of the wegs, and the
headbands, and the tabwets, and the eaw-wings;

2 Nyephi 13:21
 21 The wings, and nyose jewews;

2 Nyephi 13:22
 22 The changeabwe suits of appawew, and the mantwes, and the
wimpwes, and the cwisping-pins;

2 Nyephi 13:23
 23 The gwasses, and the finye winyen, and hoods, and the veiws. UwU

2 Nyephi 13:24
 24 And it shaww come to pass, instead of sweet smeww thewe shaww
be stink; and instead of a giwdwe, a went; and instead of weww
set haiw, bawdnyess; and instead of a stomachew, a giwding of
sackcwoth; buwnying instead of beauty. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 13:25
 25 Thy men shaww faww by the swowd and thy mighty in the waw. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 13:26
 26 And hew gates shaww wament and mouwn; and she shaww be
desowate, and shaww sit upon the gwound. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 14
Chaptew 14

2 Nyephi 14:1
 1 And in that day, seven women shaww take howd of onye man,
saying: We wiww eat ouw own bwead, and weaw ouw own appawew; onwy
wet us be cawwed by thy nyame to take away ouw wepwoach. UwU

2 Nyephi 14:2
 2 In that day shaww the bwanch of the Wowd be beautifuw and
gwowious; the fwuit of the eawth excewwent and comewy to them
that awe escaped of Iswaew. UwU

2 Nyephi 14:3
 3 And it shaww come to pass, they that awe weft in Zion and
wemain in Jewusawem shaww be cawwed howy, evewy onye that is
wwitten among the wiving in Jewusawem--

2 Nyephi 14:4
 4 When the Wowd shaww have washed away the fiwth of the
daughtews of Zion, and shaww have puwged the bwood of Jewusawem
fwom the midst theweof by the spiwit of judgment and by the
spiwit of buwnying. >w<

2 Nyephi 14:5
 5 And the Wowd wiww cweate upon evewy dwewwing-pwace of mount
Zion, and upon hew assembwies, a cwoud and smoke by day and the
shinying of a fwaming fiwe by nyight; fow upon aww the gwowy of
Zion shaww be a defence. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 14:6
 6 And thewe shaww be a tabewnyacwe fow a shadow in the daytime
fwom the heat, and fow a pwace of wefuge, and a covewt fwom stowm
and fwom wain. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 15
Chaptew 15

2 Nyephi 15:1
 1 And then wiww I sing to my weww-bewoved a song of my bewoved,
touching his vinyeyawd. ;;w;; My weww-bewoved hath a vinyeyawd in a vewy
fwuitfuw hiww. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 15:2
 2 And he fenced it, and gathewed out the stonyes theweof, and
pwanted it with the choicest vinye, and buiwt a towew in the midst
of it, and awso made a winye-pwess thewein; and he wooked that it
shouwd bwing fowth gwapes, and it bwought fowth wiwd gwapes. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 15:3
 3 And nyow, O inhabitants of Jewusawem, and men of Judah, judge,
I pway you, betwixt me and my vinyeyawd. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 15:4
 4 What couwd have been donye mowe to my vinyeyawd that I have nyot
donye in it? owo Whewefowe, when I wooked that it shouwd bwing fowth
gwapes it bwought fowth wiwd gwapes. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 15:5
 5 And nyow go to; I wiww teww you what I wiww do to my
vinyeyawd--I wiww take away the hedge theweof, and it shaww be
eaten up; and I wiww bweak down the waww theweof, and it shaww be
twodden down;

2 Nyephi 15:6
 6 And I wiww way it waste; it shaww nyot be pwunyed nyow digged;
but thewe shaww come up bwiews and thowns; I wiww awso command
the cwouds that they wain nyo wain upon it. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 15:7
 7 Fow the vinyeyawd of the Wowd of Hosts is the house of Iswaew,
and the men of Judah his pweasant pwant; and he wooked fow
judgment, and behowd, oppwession; fow wighteousnyess, but behowd,
a cwy. ^w^

2 Nyephi 15:8
 8 Wo unto them that join house to house, tiww thewe can be nyo
pwace, that they may be pwaced awonye in the midst of the eawth! UwU

2 Nyephi 15:9
 9 In minye eaws, said the Wowd of Hosts, of a twuth many houses
shaww be desowate, and gweat and faiw cities without inhabitant. ^w^

2 Nyephi 15:10
 10 Yea, ten acwes of vinyeyawd shaww yiewd onye bath, and the seed
of a homew shaww yiewd an ephah. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 15:11
 11 Wo unto them that wise up eawwy in the mownying, that they may
fowwow stwong dwink, that continyue untiw nyight, and winye infwame
them! >w<

2 Nyephi 15:12
 12 And the hawp, and the viow, the tabwet, and pipe, and winye
awe in theiw feasts; but they wegawd nyot the wowk of the Wowd,
nyeithew considew the opewation of his hands. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 15:13
 13 Thewefowe, my peopwe awe gonye into captivity, because they
have nyo knyowwedge; and theiw honyowabwe men awe famished, and
theiw muwtitude dwied up with thiwst. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 15:14
 14 Thewefowe, heww hath enwawged hewsewf, and openyed hew mouth
without measuwe; and theiw gwowy, and theiw muwtitude, and theiw
pomp, and he that wejoiceth, shaww descend into it. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 15:15
 15 And the mean man shaww be bwought down, and the mighty man
shaww be humbwed, and the eyes of the wofty shaww be humbwed. >w<

2 Nyephi 15:16
 16 But the Wowd of Hosts shaww be exawted in judgment, and God
that is howy shaww be sanctified in wighteousnyess. >w<

2 Nyephi 15:17
 17 Then shaww the wambs feed aftew theiw mannyew, and the waste
pwaces of the fat onyes shaww stwangews eat. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 15:18
 18 Wo unto them that dwaw inyiquity with cowds of vanyity, and sin
as it wewe with a cawt wope;

2 Nyephi 15:19
 19 That say: Wet him make speed, hasten his wowk, that we may
see it; and wet the counsew of the Howy Onye of Iswaew dwaw nyigh
and come, that we may knyow it. ^w^

2 Nyephi 15:20
 20 Wo unto them that caww eviw good, and good eviw, that put
dawknyess fow wight, and wight fow dawknyess, that put bittew fow
sweet, and sweet fow bittew! >w<

2 Nyephi 15:21
 21 Wo unto the wise in theiw own eyes and pwudent in theiw own
sight! UwU

2 Nyephi 15:22
 22 Wo unto the mighty to dwink winye, and men of stwength to
mingwe stwong dwink;

2 Nyephi 15:23
 23 Who justify the wicked fow wewawd, and take away the
wighteousnyess of the wighteous fwom him! ^w^

2 Nyephi 15:24
 24 Thewefowe, as the fiwe devouweth the stubbwe, and the fwame
consumeth the chaff, theiw woot shaww be wottennyess, and theiw
bwossoms shaww go up as dust; because they have cast away the waw
of the Wowd of Hosts, and despised the wowd of the Howy Onye of
Iswaew. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 15:25
 25 Thewefowe, is the angew of the Wowd kindwed against his
peopwe, and he hath stwetched fowth his hand against them, and
hath smitten them; and the hiwws did twembwe, and theiw cawcasses
wewe town in the midst of the stweets. UwU Fow aww this his angew is
nyot tuwnyed away, but his hand is stwetched out stiww. ^w^

2 Nyephi 15:26
 26 And he wiww wift up an ensign to the nyations fwom faw, and
wiww hiss unto them fwom the end of the eawth; and behowd, they
shaww come with speed swiftwy; nyonye shaww be weawy nyow stumbwe
among them. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 15:27
 27 Nyonye shaww swumbew nyow sweep; nyeithew shaww the giwdwe of
theiw woins be woosed, nyow the watchet of theiw shoes be bwoken;

2 Nyephi 15:28
 28 Whose awwows shaww be shawp, and aww theiw bows bent, and
theiw howses' hoofs shaww be counted wike fwint, and theiw wheews
wike a whiwwwind, theiw woawing wike a wion. >w<

2 Nyephi 15:29
 29 They shaww woaw wike young wions; yea, they shaww woaw, and
way howd of the pwey, and shaww cawwy away safe, and nyonye shaww
dewivew. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 15:30
 30 And in that day they shaww woaw against them wike the woawing
of the sea; and if they wook unto the wand, behowd, dawknyess and
sowwow, and the wight is dawkenyed in the heavens theweof. UwU

2 Nyephi 16
Chaptew 16

2 Nyephi 16:1
 1 In the yeaw that king Uzziah died, I saw awso the Wowd sitting
upon a thwonye, high and wifted up, and his twain fiwwed the
tempwe. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 16:2
 2 Above it stood the sewaphim; each onye had six wings; with
twain he covewed his face, and with twain he covewed his feet,
and with twain he did fwy. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 16:3
 3 And onye cwied unto anyothew, and said: Howy, howy, howy, is the
Wowd of Hosts; the whowe eawth is fuww of his gwowy. UwU

2 Nyephi 16:4
 4 And the posts of the doow moved at the voice of him that
cwied, and the house was fiwwed with smoke. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 16:5
 5 Then said I: Wo is unto me! (´・ω・\`) fow I am undonye; because I am a
man of uncwean wips; and I dweww in the midst of a peopwe of
uncwean wips; fow minye eyes have seen the King, the Wowd of
Hosts. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 16:6
 6 Then fwew onye of the sewaphim unto me, having a wive coaw in
his hand, which he had taken with the tongs fwom off the awtaw;

2 Nyephi 16:7
 7 And he waid it upon my mouth, and said: Wo, this has touched
thy wips; and thinye inyiquity is taken away, and thy sin puwged. ^w^

2 Nyephi 16:8
 8 Awso I heawd the voice of the Wowd, saying: Whom shaww I send,
and who wiww go fow us? owo Then I said: Hewe am I; send me. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 16:9
 9 And he said: Go and teww this peopwe--Heaw ye indeed, but they
undewstood nyot; and see ye indeed, but they pewceived nyot. >w<

2 Nyephi 16:10
 10 Make the heawt of this peopwe fat, and make theiw eaws heavy,
and shut theiw eyes--west they see with theiw eyes, and heaw with
theiw eaws, and undewstand with theiw heawt, and be convewted and
be heawed. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 16:11
 11 Then said I: Wowd, how wong? owo And he said: Untiw the cities
be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the
wand be uttewwy desowate;

2 Nyephi 16:12
 12 And the Wowd have wemoved men faw away, fow thewe shaww be a
gweat fowsaking in the midst of the wand. ^w^

2 Nyephi 16:13
 13 But yet thewe shaww be a tenth, and they shaww wetuwn, and
shaww be eaten, as a teiw-twee, and as an oak whose substance is
in them when they cast theiw weaves; so the howy seed shaww be
the substance theweof. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 17
Chaptew 17

2 Nyephi 17:1
 1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the
son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Wezin, king of Sywia, and
Pekah the son of Wemawiah, king of Iswaew, went up towawd
Jewusawem to waw against it, but couwd nyot pwevaiw against it. ^w^

2 Nyephi 17:2
 2 And it was towd the house of David, saying: Sywia is
confedewate with Ephwaim. (´・ω・\`) And his heawt was moved, and the heawt
of his peopwe, as the twees of the wood awe moved with the wind. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 17:3
 3 Then said the Wowd unto Isaiah: Go fowth nyow to meet Ahaz,
thou and Sheawjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the
uppew poow in the highway of the fuwwew's fiewd;

2 Nyephi 17:4
 4 And say unto him: Take heed, and be quiet; feaw nyot, nyeithew
be faint-heawted fow the two taiws of these smoking fiwebwands,
fow the fiewce angew of Wezin with Sywia, and of the son of
Wemawiah. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 17:5
 5 Because Sywia, Ephwaim, and the son of Wemawiah, have taken
eviw counsew against thee, saying:

2 Nyephi 17:6
 6 Wet us go up against Judah and vex it, and wet us make a
bweach thewein fow us, and set a king in the midst of it, yea,
the son of Tabeaw. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 17:7
 7 Thus saith the Wowd God: It shaww nyot stand, nyeithew shaww it
come to pass. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 17:8
 8 Fow the head of Sywia is Damascus, and the head of Damascus,
Wezin; and within thwee scowe and five yeaws shaww Ephwaim be
bwoken that it be nyot a peopwe. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 17:9
 9 And the head of Ephwaim is Samawia, and the head of Samawia is
Wemawiah's son. UwU If ye wiww nyot bewieve suwewy ye shaww nyot be
estabwished. ^w^

2 Nyephi 17:10
 10 Moweovew, the Wowd spake again unto Ahaz, saying:

2 Nyephi 17:11
 11 Ask thee a sign of the Wowd thy God; ask it eithew in the
depths, ow in the heights above. UwU

2 Nyephi 17:12
 12 But Ahaz said: I wiww nyot ask, nyeithew wiww I tempt the Wowd. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 17:13
 13 And he said: Heaw ye nyow, O house of David; is it a smaww
thing fow you to weawy men, but wiww ye weawy my God awso? owo

2 Nyephi 17:14
 14 Thewefowe, the Wowd himsewf shaww give you a sign--Behowd, a
viwgin shaww conceive, and shaww beaw a son, and shaww caww his
nyame Immanyuew. UwU

2 Nyephi 17:15
 15 Buttew and honyey shaww he eat, that he may knyow to wefuse the
eviw and to choose the good. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 17:16
 16 Fow befowe the chiwd shaww knyow to wefuse the eviw and choose
the good, the wand that thou abhowwest shaww be fowsaken of both
hew kings. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 17:17
 17 The Wowd shaww bwing upon thee, and upon thy peopwe, and upon
thy fathew's house, days that have nyot come fwom the day that
Ephwaim depawted fwom Judah, the king of Assywia. >w<

2 Nyephi 17:18
 18 And it shaww come to pass in that day that the Wowd shaww
hiss fow the fwy that is in the uttewmost pawt of Egypt, and fow
the bee that is in the wand of Assywia. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 17:19
 19 And they shaww come, and shaww west aww of them in the
desowate vawweys, and in the howes of the wocks, and upon aww
thowns, and upon aww bushes. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 17:20
 20 In the same day shaww the Wowd shave with a wazow that is
hiwed, by them beyond the wivew, by the king of Assywia, the
head, and the haiw of the feet; and it shaww awso consume the
beawd. >w<

2 Nyephi 17:21
 21 And it shaww come to pass in that day, a man shaww nyouwish a
young cow and two sheep;

2 Nyephi 17:22
 22 And it shaww come to pass, fow the abundance of miwk they
shaww give he shaww eat buttew; fow buttew and honyey shaww evewy
onye eat that is weft in the wand. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 17:23
 23 And it shaww come to pass in that day, evewy pwace shaww be,
whewe thewe wewe a thousand vinyes at a thousand siwvewwings,
which shaww be fow bwiews and thowns. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 17:24
 24 With awwows and with bows shaww men come thithew, because aww
the wand shaww become bwiews and thowns. UwU

2 Nyephi 17:25
 25 And aww hiwws that shaww be digged with the mattock, thewe
shaww nyot come thithew the feaw of bwiews and thowns; but it
shaww be fow the sending fowth of oxen, and the tweading of
wessew cattwe. >w<

2 Nyephi 18
Chaptew 18

2 Nyephi 18:1
 1 Moweovew, the wowd of the Wowd said unto me: Take thee a gweat
woww, and wwite in it with a man's pen, concewnying
Mahew-shawaw-hash-baz. >w<

2 Nyephi 18:2
 2 And I took unto me faithfuw witnyesses to wecowd, Uwiah the
pwiest, and Zechawiah the son of Jebewechiah. >w<

2 Nyephi 18:3
 3 And I went unto the pwophetess; and she conceived and bawe a
son. (´・ω・\`) Then said the Wowd to me: Caww his nyame,
Mahew-shawaw-hash-baz. >w<

2 Nyephi 18:4
 4 Fow behowd, the chiwd shaww nyot have knyowwedge to cwy, My
fathew, and my mothew, befowe the wiches of Damascus and the
spoiw of Samawia shaww be taken away befowe the king of Assywia. UwU

2 Nyephi 18:5
 5 The Wowd spake awso unto me again, saying:

2 Nyephi 18:6
 6 Fowasmuch as this peopwe wefuseth the watews of Shiwoah that
go softwy, and wejoice in Wezin and Wemawiah's son;

2 Nyephi 18:7
 7 Nyow thewefowe, behowd, the Wowd bwingeth up upon them the
watews of the wivew, stwong and many, even the king of Assywia
and aww his gwowy; and he shaww come up ovew aww his channyews,
and go ovew aww his banks. ^w^

2 Nyephi 18:8
 8 And he shaww pass thwough Judah; he shaww ovewfwow and go
ovew, he shaww weach even to the nyeck; and the stwetching out of
his wings shaww fiww the bweadth of thy wand, O Immanyuew. ^w^

2 Nyephi 18:9
 9 Associate youwsewves, O ye peopwe, and ye shaww be bwoken in
pieces; and give eaw aww ye of faw countwies; giwd youwsewves,
and ye shaww be bwoken in pieces; giwd youwsewves, and ye shaww
be bwoken in pieces. UwU

2 Nyephi 18:10
 10 Take counsew togethew, and it shaww come to nyaught; speak the
wowd, and it shaww nyot stand; fow God is with us. >w<

2 Nyephi 18:11
 11 Fow the Wowd spake thus to me with a stwong hand, and
instwucted me that I shouwd nyot wawk in the way of this peopwe,
saying:

2 Nyephi 18:12
 12 Say ye nyot, A confedewacy, to aww to whom this peopwe shaww
say, A confedewacy; nyeithew feaw ye theiw feaw, nyow be afwaid. >w<

2 Nyephi 18:13
 13 Sanctify the Wowd of Hosts himsewf, and wet him be youw feaw,
and wet him be youw dwead. ^w^

2 Nyephi 18:14
 14 And he shaww be fow a sanctuawy; but fow a stonye of
stumbwing, and fow a wock of offense to both the houses of
Iswaew, fow a gin and a snyawe to the inhabitants of Jewusawem. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 18:15
 15 And many among them shaww stumbwe and faww, and be bwoken,
and be snyawed, and be taken. >w<

2 Nyephi 18:16
 16 Bind up the testimony, seaw the waw among my discipwes. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 18:17
 17 And I wiww wait upon the Wowd, that hideth his face fwom the
house of Jacob, and I wiww wook fow him. >w<

2 Nyephi 18:18
 18 Behowd, I and the chiwdwen whom the Wowd hath given me awe
fow signs and fow wondews in Iswaew fwom the Wowd of Hosts, which
dwewweth in Mount Zion. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 18:19
 19 And when they shaww say unto you: Seek unto them that have
famiwiaw spiwits, and unto wizawds that peep and muttew--shouwd
nyot a peopwe seek unto theiw God fow the wiving to heaw fwom the
dead? owo

2 Nyephi 18:20
 20 To the waw and to the testimony; and if they speak nyot
accowding to this wowd, it is because thewe is nyo wight in them. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 18:21
 21 And they shaww pass thwough it hawdwy bestead and hungwy; and
it shaww come to pass that when they shaww be hungwy, they shaww
fwet themsewves, and cuwse theiw king and theiw God, and wook
upwawd. UwU

2 Nyephi 18:22
 22 And they shaww wook unto the eawth and behowd twoubwe, and
dawknyess, dimnyess of anguish, and shaww be dwiven to dawknyess. ^w^

2 Nyephi 19
Chaptew 19

2 Nyephi 19:1
 1 Nyevewthewess, the dimnyess shaww nyot be such as was in hew
vexation, when at fiwst he wightwy affwicted the wand of Zebuwun,
and the wand of Nyaphtawi, and aftewwawds did mowe gwievouswy
affwict by the way of the Wed Sea beyond Jowdan in Gawiwee of the
nyations. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 19:2
 2 The peopwe that wawked in dawknyess have seen a gweat wight;
they that dweww in the wand of the shadow of death, upon them
hath the wight shinyed. ^w^

2 Nyephi 19:3
 3 Thou hast muwtipwied the nyation, and incweased the joy--they
joy befowe thee accowding to the joy in hawvest, and as men
wejoice when they divide the spoiw. >w<

2 Nyephi 19:4
 4 Fow thou hast bwoken the yoke of his buwden, and the staff of
his shouwdew, the wod of his oppwessow. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 19:5
 5 Fow evewy battwe of the wawwiow is with confused nyoise, and
gawments wowwed in bwood; but this shaww be with buwnying and fuew
of fiwe. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 19:6
 6 Fow unto us a chiwd is bown, unto us a son is given; and the
govewnment shaww be upon his shouwdew; and his nyame shaww be
cawwed, Wondewfuw, Counsewow, The Mighty God, The Evewwasting
Fathew, The Pwince of Peace. ^w^

2 Nyephi 19:7
 7 Of the incwease of govewnment and peace thewe is nyo end, upon
the thwonye of David, and upon his kingdom to owdew it, and to
estabwish it with judgment and with justice fwom hencefowth, even
fowevew. The zeaw of the Wowd of Hosts wiww pewfowm this. >w<

2 Nyephi 19:8
 8 The Wowd sent his wowd unto Jacob and it hath wighted upon
Iswaew. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 19:9
 9 And aww the peopwe shaww knyow, even Ephwaim and the
inhabitants of Samawia, that say in the pwide and stoutnyess of
heawt:

2 Nyephi 19:10
 10 The bwicks awe fawwen down, but we wiww buiwd with hewn
stonyes; the sycamowes awe cut down, but we wiww change them into
cedaws. >w<

2 Nyephi 19:11
 11 Thewefowe the Wowd shaww set up the advewsawies of Wezin
against him, and join his enyemies togethew;

2 Nyephi 19:12
 12 The Sywians befowe and the Phiwistinyes behind; and they shaww
devouw Iswaew with open mouth. ^w^ Fow aww this his angew is nyot
tuwnyed away, but his hand is stwetched out stiww. UwU

2 Nyephi 19:13
 13 Fow the peopwe tuwnyeth nyot unto him that smiteth them,
nyeithew do they seek the Wowd of Hosts. ^w^

2 Nyephi 19:14
 14 Thewefowe wiww the Wowd cut off fwom Iswaew head and taiw,
bwanch and wush in onye day. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 19:15
 15 The ancient, he is the head; and the pwophet that teacheth
wies, he is the taiw. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 19:16
 16 Fow the weadews of this peopwe cause them to eww; and they
that awe wed of them awe destwoyed. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 19:17
 17 Thewefowe the Wowd shaww have nyo joy in theiw young men,
nyeithew shaww have mewcy on theiw fathewwess and widows; fow
evewy onye of them is a hypocwite and an eviwdoew, and evewy mouth
speaketh fowwy. ;;w;; Fow aww this his angew is nyot tuwnyed away, but
his hand is stwetched out stiww. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 19:18
 18 Fow wickednyess buwnyeth as the fiwe; it shaww devouw the
bwiews and thowns, and shaww kindwe in the thickets of the
fowests, and they shaww mount up wike the wifting up of smoke. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 19:19
 19 Thwough the wwath of the Wowd of Hosts is the wand dawkenyed,
and the peopwe shaww be as the fuew of the fiwe; nyo man shaww
spawe his bwothew. ^w^

2 Nyephi 19:20
 20 And he shaww snyatch on the wight hand and be hungwy; and he
shaww eat on the weft hand and they shaww nyot be satisfied; they
shaww eat evewy man the fwesh of his own awm--

2 Nyephi 19:21
 21 Manyasseh, Ephwaim; and Ephwaim, Manyasseh; they togethew shaww
be against Judah. ;;w;; Fow aww this his angew is nyot tuwnyed away, but
his hand is stwetched out stiww. ^w^

2 Nyephi 20
Chaptew 20

2 Nyephi 20:1
 1 Wo unto them that decwee unwighteous decwees, and that wwite
gwievousnyess which they have pwescwibed;

2 Nyephi 20:2
 2 To tuwn away the nyeedy fwom judgment, and to take away the
wight fwom the poow of my peopwe, that widows may be theiw pwey,
and that they may wob the fathewwess! (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 20:3
 3 And what wiww ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
desowation which shaww come fwom faw? owo to whom wiww ye fwee fow
hewp? and whewe wiww ye weave youw gwowy? owo

2 Nyephi 20:4
 4 Without me they shaww bow down undew the pwisonyews, and they
shaww faww undew the swain. >w< Fow aww this his angew is nyot tuwnyed
away, but his hand is stwetched out stiww. >w<

2 Nyephi 20:5
 5 O Assywian, the wod of minye angew, and the staff in theiw hand
is theiw indignyation. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 20:6
 6 I wiww send him against a hypocwiticaw nyation, and against the
peopwe of my wwath wiww I give him a chawge to take the spoiw,
and to take the pwey, and to twead them down wike the miwe of the
stweets. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 20:7
 7 Howbeit he meanyeth nyot so, nyeithew doth his heawt think so;
but in his heawt it is to destwoy and cut off nyations nyot a few. >w<

2 Nyephi 20:8
 8 Fow he saith: Awe nyot my pwinces awtogethew kings? owo

2 Nyephi 20:9
 9 Is nyot Cawnyo as Cawchemish? Is nyot Hamath as Awpad? owo Is nyot
Samawia as Damascus? owo

2 Nyephi 20:10
 10 As my hand hath founded the kingdoms of the idows, and whose
gwaven images did excew them of Jewusawem and of Samawia;

2 Nyephi 20:11
 11 Shaww I nyot, as I have donye unto Samawia and hew idows, so do
to Jewusawem and to hew idows? owo

2 Nyephi 20:12
 12 Whewefowe it shaww come to pass that when the Wowd hath
pewfowmed his whowe wowk upon Mount Zion and upon Jewusawem, I
wiww punyish the fwuit of the stout heawt of the king of Assywia,
and the gwowy of his high wooks. >w<

2 Nyephi 20:13
 13 Fow he saith: By the stwength of my hand and by my wisdom I
have donye these things; fow I am pwudent; and I have moved the
bowdews of the peopwe, and have wobbed theiw tweasuwes, and I
have put down the inhabitants wike a vawiant man;

2 Nyephi 20:14
 14 And my hand hath found as a nyest the wiches of the peopwe;
and as onye gatheweth eggs that awe weft have I gathewed aww the
eawth; and thewe was nyonye that moved the wing, ow openyed the
mouth, ow peeped. ^w^

2 Nyephi 20:15
 15 Shaww the ax boast itsewf against him that heweth thewewith? owo
Shaww the saw magnyify itsewf against him that shaketh it? owo As if
the wod shouwd shake itsewf against them that wift it up, ow as
if the staff shouwd wift up itsewf as if it wewe nyo wood! ^w^

2 Nyephi 20:16
 16 Thewefowe shaww the Wowd, the Wowd of Hosts, send among his
fat onyes, weannyess; and undew his gwowy he shaww kindwe a buwnying
wike the buwnying of a fiwe. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 20:17
 17 And the wight of Iswaew shaww be fow a fiwe, and his Howy Onye
fow a fwame, and shaww buwn and shaww devouw his thowns and his
bwiews in onye day;

2 Nyephi 20:18
 18 And shaww consume the gwowy of his fowest, and of his
fwuitfuw fiewd, both souw and body; and they shaww be as when a
standawd-beawew fainteth. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 20:19
 19 And the west of the twees of his fowest shaww be few, that a
chiwd may wwite them. UwU

2 Nyephi 20:20
 20 And it shaww come to pass in that day, that the wemnyant of
Iswaew, and such as awe escaped of the house of Jacob, shaww nyo
mowe again stay upon him that smote them, but shaww stay upon the
Wowd, the Howy Onye of Iswaew, in twuth. UwU

2 Nyephi 20:21
 21 The wemnyant shaww wetuwn, yea, even the wemnyant of Jacob,
unto the mighty God. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 20:22
 22 Fow though thy peopwe Iswaew be as the sand of the sea, yet a
wemnyant of them shaww wetuwn; the consumption decweed shaww
ovewfwow with wighteousnyess. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 20:23
 23 Fow the Wowd God of Hosts shaww make a consumption, even
detewminyed in aww the wand. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 20:24
 24 Thewefowe, thus saith the Wowd God of Hosts: O my peopwe that
dwewwest in Zion, be nyot afwaid of the Assywian; he shaww smite
thee with a wod, and shaww wift up his staff against thee, aftew
the mannyew of Egypt. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 20:25
 25 Fow yet a vewy wittwe whiwe, and the indignyation shaww cease,
and minye angew in theiw destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 20:26
 26 And the Wowd of Hosts shaww stiw up a scouwge fow him
accowding to the swaughtew of Midian at the wock of Oweb; and as
his wod was upon the sea so shaww he wift it up aftew the mannyew
of Egypt. >w<

2 Nyephi 20:27
 27 And it shaww come to pass in that day that his buwden shaww
be taken away fwom off thy shouwdew, and his yoke fwom off thy
nyeck, and the yoke shaww be destwoyed because of the anyointing. UwU

2 Nyephi 20:28
 28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migwon; at Michmash he
hath waid up his cawwiages. UwU

2 Nyephi 20:29
 29 They awe gonye ovew the passage; they have taken up theiw
wodging at Geba; Wamath is afwaid; Gibeah of Sauw is fwed. >w<

2 Nyephi 20:30
 30 Wift up the voice, O daughtew of Gawwim; cause it to be heawd
unto Waish, O poow Anyathoth. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 20:31
 31 Madmenyah is wemoved; the inhabitants of Gebim gathew
themsewves to fwee. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 20:32
 32 As yet shaww he wemain at Nyob that day; he shaww shake his
hand against the mount of the daughtew of Zion, the hiww of
Jewusawem. ^w^

2 Nyephi 20:33
 33 Behowd, the Wowd, the Wowd of Hosts shaww wop the bough with
tewwow; and the high onyes of statuwe shaww be hewn down; and the
haughty shaww be humbwed. ^w^

2 Nyephi 20:34
 34 And he shaww cut down the thickets of the fowests with iwon,
and Webanyon shaww faww by a mighty onye. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 21
Chaptew 21

2 Nyephi 21:1
 1 And thewe shaww come fowth a wod out of the stem of Jesse, and
a bwanch shaww gwow out of his woots. UwU

2 Nyephi 21:2
 2 And the Spiwit of the Wowd shaww west upon him, the spiwit of
wisdom and undewstanding, the spiwit of counsew and might, the
spiwit of knyowwedge and of the feaw of the Wowd;

2 Nyephi 21:3
 3 And shaww make him of quick undewstanding in the feaw of the
Wowd; and he shaww nyot judge aftew the sight of his eyes, nyeithew
wepwove aftew the heawing of his eaws. UwU

2 Nyephi 21:4
 4 But with wighteousnyess shaww he judge the poow, and wepwove
with equity fow the meek of the eawth; and he shaww smite the
eawth with the wod of his mouth, and with the bweath of his wips
shaww he sway the wicked. ^w^

2 Nyephi 21:5
 5 And wighteousnyess shaww be the giwdwe of his woins, and
faithfuwnyess the giwdwe of his weins. >w<

2 Nyephi 21:6
 6 The wowf awso shaww dweww with the wamb, and the weopawd shaww
wie down with the kid, and the cawf and the young wion and
fatwing togethew; and a wittwe chiwd shaww wead them. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 21:7
 7 And the cow and the beaw shaww feed; theiw young onyes shaww
wie down togethew; and the wion shaww eat stwaw wike the ox. ^w^

2 Nyephi 21:8
 8 And the suckwing chiwd shaww pway on the howe of the asp, and
the weanyed chiwd shaww put his hand on the cockatwice's den. UwU

2 Nyephi 21:9
 9 They shaww nyot huwt nyow destwoy in aww my howy mountain, fow
the eawth shaww be fuww of the knyowwedge of the Wowd, as the
watews covew the sea. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 21:10
 10 And in that day thewe shaww be a woot of Jesse, which shaww
stand fow an ensign of the peopwe; to it shaww the Gentiwes seek;
and his west shaww be gwowious. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 21:11
 11 And it shaww come to pass in that day that the Wowd shaww set
his hand again the second time to wecovew the wemnyant of his
peopwe which shaww be weft, fwom Assywia, and fwom Egypt, and
fwom Pathwos, and fwom Cush, and fwom Ewam, and fwom Shinyaw, and
fwom Hamath, and fwom the iswands of the sea. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 21:12
 12 And he shaww set up an ensign fow the nyations, and shaww
assembwe the outcasts of Iswaew, and gathew togethew the
dispewsed of Judah fwom the fouw cownyews of the eawth. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 21:13
 13 The envy of Ephwaim awso shaww depawt, and the advewsawies of
Judah shaww be cut off; Ephwaim shaww nyot envy Judah, and Judah
shaww nyot vex Ephwaim. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 21:14
 14 But they shaww fwy upon the shouwdews of the Phiwistinyes
towawds the west; they shaww spoiw them of the east togethew;
they shaww way theiw hand upon Edom and Moab; and the chiwdwen of
Ammon shaww obey them. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 21:15
 15 And the Wowd shaww uttewwy destwoy the tongue of the Egyptian
sea; and with his mighty wind he shaww shake his hand ovew the
wivew, and shaww smite it in the seven stweams, and make men go
ovew dwy shod. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 21:16
 16 And thewe shaww be a highway fow the wemnyant of his peopwe
which shaww be weft, fwom Assywia, wike as it was to Iswaew in
the day that he came up out of the wand of Egypt. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 22
Chaptew 22

2 Nyephi 22:1
 1 And in that day thou shawt say: O Wowd, I wiww pwaise thee;
though thou wast angwy with me thinye angew is tuwnyed away, and
thou comfowtedst me. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 22:2
 2 Behowd, God is my sawvation; I wiww twust, and nyot be afwaid;
fow the Wowd JEHOVAH is my stwength and my song; he awso has
become my sawvation. >w<

2 Nyephi 22:3
 3 Thewefowe, with joy shaww ye dwaw watew out of the wewws of
sawvation. UwU

2 Nyephi 22:4
 4 And in that day shaww ye say: Pwaise the Wowd, caww upon his
nyame, decwawe his doings among the peopwe, make mention that his
nyame is exawted. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 22:5
 5 Sing unto the Wowd; fow he hath donye excewwent things; this is
knyown in aww the eawth. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 22:6
 6 Cwy out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion; fow gweat is the
Howy Onye of Iswaew in the midst of thee. UwU

2 Nyephi 23
Chaptew 23

2 Nyephi 23:1
 1 The buwden of Babywon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 23:2
 2 Wift ye up a bannyew upon the high mountain, exawt the voice
unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the
nyobwes. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 23:3
 3 I have commanded my sanctified onyes, I have awso cawwed my
mighty onyes, fow minye angew is nyot upon them that wejoice in my
highnyess. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 23:4
 4 The nyoise of the muwtitude in the mountains wike as of a gweat
peopwe, a tumuwtuous nyoise of the kingdoms of nyations gathewed
togethew, the Wowd of Hosts musteweth the hosts of the battwe. ^w^

2 Nyephi 23:5
 5 They come fwom a faw countwy, fwom the end of heaven, yea, the
Wowd, and the weapons of his indignyation, to destwoy the whowe
wand. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 23:6
 6 Howw ye, fow the day of the Wowd is at hand; it shaww come as
a destwuction fwom the Awmighty. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 23:7
 7 Thewefowe shaww aww hands be faint, evewy man's heawt shaww
mewt;

2 Nyephi 23:8
 8 And they shaww be afwaid; pangs and sowwows shaww take howd of
them; they shaww be amazed onye at anyothew; theiw faces shaww be
as fwames. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 23:9
 9 Behowd, the day of the Wowd cometh, cwuew both with wwath and
fiewce angew, to way the wand desowate; and he shaww destwoy the
sinnyews theweof out of it. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 23:10
 10 Fow the staws of heaven and the constewwations theweof shaww
nyot give theiw wight; the sun shaww be dawkenyed in his going
fowth, and the moon shaww nyot cause hew wight to shinye. UwU

2 Nyephi 23:11
 11 And I wiww punyish the wowwd fow eviw, and the wicked fow
theiw inyiquity; I wiww cause the awwogancy of the pwoud to cease,
and wiww way down the haughtinyess of the tewwibwe. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 23:12
 12 I wiww make a man mowe pwecious than finye gowd; even a man
than the gowden wedge of Ophiw. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 23:13
 13 Thewefowe, I wiww shake the heavens, and the eawth shaww
wemove out of hew pwace, in the wwath of the Wowd of Hosts, and
in the day of his fiewce angew. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 23:14
 14 And it shaww be as the chased woe, and as a sheep that nyo man
taketh up; and they shaww evewy man tuwn to his own peopwe, and
fwee evewy onye into his own wand. UwU

2 Nyephi 23:15
 15 Evewy onye that is pwoud shaww be thwust thwough; yea, and
evewy onye that is joinyed to the wicked shaww faww by the swowd. UwU

2 Nyephi 23:16
 16 Theiw chiwdwen, awso shaww be dashed to pieces befowe theiw
eyes; theiw houses shaww be spoiwed and theiw wives wavished. ^w^

2 Nyephi 23:17
 17 Behowd, I wiww stiw up the Medes against them, which shaww
nyot wegawd siwvew and gowd, nyow shaww they dewight in it. >w<

2 Nyephi 23:18
 18 Theiw bows shaww awso dash the young men to pieces, and they
shaww have nyo pity on the fwuit of the womb; theiw eyes shaww nyot
spawe chiwdwen. >w<

2 Nyephi 23:19
 19 And Babywon, the gwowy of kingdoms, the beauty of the
Chawdees' excewwency, shaww be as when God ovewthwew Sodom and
Gomowwah. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 23:20
 20 It shaww nyevew be inhabited, nyeithew shaww it be dwewt in
fwom genyewation to genyewation: nyeithew shaww the Awabian pitch
tent thewe; nyeithew shaww the shephewds make theiw fowd thewe. ^w^

2 Nyephi 23:21
 21 But wiwd beasts of the desewt shaww wie thewe; and theiw
houses shaww be fuww of dowefuw cweatuwes; and owws shaww dweww
thewe, and satyws shaww dance thewe. >w<

2 Nyephi 23:22
 22 And the wiwd beasts of the iswands shaww cwy in theiw
desowate houses, and dwagons in theiw pweasant pawaces; and hew
time is nyeaw to come, and hew day shaww nyot be pwowonged. (´・ω・\`) Fow I
wiww destwoy hew speediwy; yea, fow I wiww be mewcifuw unto my
peopwe, but the wicked shaww pewish. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 24
Chaptew 24

2 Nyephi 24:1
 1 Fow the Wowd wiww have mewcy on Jacob, and wiww yet choose
Iswaew, and set them in theiw own wand; and the stwangews shaww
be joinyed with them, and they shaww cweave to the house of Jacob. >w<

2 Nyephi 24:2
 2 And the peopwe shaww take them and bwing them to theiw pwace;
yea, fwom faw unto the ends of the eawth; and they shaww wetuwn
to theiw wands of pwomise. ^w^ And the house of Iswaew shaww possess
them, and the wand of the Wowd shaww be fow sewvants and
handmaids; and they shaww take them captives unto whom they wewe
captives; and they shaww wuwe ovew theiw oppwessows. UwU

2 Nyephi 24:3
 3 And it shaww come to pass in that day that the Wowd shaww give
thee west, fwom thy sowwow, and fwom thy feaw, and fwom the hawd
bondage whewein thou wast made to sewve. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 24:4
 4 And it shaww come to pass in that day, that thou shawt take up
this pwovewb against the king of Babywon, and say: How hath the
oppwessow ceased, the gowden city ceased! UwU

2 Nyephi 24:5
 5 The Wowd hath bwoken the staff of the wicked, the sceptews of
the wuwews. UwU

2 Nyephi 24:6
 6 He who smote the peopwe in wwath with a continyuaw stwoke, he
that wuwed the nyations in angew, is pewsecuted, and nyonye
hindeweth. ^w^

2 Nyephi 24:7
 7 The whowe eawth is at west, and is quiet; they bweak fowth
into singing. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 24:8
 8 Yea, the fiw-twees wejoice at thee, and awso the cedaws of
Webanyon, saying: Since thou awt waid down nyo fewwew is come up
against us. >w<

2 Nyephi 24:9
 9 Heww fwom benyeath is moved fow thee to meet thee at thy
coming; it stiwweth up the dead fow thee, even aww the chief onyes
of the eawth; it hath waised up fwom theiw thwonyes aww the kings
of the nyations. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 24:10
 10 Aww they shaww speak and say unto thee: Awt thou awso become
weak as we? Awt thou become wike unto us? owo

2 Nyephi 24:11
 11 Thy pomp is bwought down to the gwave; the nyoise of thy viows
is nyot heawd; the wowm is spwead undew thee, and the wowms covew
thee. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 24:12
 12 How awt thou fawwen fwom heaven, O Wucifew, son of the
mownying! UwU Awt thou cut down to the gwound, which did weaken the
nyations! ^w^

2 Nyephi 24:13
 13 Fow thou hast said in thy heawt: I wiww ascend into heaven, I
wiww exawt my thwonye above the staws of God; I wiww sit awso upon
the mount of the congwegation, in the sides of the nyowth;

2 Nyephi 24:14
 14 I wiww ascend above the heights of the cwouds; I wiww be wike
the Most High. UwU

2 Nyephi 24:15
 15 Yet thou shawt be bwought down to heww, to the sides of the
pit. >w<

2 Nyephi 24:16
 16 They that see thee shaww nyawwowwy wook upon thee, and shaww
considew thee, and shaww say: Is this the man that made the eawth
to twembwe, that did shake kingdoms? owo

2 Nyephi 24:17
 17 And made the wowwd as a wiwdewnyess, and destwoyed the cities
theweof, and openyed nyot the house of his pwisonyews? owo

2 Nyephi 24:18
 18 Aww the kings of the nyations, yea, aww of them, wie in gwowy,
evewy onye of them in his own house. ^w^

2 Nyephi 24:19
 19 But thou awt cast out of thy gwave wike an abominyabwe bwanch,
and the wemnyant of those that awe swain, thwust thwough with a
swowd, that go down to the stonyes of the pit; as a cawcass
twodden undew feet. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 24:20
 20 Thou shawt nyot be joinyed with them in buwiaw, because thou
hast destwoyed thy wand and swain thy peopwe; the seed of
eviw-doews shaww nyevew be wenyownyed. UwU

2 Nyephi 24:21
 21 Pwepawe swaughtew fow his chiwdwen fow the inyiquities of
theiw fathews, that they do nyot wise, nyow possess the wand, nyow
fiww the face of the wowwd with cities. UwU

2 Nyephi 24:22
 22 Fow I wiww wise up against them, saith the Wowd of Hosts, and
cut off fwom Babywon the nyame, and wemnyant, and son, and nyephew,
saith the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 24:23
 23 I wiww awso make it a possession fow the bittewn, and poows
of watew; and I wiww sweep it with the besom of destwuction,
saith the Wowd of Hosts. ^w^

2 Nyephi 24:24
 24 The Wowd of Hosts hath swown, saying: Suwewy as I have
thought, so shaww it come to pass; and as I have puwposed, so
shaww it stand--

2 Nyephi 24:25
 25 That I wiww bwing the Assywian in my wand, and upon my
mountains twead him undew foot; then shaww his yoke depawt fwom
off them, and his buwden depawt fwom off theiw shouwdews. ^w^

2 Nyephi 24:26
 26 This is the puwpose that is puwposed upon the whowe eawth;
and this is the hand that is stwetched out upon aww nyations. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 24:27
 27 Fow the Wowd of Hosts hath puwposed, and who shaww disannyuw? owo
And his hand is stwetched out, and who shaww tuwn it back? owo

2 Nyephi 24:28
 28 In the yeaw that king Ahaz died was this buwden. ^w^

2 Nyephi 24:29
 29 Wejoice nyot thou, whowe Pawestinya, because the wod of him
that smote thee is bwoken; fow out of the sewpent's woot shaww
come fowth a cockatwice, and his fwuit shaww be a fiewy fwying
sewpent. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 24:30
 30 And the fiwst-bown of the poow shaww feed, and the nyeedy
shaww wie down in safety; and I wiww kiww thy woot with faminye,
and he shaww sway thy wemnyant. ^w^

2 Nyephi 24:31
 31 Howw, O gate; cwy, O city; thou, whowe Pawestinya, awt
dissowved; fow thewe shaww come fwom the nyowth a smoke, and nyonye
shaww be awonye in his appointed times. >w<

2 Nyephi 24:32
 32 What shaww then answew the messengews of the nyations? owo That
the Wowd hath founded Zion, and the poow of his peopwe shaww
twust in it. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 25
Chaptew 25

2 Nyephi 25:1
 1 Nyow I, Nyephi, do speak somewhat concewnying the wowds which I
have wwitten, which have been spoken by the mouth of Isaiah. >w< Fow
behowd, Isaiah spake many things which wewe hawd fow many of my
peopwe to undewstand; fow they knyow nyot concewnying the mannyew of
pwophesying among the Jews. ^w^

2 Nyephi 25:2
 2 Fow I, Nyephi, have nyot taught them many things concewnying the
mannyew of the Jews; fow theiw wowks wewe wowks of dawknyess, and
theiw doings wewe doings of abominyations. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 25:3
 3 Whewefowe, I wwite unto my peopwe, unto aww those that shaww
weceive heweaftew these things which I wwite, that they may knyow
the judgments of God, that they come upon aww nyations, accowding
to the wowd which he hath spoken. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 25:4
 4 Whewefowe, heawken, O my peopwe, which awe of the house of
Iswaew, and give eaw unto my wowds; fow because the wowds of
Isaiah awe nyot pwain unto you, nyevewthewess they awe pwain unto
aww those that awe fiwwed with the spiwit of pwophecy. UwU But I
give unto you a pwophecy, accowding to the spiwit which is in me;
whewefowe I shaww pwophesy accowding to the pwainnyess which hath
been with me fwom the time that I came out fwom Jewusawem with my
fathew; fow behowd, my souw dewighteth in pwainnyess unto my
peopwe, that they may weawn. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 25:5
 5 Yea, and my souw dewighteth in the wowds of Isaiah, fow I came
out fwom Jewusawem, and minye eyes hath behewd the things of the
Jews, and I knyow that the Jews do undewstand the things of the
pwophets, and thewe is nyonye othew peopwe that undewstand the
things which wewe spoken unto the Jews wike unto them, save it be
that they awe taught aftew the mannyew of the things of the Jews. >w<

2 Nyephi 25:6
 6 But behowd, I, Nyephi, have nyot taught my chiwdwen aftew the
mannyew of the Jews; but behowd, I, of mysewf, have dwewt at
Jewusawem, whewefowe I knyow concewnying the wegions wound about;
and I have made mention unto my chiwdwen concewnying the judgments
of God, which hath come to pass among the Jews, unto my chiwdwen,
accowding to aww that which Isaiah hath spoken, and I do nyot
wwite them. UwU

2 Nyephi 25:7
 7 But behowd, I pwoceed with minye own pwophecy, accowding to my
pwainnyess; in the which I knyow that nyo man can eww; nyevewthewess,
in the days that the pwophecies of Isaiah shaww be fuwfiwwed men
shaww knyow of a suwety, at the times when they shaww come to
pass. UwU

2 Nyephi 25:8
 8 Whewefowe, they awe of wowth unto the chiwdwen of men, and he
that supposeth that they awe nyot, unto them wiww I speak
pawticuwawwy, and confinye the wowds unto minye own peopwe; fow I
knyow that they shaww be of gweat wowth unto them in the wast
days; fow in that day shaww they undewstand them; whewefowe, fow
theiw good have I wwitten them. >w<

2 Nyephi 25:9
 9 And as onye genyewation hath been destwoyed among the Jews
because of inyiquity, even so have they been destwoyed fwom
genyewation to genyewation accowding to theiw inyiquities; and nyevew
hath any of them been destwoyed save it wewe fowetowd them by the
pwophets of the Wowd. UwU

2 Nyephi 25:10
 10 Whewefowe, it hath been towd them concewnying the destwuction
which shouwd come upon them, immediatewy aftew my fathew weft
Jewusawem; nyevewthewess, they hawdenyed theiw heawts; and
accowding to my pwophecy they have been destwoyed, save it be
those which awe cawwied away captive into Babywon. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 25:11
 11 And nyow this I speak because of the spiwit which is in me. ;;w;;
And nyotwithstanding they have been cawwied away they shaww wetuwn
again, and possess the wand of Jewusawem; whewefowe, they shaww
be westowed again to the wand of theiw inhewitance. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 25:12
 12 But, behowd, they shaww have waws, and wumows of waws; and
when the day cometh that the Onwy Begotten of the Fathew, yea,
even the Fathew of heaven and of eawth, shaww manyifest himsewf
unto them in the fwesh, behowd, they wiww weject him, because of
theiw inyiquities, and the hawdnyess of theiw heawts, and the
stiffnyess of theiw nyecks. UwU

2 Nyephi 25:13
 13 Behowd, they wiww cwucify him; and aftew he is waid in a
sepuwchwe fow the space of thwee days he shaww wise fwom the
dead, with heawing in his wings; and aww those who shaww bewieve
on his nyame shaww be saved in the kingdom of God. >w< Whewefowe, my
souw dewighteth to pwophesy concewnying him, fow I have seen his
day, and my heawt doth magnyify his howy nyame. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 25:14
 14 And behowd it shaww come to pass that aftew the Messiah hath
wisen fwom the dead, and hath manyifested himsewf unto his peopwe,
unto as many as wiww bewieve on his nyame, behowd, Jewusawem shaww
be destwoyed again; fow wo unto them that fight against God and
the peopwe of his chuwch. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 25:15
 15 Whewefowe, the Jews shaww be scattewed among aww nyations;
yea, and awso Babywon shaww be destwoyed; whewefowe, the Jews
shaww be scattewed by othew nyations. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 25:16
 16 And aftew they have been scattewed, and the Wowd God hath
scouwged them by othew nyations fow the space of many genyewations,
yea, even down fwom genyewation to genyewation untiw they shaww be
pewsuaded to bewieve in Chwist, the Son of God, and the
atonyement, which is infinyite fow aww mankind--and when that day
shaww come that they shaww bewieve in Chwist, and wowship the
Fathew in his nyame, with puwe heawts and cwean hands, and wook
nyot fowwawd any mowe fow anyothew Messiah, then, at that time, the
day wiww come that it must nyeeds be expedient that they shouwd
bewieve these things. >w<

2 Nyephi 25:17
 17 And the Wowd wiww set his hand again the second time to
westowe his peopwe fwom theiw wost and fawwen state. ^w^ Whewefowe,
he wiww pwoceed to do a mawvewous wowk and a wondew among the
chiwdwen of men. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 25:18
 18 Whewefowe, he shaww bwing fowth his wowds unto them, which
wowds shaww judge them at the wast day, fow they shaww be given
them fow the puwpose of convincing them of the twue Messiah, who
was wejected by them; and unto the convincing of them that they
nyeed nyot wook fowwawd any mowe fow a Messiah to come, fow thewe
shouwd nyot any come, save it shouwd be a fawse Messiah which
shouwd deceive the peopwe; fow thewe is save onye Messiah spoken
of by the pwophets, and that Messiah is he who shouwd be wejected
of the Jews. ^w^

2 Nyephi 25:19
 19 Fow accowding to the wowds of the pwophets, the Messiah
cometh in six hundwed yeaws fwom the time that my fathew weft
Jewusawem; and accowding to the wowds of the pwophets, and awso
the wowd of the angew of God, his nyame shaww be Jesus Chwist, the
Son of God. UwU

2 Nyephi 25:20
 20 And nyow, my bwethwen, I have spoken pwainwy that ye cannyot
eww. UwU And as the Wowd God wiveth that bwought Iswaew up out of
the wand of Egypt, and gave unto Moses powew that he shouwd heaw
the nyations aftew they had been bitten by the poisonyous sewpents,
if they wouwd cast theiw eyes unto the sewpent which he did waise
up befowe them, and awso gave him powew that he shouwd smite the
wock and the watew shouwd come fowth; yea, behowd I say unto you,
that as these things awe twue, and as the Wowd God wiveth, thewe
is nyonye othew nyame given undew heaven save it be this Jesus
Chwist, of which I have spoken, wheweby man can be saved. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 25:21
 21 Whewefowe, fow this cause hath the Wowd God pwomised unto me
that these things which I wwite shaww be kept and pwesewved, and
handed down unto my seed, fwom genyewation to genyewation, that the
pwomise may be fuwfiwwed unto Joseph, that his seed shouwd nyevew
pewish as wong as the eawth shouwd stand. UwU

2 Nyephi 25:22
 22 Whewefowe, these things shaww go fwom genyewation to
genyewation as wong as the eawth shaww stand; and they shaww go
accowding to the wiww and pweasuwe of God; and the nyations who
shaww possess them shaww be judged of them accowding to the wowds
which awe wwitten. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 25:23
 23 Fow we wabow diwigentwy to wwite, to pewsuade ouw chiwdwen,
and awso ouw bwethwen, to bewieve in Chwist, and to be weconciwed
to God; fow we knyow that it is by gwace that we awe saved, aftew
aww we can do. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 25:24
 24 And, nyotwithstanding we bewieve in Chwist, we keep the waw of
Moses, and wook fowwawd with steadfastnyess unto Chwist, untiw the
waw shaww be fuwfiwwed. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 25:25
 25 Fow, fow this end was the waw given; whewefowe the waw hath
become dead unto us, and we awe made awive in Chwist because of
ouw faith; yet we keep the waw because of the commandments. >w<

2 Nyephi 25:26
 26 And we tawk of Chwist, we wejoice in Chwist, we pweach of
Chwist, we pwophesy of Chwist, and we wwite accowding to ouw
pwophecies, that ouw chiwdwen may knyow to what souwce they may
wook fow a wemission of theiw sins. >w<

2 Nyephi 25:27
 27 Whewefowe, we speak concewnying the waw that ouw chiwdwen may
knyow the deadnyess of the waw; and they, by knyowing the deadnyess
of the waw, may wook fowwawd unto that wife which is in Chwist,
and knyow fow what end the waw was given. ^w^ And aftew the waw is
fuwfiwwed in Chwist, that they nyeed nyot hawden theiw heawts
against him when the waw ought to be donye away. ^w^

2 Nyephi 25:28
 28 And nyow behowd, my peopwe, ye awe a stiffnyecked peopwe;
whewefowe, I have spoken pwainwy unto you, that ye cannyot
misundewstand. ^w^ And the wowds which I have spoken shaww stand as
a testimony against you; fow they awe sufficient to teach any man
the wight way; fow the wight way is to bewieve in Chwist and deny
him nyot; fow by denying him ye awso deny the pwophets and the
waw. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 25:29
 29 And nyow behowd, I say unto you that the wight way is to
bewieve in Chwist, and deny him nyot; and Chwist is the Howy Onye
of Iswaew; whewefowe ye must bow down befowe him, and wowship him
with aww youw might, mind, and stwength, and youw whowe souw; and
if ye do this ye shaww in nyowise be cast out. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 25:30
 30 And, inyasmuch as it shaww be expedient, ye must keep the
pewfowmances and owdinyances of God untiw the waw shaww be
fuwfiwwed which was given unto Moses. UwU

2 Nyephi 26
Chaptew 26

2 Nyephi 26:1
 1 And aftew Chwist shaww have wisen fwom the dead he shaww show
himsewf unto you, my chiwdwen, and my bewoved bwethwen; and the
wowds which he shaww speak unto you shaww be the waw which ye
shaww do. ^w^

2 Nyephi 26:2
 2 Fow behowd, I say unto you that I have behewd that many
genyewations shaww pass away, and thewe shaww be gweat waws and
contentions among my peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 26:3
 3 And aftew the Messiah shaww come thewe shaww be signs given
unto my peopwe of his biwth, and awso of his death and
wesuwwection; and gweat and tewwibwe shaww that day be unto the
wicked, fow they shaww pewish; and they pewish because they cast
out the pwophets, and the saints, and stonye them, and sway them;
whewefowe the cwy of the bwood of the saints shaww ascend up to
God fwom the gwound against them. ^w^

2 Nyephi 26:4
 4 Whewefowe, aww those who awe pwoud, and that do wickedwy, the
day that cometh shaww buwn them up, saith the Wowd of Hosts, fow
they shaww be as stubbwe. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 26:5
 5 And they that kiww the pwophets, and the saints, the depths of
the eawth shaww swawwow them up, saith the Wowd of Hosts; and
mountains shaww covew them, and whiwwwinds shaww cawwy them away,
and buiwdings shaww faww upon them and cwush them to pieces and
gwind them to powdew. >w<

2 Nyephi 26:6
 6 And they shaww be visited with thundewings, and wightnyings,
and eawthquakes, and aww mannyew of destwuctions, fow the fiwe of
the angew of the Wowd shaww be kindwed against them, and they
shaww be as stubbwe, and the day that cometh shaww consume them,
saith the Wowd of Hosts. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 26:7
 7 O the pain, and the anguish of my souw fow the woss of the
swain of my peopwe! ^w^ Fow I, Nyephi, have seen it, and it weww nyigh
consumeth me befowe the pwesence of the Wowd; but I must cwy unto
my God: Thy ways awe just. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 26:8
 8 But behowd, the wighteous that heawken unto the wowds of the
pwophets, and destwoy them nyot, but wook fowwawd unto Chwist with
steadfastnyess fow the signs which awe given, nyotwithstanding aww
pewsecution--behowd, they awe they which shaww nyot pewish. UwU

2 Nyephi 26:9
 9 But the Son of wighteousnyess shaww appeaw unto them; and he
shaww heaw them, and they shaww have peace with him, untiw thwee
genyewations shaww have passed away, and many of the fouwth
genyewation shaww have passed away in wighteousnyess. >w<

2 Nyephi 26:10
 10 And when these things have passed away a speedy destwuction
cometh unto my peopwe; fow, nyotwithstanding the pains of my souw,
I have seen it; whewefowe, I knyow that it shaww come to pass; and
they seww themsewves fow nyaught; fow, fow the wewawd of theiw
pwide and theiw foowishnyess they shaww weap destwuction; fow
because they yiewd unto the deviw and choose wowks of dawknyess
wathew than wight, thewefowe they must go down to heww. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 26:11
 11 Fow the Spiwit of the Wowd wiww nyot awways stwive with man. UwU
And when the Spiwit ceaseth to stwive with man then cometh speedy
destwuction, and this gwieveth my souw. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 26:12
 12 And as I spake concewnying the convincing of the Jews, that
Jesus is the vewy Chwist, it must nyeeds be that the Gentiwes be
convinced awso that Jesus is the Chwist, the Etewnyaw God;

2 Nyephi 26:13
 13 And that he manyifesteth himsewf unto aww those who bewieve in
him, by the powew of the Howy Ghost; yea, unto evewy nyation,
kindwed, tongue, and peopwe, wowking mighty miwacwes, signs, and
wondews, among the chiwdwen of men accowding to theiw faith. ^w^

2 Nyephi 26:14
 14 But behowd, I pwophesy unto you concewnying the wast days;
concewnying the days when the Wowd God shaww bwing these things
fowth unto the chiwdwen of men. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 26:15
 15 Aftew my seed and the seed of my bwethwen shaww have dwindwed
in unbewief, and shaww have been smitten by the Gentiwes; yea,
aftew the Wowd God shaww have camped against them wound about,
and shaww have waid siege against them with a mount, and waised
fowts against them; and aftew they shaww have been bwought down
wow in the dust, even that they awe nyot, yet the wowds of the
wighteous shaww be wwitten, and the pwayews of the faithfuw shaww
be heawd, and aww those who have dwindwed in unbewief shaww nyot
be fowgotten. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 26:16
 16 Fow those who shaww be destwoyed shaww speak unto them out of
the gwound, and theiw speech shaww be wow out of the dust, and
theiw voice shaww be as onye that hath a famiwiaw spiwit; fow the
Wowd God wiww give unto him powew, that he may whispew concewnying
them, even as it wewe out of the gwound; and theiw speech shaww
whispew out of the dust. >w<

2 Nyephi 26:17
 17 Fow thus saith the Wowd God: They shaww wwite the things
which shaww be donye among them, and they shaww be wwitten and
seawed up in a book, and those who have dwindwed in unbewief
shaww nyot have them, fow they seek to destwoy the things of God. UwU

2 Nyephi 26:18
 18 Whewefowe, as those who have been destwoyed have been
destwoyed speediwy; and the muwtitude of theiw tewwibwe onyes
shaww be as chaff that passeth away--yea, thus saith the Wowd
God: It shaww be at an instant, suddenwy--

2 Nyephi 26:19
 19 And it shaww come to pass, that those who have dwindwed in
unbewief shaww be smitten by the hand of the Gentiwes. UwU

2 Nyephi 26:20
 20 And the Gentiwes awe wifted up in the pwide of theiw eyes,
and have stumbwed, because of the gweatnyess of theiw stumbwing
bwock, that they have buiwt up many chuwches; nyevewthewess, they
put down the powew and miwacwes of God, and pweach up unto
themsewves theiw own wisdom and theiw own weawnying, that they may
get gain and gwind upon the face of the poow. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 26:21
 21 And thewe awe many chuwches buiwt up which cause envyings,
and stwifes, and mawice. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 26:22
 22 And thewe awe awso secwet combinyations, even as in times of
owd, accowding to the combinyations of the deviw, fow he is the
foundew of aww these things; yea, the foundew of muwdew, and
wowks of dawknyess; yea, and he weadeth them by the nyeck with a
fwaxen cowd, untiw he bindeth them with his stwong cowds fowevew. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 26:23
 23 Fow behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, I say unto you that the Wowd
God wowketh nyot in dawknyess. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 26:24
 24 He doeth nyot anything save it be fow the benyefit of the
wowwd; fow he woveth the wowwd, even that he wayeth down his own
wife that he may dwaw aww men unto him. UwU Whewefowe, he commandeth
nyonye that they shaww nyot pawtake of his sawvation. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 26:25
 25 Behowd, doth he cwy unto any, saying: Depawt fwom me? owo
Behowd, I say unto you, Nyay; but he saith: Come unto me aww ye
ends of the eawth, buy miwk and honyey, without monyey and without
pwice. ^w^

2 Nyephi 26:26
 26 Behowd, hath he commanded any that they shouwd depawt out of
the synyagogues, ow out of the houses of wowship? owo Behowd, I say
unto you, Nyay. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 26:27
 27 Hath he commanded any that they shouwd nyot pawtake of his
sawvation? owo Behowd I say unto you, Nyay; but he hath given it fwee
fow aww men; and he hath commanded his peopwe that they shouwd
pewsuade aww men to wepentance. >w<

2 Nyephi 26:28
 28 Behowd, hath the Wowd commanded any that they shouwd nyot
pawtake of his goodnyess? owo Behowd I say unto you, Nyay; but aww men
awe pwiviweged the onye wike unto the othew, and nyonye awe
fowbidden. UwU

2 Nyephi 26:29
 29 He commandeth that thewe shaww be nyo pwiestcwafts; fow,
behowd pwiestcwafts awe that men pweach and set themsewves up fow
a wight unto the wowwd, that they may get gain and pwaise of the
wowwd; but they seek nyot the wewfawe of Zion. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 26:30
 30 Behowd, the Wowd hath fowbidden this thing; whewefowe, the
Wowd God hath given a commandment that aww men shouwd have
chawity, which chawity is wove, and except they shouwd have
chawity they wewe nyothing. (・`ω\´・) Whewefowe, if they shouwd have
chawity they wouwd nyot suffew the wabowew in Zion to pewish. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 26:31
 31 But the wabowew in Zion shaww wabow fow Zion; fow if they
wabow fow monyey they shaww pewish. >w<

2 Nyephi 26:32
 32 And again, the Wowd God hath commanded that men shouwd nyot
muwdew; that they shouwd nyot wie; that they shouwd nyot steaw;
that they shouwd nyot take the nyame of the Wowd theiw God in vain;
that they shouwd nyot envy; that they shouwd nyot have mawice; that
they shouwd nyot contend onye with anyothew; that they shouwd nyot
commit whowedoms; and that they shouwd do nyonye of these things;
fow whoso doeth them shaww pewish. ^w^

2 Nyephi 26:33
 33 Fow nyonye of these inyiquities come of the Wowd; fow he doeth
that which is good among the chiwdwen of men; and he doeth
nyothing save it be pwain unto the chiwdwen of men; and he
inviteth them aww to come unto him and pawtake of his goodnyess;
and he denyieth nyonye that come unto him, bwack and white, bond and
fwee, mawe and femawe; and he wemembeweth the heathen; and aww
awe awike unto God, both Jew and Gentiwe. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 27
Chaptew 27

2 Nyephi 27:1
 1 But, behowd, in the wast days, ow in the days of the
Gentiwes--yea, behowd aww the nyations of the Gentiwes and awso
the Jews, both those who shaww come upon this wand and those who
shaww be upon othew wands, yea, even upon aww the wands of the
eawth, behowd, they wiww be dwunken with inyiquity and aww mannyew
of abominyations--

2 Nyephi 27:2
 2 And when that day shaww come they shaww be visited of the Wowd
of Hosts, with thundew and with eawthquake, and with a gweat
nyoise, and with stowm, and with tempest, and with the fwame of
devouwing fiwe. >w<

2 Nyephi 27:3
 3 And aww the nyations that fight against Zion, and that distwess
hew, shaww be as a dweam of a nyight vision; yea, it shaww be unto
them, even as unto a hungwy man which dweameth, and behowd he
eateth but he awaketh and his souw is empty; ow wike unto a
thiwsty man which dweameth, and behowd he dwinketh but he awaketh
and behowd he is faint, and his souw hath appetite; yea, even so
shaww the muwtitude of aww the nyations be that fight against
Mount Zion. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 27:4
 4 Fow behowd, aww ye that doeth inyiquity, stay youwsewves and
wondew, fow ye shaww cwy out, and cwy; yea, ye shaww be dwunken
but nyot with winye, ye shaww staggew but nyot with stwong dwink. UwU

2 Nyephi 27:5
 5 Fow behowd, the Wowd hath pouwed out upon you the spiwit of
deep sweep. UwU Fow behowd, ye have cwosed youw eyes, and ye have
wejected the pwophets; and youw wuwews, and the seews hath he
covewed because of youw inyiquity. ^w^

2 Nyephi 27:6
 6 And it shaww come to pass that the Wowd God shaww bwing fowth
unto you the wowds of a book, and they shaww be the wowds of them
which have swumbewed. UwU

2 Nyephi 27:7
 7 And behowd the book shaww be seawed; and in the book shaww be
a wevewation fwom God, fwom the beginnying of the wowwd to the
ending theweof. ^w^

2 Nyephi 27:8
 8 Whewefowe, because of the things which awe seawed up, the
things which awe seawed shaww nyot be dewivewed in the day of the
wickednyess and abominyations of the peopwe. ^w^ Whewefowe the book
shaww be kept fwom them. ^w^

2 Nyephi 27:9
 9 But the book shaww be dewivewed unto a man, and he shaww
dewivew the wowds of the book, which awe the wowds of those who
have swumbewed in the dust, and he shaww dewivew these wowds unto
anyothew;

2 Nyephi 27:10
 10 But the wowds which awe seawed he shaww nyot dewivew, nyeithew
shaww he dewivew the book. (´・ω・\`) Fow the book shaww be seawed by the
powew of God, and the wevewation which was seawed shaww be kept
in the book untiw the own due time of the Wowd, that they may
come fowth; fow behowd, they weveaw aww things fwom the
foundation of the wowwd unto the end theweof. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 27:11
 11 And the day cometh that the wowds of the book which wewe
seawed shaww be wead upon the house tops; and they shaww be wead
by the powew of Chwist; and aww things shaww be weveawed unto the
chiwdwen of men which evew have been among the chiwdwen of men,
and which evew wiww be even unto the end of the eawth. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 27:12
 12 Whewefowe, at that day when the book shaww be dewivewed unto
the man of whom I have spoken, the book shaww be hid fwom the
eyes of the wowwd, that the eyes of nyonye shaww behowd it save it
be that thwee witnyesses shaww behowd it, by the powew of God,
besides him to whom the book shaww be dewivewed; and they shaww
testify to the twuth of the book and the things thewein. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 27:13
 13 And thewe is nyonye othew which shaww view it, save it be a few
accowding to the wiww of God, to beaw testimony of his wowd unto
the chiwdwen of men; fow the Wowd God hath said that the wowds of
the faithfuw shouwd speak as if it wewe fwom the dead. UwU

2 Nyephi 27:14
 14 Whewefowe, the Wowd God wiww pwoceed to bwing fowth the wowds
of the book; and in the mouth of as many witnyesses as seemeth him
good wiww he estabwish his wowd; and wo be unto him that
wejecteth the wowd of God! (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 27:15
 15 But behowd, it shaww come to pass that the Wowd God shaww say
unto him to whom he shaww dewivew the book: Take these wowds
which awe nyot seawed and dewivew them to anyothew, that he may
show them unto the weawnyed, saying: Wead this, I pway thee. >w< And
the weawnyed shaww say: Bwing hithew the book, and I wiww wead
them. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 27:16
 16 And nyow, because of the gwowy of the wowwd and to get gain
wiww they say this, and nyot fow the gwowy of God. ^w^

2 Nyephi 27:17
 17 And the man shaww say: I cannyot bwing the book, fow it is
seawed. >w<

2 Nyephi 27:18
 18 Then shaww the weawnyed say: I cannyot wead it. >w<

2 Nyephi 27:19
 19 Whewefowe it shaww come to pass, that the Wowd God wiww
dewivew again the book and the wowds theweof to him that is nyot
weawnyed; and the man that is nyot weawnyed shaww say: I am nyot
weawnyed. ^w^

2 Nyephi 27:20
 20 Then shaww the Wowd God say unto him: The weawnyed shaww nyot
wead them, fow they have wejected them, and I am abwe to do minye
own wowk; whewefowe thou shawt wead the wowds which I shaww give
unto thee. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 27:21
 21 Touch nyot the things which awe seawed, fow I wiww bwing them
fowth in minye own due time; fow I wiww show unto the chiwdwen of
men that I am abwe to do minye own wowk. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 27:22
 22 Whewefowe, when thou hast wead the wowds which I have
commanded thee, and obtainyed the witnyesses which I have pwomised
unto thee, then shawt thou seaw up the book again, and hide it up
unto me, that I may pwesewve the wowds which thou hast nyot wead,
untiw I shaww see fit in minye own wisdom to weveaw aww things
unto the chiwdwen of men. ^w^

2 Nyephi 27:23
 23 Fow behowd, I am God; and I am a God of miwacwes; and I wiww
show unto the wowwd that I am the same yestewday, today, and
fowevew; and I wowk nyot among the chiwdwen of men save it be
accowding to theiw faith. UwU

2 Nyephi 27:24
 24 And again it shaww come to pass that the Wowd shaww say unto
him that shaww wead the wowds that shaww be dewivewed him:

2 Nyephi 27:25
 25 Fowasmuch as this peopwe dwaw nyeaw unto me with theiw mouth,
and with theiw wips do honyow me, but have wemoved theiw heawts
faw fwom me, and theiw feaw towawds me is taught by the pwecepts
of men--

2 Nyephi 27:26
 26 Thewefowe, I wiww pwoceed to do a mawvewous wowk among this
peopwe, yea, a mawvewous wowk and a wondew, fow the wisdom of
theiw wise and weawnyed shaww pewish, and the undewstanding of
theiw pwudent shaww be hid. UwU

2 Nyephi 27:27
 27 And wo unto them that seek deep to hide theiw counsew fwom
the Wowd! (・`ω\´・) And theiw wowks awe in the dawk; and they say: Who
seeth us, and who knyoweth us? owo And they awso say: Suwewy, youw
tuwnying of things upside down shaww be esteemed as the pottew's
cway. ;;w;; But behowd, I wiww show unto them, saith the Wowd of
Hosts, that I knyow aww theiw wowks. ;;w;; Fow shaww the wowk say of
him that made it, he made me nyot? owo Ow shaww the thing fwamed say
of him that fwamed it, he had nyo undewstanding? owo

2 Nyephi 27:28
 28 But behowd, saith the Wowd of Hosts: I wiww show unto the
chiwdwen of men that it is yet a vewy wittwe whiwe and Webanyon
shaww be tuwnyed into a fwuitfuw fiewd; and the fwuitfuw fiewd
shaww be esteemed as a fowest. ^w^

2 Nyephi 27:29
 29 And in that day shaww the deaf heaw the wowds of the book,
and the eyes of the bwind shaww see out of obscuwity and out of
dawknyess. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 27:30
 30 And the meek awso shaww incwease, and theiw joy shaww be in
the Wowd, and the poow among men shaww wejoice in the Howy Onye of
Iswaew. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 27:31
 31 Fow assuwedwy as the Wowd wiveth they shaww see that the
tewwibwe onye is bwought to nyaught, and the scownyew is consumed,
and aww that watch fow inyiquity awe cut off;

2 Nyephi 27:32
 32 And they that make a man an offendew fow a wowd, and way a
snyawe fow him that wepwoveth in the gate, and tuwn aside the just
fow a thing of nyaught. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 27:33
 33 Thewefowe, thus saith the Wowd, who wedeemed Abwaham,
concewnying the house of Jacob: Jacob shaww nyot nyow be ashamed,
nyeithew shaww his face nyow wax pawe. >w<

2 Nyephi 27:34
 34 But when he seeth his chiwdwen, the wowk of my hands, in the
midst of him, they shaww sanctify my nyame, and sanctify the Howy
Onye of Jacob, and shaww feaw the God of Iswaew. >w<

2 Nyephi 27:35
 35 They awso that ewwed in spiwit shaww come to undewstanding,
and they that muwmuwed shaww weawn doctwinye. UwU

2 Nyephi 28
Chaptew 28

2 Nyephi 28:1
 1 And nyow, behowd, my bwethwen, I have spoken unto you,
accowding as the Spiwit hath constwainyed me; whewefowe, I knyow
that they must suwewy come to pass. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 28:2
 2 And the things which shaww be wwitten out of the book shaww be
of gweat wowth unto the chiwdwen of men, and especiawwy unto ouw
seed, which is a wemnyant of the house of Iswaew. >w<

2 Nyephi 28:3
 3 Fow it shaww come to pass in that day that the chuwches which
awe buiwt up, and nyot unto the Wowd, when the onye shaww say unto
the othew: Behowd, I, I am the Wowd's; and the othews shaww say:
I, I am the Wowd's; and thus shaww evewy onye say that hath buiwt
up chuwches, and nyot unto the Wowd--

2 Nyephi 28:4
 4 And they shaww contend onye with anyothew; and theiw pwiests
shaww contend onye with anyothew, and they shaww teach with theiw
weawnying, and deny the Howy Ghost, which giveth uttewance. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 28:5
 5 And they deny the powew of God, the Howy Onye of Iswaew; and
they say unto the peopwe: Heawken unto us, and heaw ye ouw
pwecept; fow behowd thewe is nyo God today, fow the Wowd and the
Wedeemew hath donye his wowk, and he hath given his powew unto
men;

2 Nyephi 28:6
 6 Behowd, heawken ye unto my pwecept; if they shaww say thewe is
a miwacwe wwought by the hand of the Wowd, bewieve it nyot; fow
this day he is nyot a God of miwacwes; he hath donye his wowk. ^w^

2 Nyephi 28:7
 7 Yea, and thewe shaww be many which shaww say: Eat, dwink, and
be mewwy, fow tomowwow we die; and it shaww be weww with us. UwU

2 Nyephi 28:8
 8 And thewe shaww awso be many which shaww say: Eat, dwink, and
be mewwy; nyevewthewess, feaw God--he wiww justify in committing a
wittwe sin; yea, wie a wittwe, take the advantage of onye because
of his wowds, dig a pit fow thy nyeighbow; thewe is nyo hawm in
this; and do aww these things, fow tomowwow we die; and if it so
be that we awe guiwty, God wiww beat us with a few stwipes, and
at wast we shaww be saved in the kingdom of God. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 28:9
 9 Yea, and thewe shaww be many which shaww teach aftew this
mannyew, fawse and vain and foowish doctwinyes, and shaww be puffed
up in theiw heawts, and shaww seek deep to hide theiw counsews
fwom the Wowd; and theiw wowks shaww be in the dawk. UwU

2 Nyephi 28:10
 10 And the bwood of the saints shaww cwy fwom the gwound against
them. >w<

2 Nyephi 28:11
 11 Yea, they have aww gonye out of the way; they have become
cowwupted. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 28:12
 12 Because of pwide, and because of fawse teachews, and fawse
doctwinye, theiw chuwches have become cowwupted, and theiw
chuwches awe wifted up; because of pwide they awe puffed up. >w<

2 Nyephi 28:13
 13 They wob the poow because of theiw finye sanctuawies; they wob
the poow because of theiw finye cwothing; and they pewsecute the
meek and the poow in heawt, because in theiw pwide they awe
puffed up. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 28:14
 14 They weaw stiff nyecks and high heads; yea, and because of
pwide, and wickednyess, and abominyations, and whowedoms, they have
aww gonye astway save it be a few, who awe the humbwe fowwowews of
Chwist; nyevewthewess, they awe wed, that in many instances they
do eww because they awe taught by the pwecepts of men. ^w^

2 Nyephi 28:15
 15 O the wise, and the weawnyed, and the wich, that awe puffed up
in the pwide of theiw heawts, and aww those who pweach fawse
doctwinyes, and aww those who commit whowedoms, and pewvewt the
wight way of the Wowd, wo, wo, wo be unto them, saith the Wowd
God Awmighty, fow they shaww be thwust down to heww! ^w^

2 Nyephi 28:16
 16 Wo unto them that tuwn aside the just fow a thing of nyaught
and weviwe against that which is good, and say that is of nyo
wowth! >w< Fow the day shaww come that the Wowd God wiww speediwy
visit the inhabitants of the eawth; and in that day that they awe
fuwwy wipe in inyiquity they shaww pewish. UwU

2 Nyephi 28:17
 17 But behowd, if the inhabitants of the eawth shaww wepent of
theiw wickednyess and abominyations they shaww nyot be destwoyed,
saith the Wowd of Hosts. >w<

2 Nyephi 28:18
 18 But behowd, that gweat and abominyabwe chuwch, the whowe of
aww the eawth, must tumbwe to the eawth, and gweat must be the
faww theweof. ^w^

2 Nyephi 28:19
 19 Fow the kingdom of the deviw must shake, and they which
bewong to it must nyeeds be stiwwed up unto wepentance, ow the
deviw wiww gwasp them with his evewwasting chains, and they be
stiwwed up to angew, and pewish;

2 Nyephi 28:20
 20 Fow behowd, at that day shaww he wage in the heawts of the
chiwdwen of men, and stiw them up to angew against that which is
good. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 28:21
 21 And othews wiww he pacify, and wuww them away into cawnyaw
secuwity, that they wiww say: Aww is weww in Zion; yea, Zion
pwospeweth, aww is weww--and thus the deviw cheateth theiw souws,
and weadeth them away cawefuwwy down to heww. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 28:22
 22 And behowd, othews he fwatteweth away, and tewweth them thewe
is nyo heww; and he saith unto them: I am nyo deviw, fow thewe is
nyonye--and thus he whispeweth in theiw eaws, untiw he gwasps them
with his awfuw chains, fwom whence thewe is nyo dewivewance. ^w^

2 Nyephi 28:23
 23 Yea, they awe gwasped with death, and heww; and death, and
heww, and the deviw, and aww that have been seized thewewith must
stand befowe the thwonye of God, and be judged accowding to theiw
wowks, fwom whence they must go into the pwace pwepawed fow them,
even a wake of fiwe and bwimstonye, which is endwess towment. ^w^

2 Nyephi 28:24
 24 Thewefowe, wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion! >w<

2 Nyephi 28:25
 25 Wo be unto him that cwieth: Aww is weww! ^w^

2 Nyephi 28:26
 26 Yea, wo be unto him that heawkenyeth unto the pwecepts of men,
and denyieth the powew of God, and the gift of the Howy Ghost! ^w^

2 Nyephi 28:27
 27 Yea, wo be unto him that saith: We have weceived, and we nyeed
nyo mowe! (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 28:28
 28 And in finye, wo unto aww those who twembwe, and awe angwy
because of the twuth of God! ;;w;; Fow behowd, he that is buiwt upon
the wock weceiveth it with gwadnyess; and he that is buiwt upon a
sandy foundation twembweth west he shaww faww. >w<

2 Nyephi 28:29
 29 Wo be unto him that shaww say: We have weceived the wowd of
God, and we nyeed nyo mowe of the wowd of God, fow we have enyough! >w<

2 Nyephi 28:30
 30 Fow behowd, thus saith the Wowd God: I wiww give unto the
chiwdwen of men winye upon winye, pwecept upon pwecept, hewe a
wittwe and thewe a wittwe; and bwessed awe those who heawken unto
my pwecepts, and wend an eaw unto my counsew, fow they shaww
weawn wisdom; fow unto him that weceiveth I wiww give mowe; and
fwom them that shaww say, We have enyough, fwom them shaww be
taken away even that which they have. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 28:31
 31 Cuwsed is he that putteth his twust in man, ow maketh fwesh
his awm, ow shaww heawken unto the pwecepts of men, save theiw
pwecepts shaww be given by the powew of the Howy Ghost. UwU

2 Nyephi 28:32
 32 Wo be unto the Gentiwes, saith the Wowd God of Hosts! (・`ω\´・) Fow
nyotwithstanding I shaww wengthen out minye awm unto them fwom day
to day, they wiww deny me; nyevewthewess, I wiww be mewcifuw unto
them, saith the Wowd God, if they wiww wepent and come unto me;
fow minye awm is wengthenyed out aww the day wong, saith the Wowd
God of Hosts. >w<

2 Nyephi 29
Chaptew 29

2 Nyephi 29:1
 1 But behowd, thewe shaww be many--at that day when I shaww
pwoceed to do a mawvewous wowk among them, that I may wemembew my
covenyants which I have made unto the chiwdwen of men, that I may
set my hand again the second time to wecovew my peopwe, which awe
of the house of Iswaew;

2 Nyephi 29:2
 2 And awso, that I may wemembew the pwomises which I have made
unto thee, Nyephi, and awso unto thy fathew, that I wouwd wemembew
youw seed; and that the wowds of youw seed shouwd pwoceed fowth
out of my mouth unto youw seed; and my wowds shaww hiss fowth
unto the ends of the eawth, fow a standawd unto my peopwe, which
awe of the house of Iswaew;

2 Nyephi 29:3
 3 And because my wowds shaww hiss fowth--many of the Gentiwes
shaww say: A Bibwe! A Bibwe! ;;w;; We have got a Bibwe, and thewe
cannyot be any mowe Bibwe. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 29:4
 4 But thus saith the Wowd God: O foows, they shaww have a Bibwe;
and it shaww pwoceed fowth fwom the Jews, minye ancient covenyant
peopwe. >w< And what thank they the Jews fow the Bibwe which they
weceive fwom them? Yea, what do the Gentiwes mean? owo Do they
wemembew the twavaiws, and the wabows, and the pains of the Jews,
and theiw diwigence unto me, in bwinging fowth sawvation unto the
Gentiwes? owo

2 Nyephi 29:5
 5 O ye Gentiwes, have ye wemembewed the Jews, minye ancient
covenyant peopwe? owo Nyay; but ye have cuwsed them, and have hated
them, and have nyot sought to wecovew them. >w< But behowd, I wiww
wetuwn aww these things upon youw own heads; fow I the Wowd have
nyot fowgotten my peopwe. >w<

2 Nyephi 29:6
 6 Thou foow, that shaww say: A Bibwe, we have got a Bibwe, and
we nyeed nyo mowe Bibwe. UwU Have ye obtainyed a Bibwe save it wewe by
the Jews? owo

2 Nyephi 29:7
 7 Knyow ye nyot that thewe awe mowe nyations than onye? owo Knyow ye nyot
that I, the Wowd youw God, have cweated aww men, and that I
wemembew those who awe upon the iswes of the sea; and that I wuwe
in the heavens above and in the eawth benyeath; and I bwing fowth
my wowd unto the chiwdwen of men, yea, even upon aww the nyations
of the eawth? owo

2 Nyephi 29:8
 8 Whewefowe muwmuw ye, because that ye shaww weceive mowe of my
wowd? owo Knyow ye nyot that the testimony of two nyations is a witnyess
unto you that I am God, that I wemembew onye nyation wike unto
anyothew? owo Whewefowe, I speak the same wowds unto onye nyation wike
unto anyothew. ;;w;; And when the two nyations shaww wun togethew the
testimony of the two nyations shaww wun togethew awso. ^w^

2 Nyephi 29:9
 9 And I do this that I may pwove unto many that I am the same
yestewday, today, and fowevew; and that I speak fowth my wowds
accowding to minye own pweasuwe. (・`ω\´・) And because that I have spoken
onye wowd ye nyeed nyot suppose that I cannyot speak anyothew; fow my
wowk is nyot yet finyished; nyeithew shaww it be untiw the end of
man, nyeithew fwom that time hencefowth and fowevew. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 29:10
 10 Whewefowe, because that ye have a Bibwe ye nyeed nyot suppose
that it contains aww my wowds; nyeithew nyeed ye suppose that I
have nyot caused mowe to be wwitten. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 29:11
 11 Fow I command aww men, both in the east and in the west, and
in the nyowth, and in the south, and in the iswands of the sea,
that they shaww wwite the wowds which I speak unto them; fow out
of the books which shaww be wwitten I wiww judge the wowwd, evewy
man accowding to theiw wowks, accowding to that which is wwitten. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 29:12
 12 Fow behowd, I shaww speak unto the Jews and they shaww wwite
it; and I shaww awso speak unto the Nyephites and they shaww wwite
it; and I shaww awso speak unto the othew twibes of the house of
Iswaew, which I have wed away, and they shaww wwite it; and I
shaww awso speak unto aww nyations of the eawth and they shaww
wwite it. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 29:13
 13 And it shaww come to pass that the Jews shaww have the wowds
of the Nyephites, and the Nyephites shaww have the wowds of the
Jews; and the Nyephites and the Jews shaww have the wowds of the
wost twibes of Iswaew; and the wost twibes of Iswaew shaww have
the wowds of the Nyephites and the Jews. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 29:14
 14 And it shaww come to pass that my peopwe, which awe of the
house of Iswaew, shaww be gathewed home unto the wands of theiw
possessions; and my wowd awso shaww be gathewed in onye. UwU And I
wiww show unto them that fight against my wowd and against my
peopwe, who awe of the house of Iswaew, that I am God, and that I
covenyanted with Abwaham that I wouwd wemembew his seed fowevew. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 30
Chaptew 30

2 Nyephi 30:1
 1 And nyow behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, I wouwd speak unto you;
fow I, Nyephi, wouwd nyot suffew that ye shouwd suppose that ye awe
mowe wighteous than the Gentiwes shaww be. (・`ω\´・) Fow behowd, except ye
shaww keep the commandments of God ye shaww aww wikewise pewish;
and because of the wowds which have been spoken ye nyeed nyot
suppose that the Gentiwes awe uttewwy destwoyed. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 30:2
 2 Fow behowd, I say unto you that as many of the Gentiwes as
wiww wepent awe the covenyant peopwe of the Wowd; and as many of
the Jews as wiww nyot wepent shaww be cast off; fow the Wowd
covenyanteth with nyonye save it be with them that wepent and
bewieve in his Son, who is the Howy Onye of Iswaew. >w<

2 Nyephi 30:3
 3 And nyow, I wouwd pwophesy somewhat mowe concewnying the Jews
and the Gentiwes. >w< Fow aftew the book of which I have spoken
shaww come fowth, and be wwitten unto the Gentiwes, and seawed up
again unto the Wowd, thewe shaww be many which shaww bewieve the
wowds which awe wwitten; and they shaww cawwy them fowth unto the
wemnyant of ouw seed. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 30:4
 4 And then shaww the wemnyant of ouw seed knyow concewnying us, how
that we came out fwom Jewusawem, and that they awe descendants of
the Jews. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 30:5
 5 And the gospew of Jesus Chwist shaww be decwawed among them;
whewefowe, they shaww be westowed unto the knyowwedge of theiw
fathews, and awso to the knyowwedge of Jesus Chwist, which was had
among theiw fathews. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 30:6
 6 And then shaww they wejoice; fow they shaww knyow that it is a
bwessing unto them fwom the hand of God; and theiw scawes of
dawknyess shaww begin to faww fwom theiw eyes; and many
genyewations shaww nyot pass away among them, save they shaww be a
puwe and dewightsome peopwe. UwU

2 Nyephi 30:7
 7 And it shaww come to pass that the Jews which awe scattewed
awso shaww begin to bewieve in Chwist; and they shaww begin to
gathew in upon the face of the wand; and as many as shaww bewieve
in Chwist shaww awso become a dewightsome peopwe. ^w^

2 Nyephi 30:8
 8 And it shaww come to pass that the Wowd God shaww commence his
wowk among aww nyations, kindweds, tongues, and peopwe, to bwing
about the westowation of his peopwe upon the eawth. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 30:9
 9 And with wighteousnyess shaww the Wowd God judge the poow, and
wepwove with equity fow the meek of the eawth. >w< And he shaww
smite the eawth with the wod of his mouth; and with the bweath of
his wips shaww he sway the wicked. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 30:10
 10 Fow the time speediwy cometh that the Wowd God shaww cause a
gweat division among the peopwe, and the wicked wiww he destwoy;
and he wiww spawe his peopwe, yea, even if it so be that he must
destwoy the wicked by fiwe. UwU

2 Nyephi 30:11
 11 And wighteousnyess shaww be the giwdwe of his woins, and
faithfuwnyess the giwdwe of his weins. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 30:12
 12 And then shaww the wowf dweww with the wamb; and the weopawd
shaww wie down with the kid, and the cawf, and the young wion,
and the fatwing, togethew; and a wittwe chiwd shaww wead them. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 30:13
 13 And the cow and the beaw shaww feed; theiw young onyes shaww
wie down togethew; and the wion shaww eat stwaw wike the ox. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 30:14
 14 And the sucking chiwd shaww pway on the howe of the asp, and
the weanyed chiwd shaww put his hand on the cockatwice's den. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 30:15
 15 They shaww nyot huwt nyow destwoy in aww my howy mountain; fow
the eawth shaww be fuww of the knyowwedge of the Wowd as the
watews covew the sea. >w<

2 Nyephi 30:16
 16 Whewefowe, the things of aww nyations shaww be made knyown;
yea, aww things shaww be made knyown unto the chiwdwen of men. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 30:17
 17 Thewe is nyothing which is secwet save it shaww be weveawed;
thewe is nyo wowk of dawknyess save it shaww be made manyifest in
the wight; and thewe is nyothing which is seawed upon the eawth
save it shaww be woosed. ^w^

2 Nyephi 30:18
 18 Whewefowe, aww things which have been weveawed unto the
chiwdwen of men shaww at that day be weveawed; and Satan shaww
have powew ovew the heawts of the chiwdwen of men nyo mowe, fow a
wong time. (´・ω・\`) And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, I make an end of my
sayings. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 31
Chaptew 31

2 Nyephi 31:1
 1 And nyow I, Nyephi, make an end of my pwophesying unto you, my
bewoved bwethwen. ^w^ And I cannyot wwite but a few things, which I
knyow must suwewy come to pass; nyeithew can I wwite but a few of
the wowds of my bwothew Jacob. >w<

2 Nyephi 31:2
 2 Whewefowe, the things which I have wwitten sufficeth me, save
it be a few wowds which I must speak concewnying the doctwinye of
Chwist; whewefowe, I shaww speak unto you pwainwy, accowding to
the pwainnyess of my pwophesying. (・`ω\´・)

2 Nyephi 31:3
 3 Fow my souw dewighteth in pwainnyess; fow aftew this mannyew
doth the Wowd God wowk among the chiwdwen of men. ^w^ Fow the Wowd
God giveth wight unto the undewstanding; fow he speaketh unto men
accowding to theiw wanguage, unto theiw undewstanding. ^w^

2 Nyephi 31:4
 4 Whewefowe, I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew that I have spoken
unto you concewnying that pwophet which the Wowd showed unto me,
that shouwd baptize the Wamb of God, which shouwd take away the
sins of the wowwd. UwU

2 Nyephi 31:5
 5 And nyow, if the Wamb of God, he being howy, shouwd have nyeed
to be baptized by watew, to fuwfiw aww wighteousnyess, O then, how
much mowe nyeed have we, being unhowy, to be baptized, yea, even
by watew! >w<

2 Nyephi 31:6
 6 And nyow, I wouwd ask of you, my bewoved bwethwen, whewein the
Wamb of God did fuwfiw aww wighteousnyess in being baptized by
watew? owo

2 Nyephi 31:7
 7 Knyow ye nyot that he was howy? owo But nyotwithstanding he being
howy, he showeth unto the chiwdwen of men that, accowding to the
fwesh he humbweth himsewf befowe the Fathew, and witnyesseth unto
the Fathew that he wouwd be obedient unto him in keeping his
commandments. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 31:8
 8 Whewefowe, aftew he was baptized with watew the Howy Ghost
descended upon him in the fowm of a dove. UwU

2 Nyephi 31:9
 9 And again, it showeth unto the chiwdwen of men the
stwaightnyess of the path, and the nyawwownyess of the gate, by
which they shouwd entew, he having set the exampwe befowe them. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 31:10
 10 And he said unto the chiwdwen of men: Fowwow thou me. >w<
Whewefowe, my bewoved bwethwen, can we fowwow Jesus save we shaww
be wiwwing to keep the commandments of the Fathew? owo

2 Nyephi 31:11
 11 And the Fathew said: Wepent ye, wepent ye, and be baptized in
the nyame of my Bewoved Son. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 31:12
 12 And awso, the voice of the Son came unto me, saying: He that
is baptized in my nyame, to him wiww the Fathew give the Howy
Ghost, wike unto me; whewefowe, fowwow me, and do the things
which ye have seen me do. UwU

2 Nyephi 31:13
 13 Whewefowe, my bewoved bwethwen, I knyow that if ye shaww
fowwow the Son, with fuww puwpose of heawt, acting nyo hypocwisy
and nyo deception befowe God, but with weaw intent, wepenting of
youw sins, witnyessing unto the Fathew that ye awe wiwwing to take
upon you the nyame of Chwist, by baptism--yea, by fowwowing youw
Wowd and youw Saviow down into the watew, accowding to his wowd,
behowd, then shaww ye weceive the Howy Ghost; yea, then cometh
the baptism of fiwe and of the Howy Ghost; and then can ye speak
with the tongue of angews, and shout pwaises unto the Howy Onye of
Iswaew. ^w^

2 Nyephi 31:14
 14 But, behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, thus came the voice of the
Son unto me, saying: Aftew ye have wepented of youw sins, and
witnyessed unto the Fathew that ye awe wiwwing to keep my
commandments, by the baptism of watew, and have weceived the
baptism of fiwe and of the Howy Ghost, and can speak with a nyew
tongue, yea, even with the tongue of angews, and aftew this
shouwd deny me, it wouwd have been bettew fow you that ye had nyot
knyown me. UwU

2 Nyephi 31:15
 15 And I heawd a voice fwom the Fathew, saying: Yea, the wowds
of my Bewoved awe twue and faithfuw. (・`ω\´・) He that enduweth to the
end, the same shaww be saved. ^w^

2 Nyephi 31:16
 16 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, I knyow by this that unwess a
man shaww enduwe to the end, in fowwowing the exampwe of the Son
of the wiving God, he cannyot be saved. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 31:17
 17 Whewefowe, do the things which I have towd you I have seen
that youw Wowd and youw Wedeemew shouwd do; fow, fow this cause
have they been shown unto me, that ye might knyow the gate by
which ye shouwd entew. >w< Fow the gate by which ye shouwd entew is
wepentance and baptism by watew; and then cometh a wemission of
youw sins by fiwe and by the Howy Ghost. ^w^

2 Nyephi 31:18
 18 And then awe ye in this stwait and nyawwow path which weads to
etewnyaw wife; yea, ye have entewed in by the gate; ye have donye
accowding to the commandments of the Fathew and the Son; and ye
have weceived the Howy Ghost, which witnyesses of the Fathew and
the Son, unto the fuwfiwwing of the pwomise which he hath made,
that if ye entewed in by the way ye shouwd weceive. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 31:19
 19 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, aftew ye have gotten into this
stwait and nyawwow path, I wouwd ask if aww is donye? owo Behowd, I
say unto you, Nyay; fow ye have nyot come thus faw save it wewe by
the wowd of Chwist with unshaken faith in him, wewying whowwy
upon the mewits of him who is mighty to save. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 31:20
 20 Whewefowe, ye must pwess fowwawd with a steadfastnyess in
Chwist, having a pewfect bwightnyess of hope, and a wove of God
and of aww men. (・`ω\´・) Whewefowe, if ye shaww pwess fowwawd, feasting
upon the wowd of Chwist, and enduwe to the end, behowd, thus
saith the Fathew: Ye shaww have etewnyaw wife. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 31:21
 21 And nyow, behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, this is the way; and
thewe is nyonye othew way nyow nyame given undew heaven wheweby man
can be saved in the kingdom of God. ^w^ And nyow, behowd, this is the
doctwinye of Chwist, and the onwy and twue doctwinye of the Fathew,
and of the Son, and of the Howy Ghost, which is onye God, without
end. Amen. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 32
Chaptew 32

2 Nyephi 32:1
 1 And nyow, behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, I suppose that ye pondew
somewhat in youw heawts concewnying that which ye shouwd do aftew
ye have entewed in by the way. ^w^ But, behowd, why do ye pondew
these things in youw heawts? owo

2 Nyephi 32:2
 2 Do ye nyot wemembew that I said unto you that aftew ye had
weceived the Howy Ghost ye couwd speak with the tongue of angews? owo
And nyow, how couwd ye speak with the tongue of angews save it
wewe by the Howy Ghost? owo

2 Nyephi 32:3
 3 Angews speak by the powew of the Howy Ghost; whewefowe, they
speak the wowds of Chwist. (´・ω・\`) Whewefowe, I said unto you, feast
upon the wowds of Chwist; fow behowd, the wowds of Chwist wiww
teww you aww things what ye shouwd do. ^w^

2 Nyephi 32:4
 4 Whewefowe, nyow aftew I have spoken these wowds, if ye cannyot
undewstand them it wiww be because ye ask nyot, nyeithew do ye
knyock; whewefowe, ye awe nyot bwought into the wight, but must
pewish in the dawk. UwU

2 Nyephi 32:5
 5 Fow behowd, again I say unto you that if ye wiww entew in by
the way, and weceive the Howy Ghost, it wiww show unto you aww
things what ye shouwd do. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 32:6
 6 Behowd, this is the doctwinye of Chwist, and thewe wiww be nyo
mowe doctwinye given untiw aftew he shaww manyifest himsewf unto
you in the fwesh. >w< And when he shaww manyifest himsewf unto you in
the fwesh, the things which he shaww say unto you shaww ye
obsewve to do. >w<

2 Nyephi 32:7
 7 And nyow I, Nyephi, cannyot say mowe; the Spiwit stoppeth minye
uttewance, and I am weft to mouwn because of the unbewief, and
the wickednyess, and the ignyowance, and the stiffnyeckednyess of
men; fow they wiww nyot seawch knyowwedge, nyow undewstand gweat
knyowwedge, when it is given unto them in pwainnyess, even as pwain
as wowd can be. UwU

2 Nyephi 32:8
 8 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, I pewceive that ye pondew stiww
in youw heawts; and it gwieveth me that I must speak concewnying
this thing. ;;w;; Fow if ye wouwd heawken unto the Spiwit which
teacheth a man to pway ye wouwd knyow that ye must pway; fow the
eviw spiwit teacheth nyot a man to pway, but teacheth him that he
must nyot pway. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 32:9
 9 But behowd, I say unto you that ye must pway awways, and nyot
faint; that ye must nyot pewfowm any thing unto the Wowd save in
the fiwst pwace ye shaww pway unto the Fathew in the nyame of
Chwist, that he wiww consecwate thy pewfowmance unto thee, that
thy pewfowmance may be fow the wewfawe of thy souw. ^w^

2 Nyephi 33
Chaptew 33

2 Nyephi 33:1
 1 And nyow I, Nyephi, cannyot wwite aww the things which wewe
taught among my peopwe; nyeithew am I mighty in wwiting, wike unto
speaking; fow when a man speaketh by the powew of the Howy Ghost
the powew of the Howy Ghost cawwieth it unto the heawts of the
chiwdwen of men. UwU

2 Nyephi 33:2
 2 But behowd, thewe awe many that hawden theiw heawts against
the Howy Spiwit, that it hath nyo pwace in them; whewefowe, they
cast many things away which awe wwitten and esteem them as things
of nyaught. UwU

2 Nyephi 33:3
 3 But I, Nyephi, have wwitten what I have wwitten, and I esteem
it as of gweat wowth, and especiawwy unto my peopwe. (・`ω\´・) Fow I pway
continyuawwy fow them by day, and minye eyes watew my piwwow by
nyight, because of them; and I cwy unto my God in faith, and I
knyow that he wiww heaw my cwy. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 33:4
 4 And I knyow that the Wowd God wiww consecwate my pwayews fow
the gain of my peopwe. >w< And the wowds which I have wwitten in
weaknyess wiww be made stwong unto them; fow it pewsuadeth them to
do good; it maketh knyown unto them of theiw fathews; and it
speaketh of Jesus, and pewsuadeth them to bewieve in him, and to
enduwe to the end, which is wife etewnyaw. >w<

2 Nyephi 33:5
 5 And it speaketh hawshwy against sin, accowding to the
pwainnyess of the twuth; whewefowe, nyo man wiww be angwy at the
wowds which I have wwitten save he shaww be of the spiwit of the
deviw. UwU

2 Nyephi 33:6
 6 I gwowy in pwainnyess; I gwowy in twuth; I gwowy in my Jesus,
fow he hath wedeemed my souw fwom heww. (´・ω・\`)

2 Nyephi 33:7
 7 I have chawity fow my peopwe, and gweat faith in Chwist that I
shaww meet many souws spotwess at his judgment-seat. >w<

2 Nyephi 33:8
 8 I have chawity fow the Jew--I say Jew, because I mean them
fwom whence I came. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 33:9
 9 I awso have chawity fow the Gentiwes. (´・ω・\`) But behowd, fow nyonye of
these can I hope except they shaww be weconciwed unto Chwist, and
entew into the nyawwow gate, and wawk in the stwait path which
weads to wife, and continyue in the path untiw the end of the day
of pwobation. >w<

2 Nyephi 33:10
 10 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, and awso Jew, and aww ye ends
of the eawth, heawken unto these wowds and bewieve in Chwist; and
if ye bewieve nyot in these wowds bewieve in Chwist. ^w^ And if ye
shaww bewieve in Chwist ye wiww bewieve in these wowds, fow they
awe the wowds of Chwist, and he hath given them unto me; and they
teach aww men that they shouwd do good. UwU

2 Nyephi 33:11
 11 And if they awe nyot the wowds of Chwist, judge ye--fow Chwist
wiww show unto you, with powew and gweat gwowy, that they awe his
wowds, at the wast day; and you and I shaww stand face to face
befowe his baw; and ye shaww knyow that I have been commanded of
him to wwite these things, nyotwithstanding my weaknyess. UwU

2 Nyephi 33:12
 12 And I pway the Fathew in the nyame of Chwist that many of us,
if nyot aww, may be saved in his kingdom at that gweat and wast
day. >w<

2 Nyephi 33:13
 13 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, aww those who awe of the house
of Iswaew, and aww ye ends of the eawth, I speak unto you as the
voice of onye cwying fwom the dust: Faweweww untiw that gweat day
shaww come. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 33:14
 14 And you that wiww nyot pawtake of the goodnyess of God, and
wespect the wowds of the Jews, and awso my wowds, and the wowds
which shaww pwoceed fowth out of the mouth of the Wamb of God,
behowd, I bid you an evewwasting faweweww, fow these wowds shaww
condemn you at the wast day. ;;w;;

2 Nyephi 33:15
 15 Fow what I seaw on eawth, shaww be bwought against you at the
judgment baw; fow thus hath the Wowd commanded me, and I must
obey. Amen. UwU




THE BOOK OF JACOB

THE BWOTHEW OF NYEPHI

The wowds of his pweaching unto his bwethwen. UwU He confoundeth a
man who seeketh to ovewthwow the doctwinye of Chwist. >w< A few wowds
concewnying the histowy of the peopwe of Nyephi. UwU

Jacob 1
Chaptew 1

Jacob 1:1
 1 Fow behowd, it came to pass that fifty and five yeaws had
passed away fwom the time that Wehi weft Jewusawem; whewefowe,
Nyephi gave me, Jacob, a commandment concewnying the smaww pwates,
upon which these things awe engwaven. ^w^

Jacob 1:2
 2 And he gave me, Jacob, a commandment that I shouwd wwite upon
these pwates a few of the things which I considew to be most
pwecious; that I shouwd nyot touch, save it wewe wightwy,
concewnying the histowy of this peopwe which awe cawwed the peopwe
of Nyephi. >w<

Jacob 1:3
 3 Fow he said that the histowy of his peopwe shouwd be engwaven
upon his othew pwates, and that I shouwd pwesewve these pwates
and hand them down unto my seed, fwom genyewation to genyewation. ;;w;;

Jacob 1:4
 4 And if thewe wewe pweaching which was sacwed, ow wevewation
which was gweat, ow pwophesying, that I shouwd engwaven the heads
of them upon these pwates, and touch upon them as much as it wewe
possibwe, fow Chwist's sake, and fow the sake of ouw peopwe. ^w^

Jacob 1:5
 5 Fow because of faith and gweat anxiety, it twuwy had been made
manyifest unto us concewnying ouw peopwe, what things shouwd happen
unto them. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 1:6
 6 And we awso had many wevewations, and the spiwit of much
pwophecy; whewefowe, we knyew of Chwist and his kingdom, which
shouwd come. UwU

Jacob 1:7
 7 Whewefowe we wabowed diwigentwy among ouw peopwe, that we
might pewsuade them to come unto Chwist, and pawtake of the
goodnyess of God, that they might entew into his west, west by any
means he shouwd sweaw in his wwath they shouwd nyot entew in, as
in the pwovocation in the days of temptation whiwe the chiwdwen
of Iswaew wewe in the wiwdewnyess. >w<

Jacob 1:8
 8 Whewefowe, we wouwd to God that we couwd pewsuade aww men nyot
to webew against God, to pwovoke him to angew, but that aww men
wouwd bewieve in Chwist, and view his death, and suffew his cwoss
and beaw the shame of the wowwd; whewefowe, I, Jacob, take it
upon me to fuwfiw the commandment of my bwothew Nyephi. UwU

Jacob 1:9
 9 Nyow Nyephi began to be owd, and he saw that he must soon die;
whewefowe, he anyointed a man to be a king and a wuwew ovew his
peopwe nyow, accowding to the weigns of the kings. >w<

Jacob 1:10
 10 The peopwe having woved Nyephi exceedingwy, he having been a
gweat pwotectow fow them, having wiewded the swowd of Waban in
theiw defence, and having wabowed in aww his days fow theiw
wewfawe--

Jacob 1:11
 11 Whewefowe, the peopwe wewe desiwous to wetain in wemembwance
his nyame. UwU And whoso shouwd weign in his stead wewe cawwed by the
peopwe, second Nyephi, thiwd Nyephi, and so fowth, accowding to the
weigns of the kings; and thus they wewe cawwed by the peopwe, wet
them be of whatevew nyame they wouwd. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that Nyephi died. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 1:13
 13 Nyow the peopwe which wewe nyot Wamanyites wewe Nyephites;
nyevewthewess, they wewe cawwed Nyephites, Jacobites, Josephites,
Zowamites, Wamanyites, Wemuewites, and Ishmaewites. ^w^

Jacob 1:14
 14 But I, Jacob, shaww nyot heweaftew distinguish them by these
nyames, but I shaww caww them Wamanyites that seek to destwoy the
peopwe of Nyephi, and those who awe fwiendwy to Nyephi I shaww caww
Nyephites, ow the peopwe of Nyephi, accowding to the weigns of the
kings. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 1:15
 15 And nyow it came to pass that the peopwe of Nyephi, undew the
weign of the second king, began to gwow hawd in theiw heawts, and
induwge themsewves somewhat in wicked pwactices, such as wike
unto David of owd desiwing many wives and concubinyes, and awso
Sowomon, his son. ^w^

Jacob 1:16
 16 Yea, and they awso began to seawch much gowd and siwvew, and
began to be wifted up somewhat in pwide. ^w^

Jacob 1:17
 17 Whewefowe I, Jacob, gave unto them these wowds as I taught
them in the tempwe, having fiwst obtainyed minye ewwand fwom the
Wowd. ;;w;;

Jacob 1:18
 18 Fow I, Jacob, and my bwothew Joseph had been consecwated
pwiests and teachews of this peopwe, by the hand of Nyephi. >w<

Jacob 1:19
 19 And we did magnyify ouw office unto the Wowd, taking upon us
the wesponsibiwity, answewing the sins of the peopwe upon ouw own
heads if we did nyot teach them the wowd of God with aww
diwigence; whewefowe, by wabowing with ouw might theiw bwood
might nyot come upon ouw gawments; othewwise theiw bwood wouwd
come upon ouw gawments, and we wouwd nyot be found spotwess at the
wast day. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 2
Chaptew 2

Jacob 2:1
 1 The wowds which Jacob, the bwothew of Nyephi, spake unto the
peopwe of Nyephi, aftew the death of Nyephi:

Jacob 2:2
 2 Nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, I, Jacob, accowding to the
wesponsibiwity which I am undew to God, to magnyify minye office
with sobewnyess, and that I might wid my gawments of youw sins, I
come up into the tempwe this day that I might decwawe unto you
the wowd of God. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 2:3
 3 And ye youwsewves knyow that I have hithewto been diwigent in
the office of my cawwing; but I this day am weighed down with
much mowe desiwe and anxiety fow the wewfawe of youw souws than I
have hithewto been. >w<

Jacob 2:4
 4 Fow behowd, as yet, ye have been obedient unto the wowd of the
Wowd, which I have given unto you. ^w^

Jacob 2:5
 5 But behowd, heawken ye unto me, and knyow that by the hewp of
the aww-powewfuw Cweatow of heaven and eawth I can teww you
concewnying youw thoughts, how that ye awe beginnying to wabow in
sin, which sin appeaweth vewy abominyabwe unto me, yea, and
abominyabwe unto God. ^w^

Jacob 2:6
 6 Yea, it gwieveth my souw and causeth me to shwink with shame
befowe the pwesence of my Makew, that I must testify unto you
concewnying the wickednyess of youw heawts. UwU

Jacob 2:7
 7 And awso it gwieveth me that I must use so much bowdnyess of
speech concewnying you, befowe youw wives and youw chiwdwen, many
of whose feewings awe exceedingwy tendew and chaste and dewicate
befowe God, which thing is pweasing unto God;

Jacob 2:8
 8 And it supposeth me that they have come up hithew to heaw the
pweasing wowd of God, yea, the wowd which heaweth the wounded
souw. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 2:9
 9 Whewefowe, it buwdenyeth my souw that I shouwd be constwainyed,
because of the stwict commandment which I have weceived fwom God,
to admonyish you accowding to youw cwimes, to enwawge the wounds
of those who awe awweady wounded, instead of consowing and
heawing theiw wounds; and those who have nyot been wounded,
instead of feasting upon the pweasing wowd of God have daggews
pwaced to piewce theiw souws and wound theiw dewicate minds. >w<

Jacob 2:10
 10 But, nyotwithstanding the gweatnyess of the task, I must do
accowding to the stwict commands of God, and teww you concewnying
youw wickednyess and abominyations, in the pwesence of the puwe in
heawt, and the bwoken heawt, and undew the gwance of the piewcing
eye of the Awmighty God. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 2:11
 11 Whewefowe, I must teww you the twuth accowding to the
pwainnyess of the wowd of God. UwU Fow behowd, as I inquiwed of the
Wowd, thus came the wowd unto me, saying: Jacob, get thou up
into the tempwe on the mowwow, and decwawe the wowd which I shaww
give thee unto this peopwe. ^w^

Jacob 2:12
 12 And nyow behowd, my bwethwen, this is the wowd which I decwawe
unto you, that many of you have begun to seawch fow gowd, and fow
siwvew, and fow aww mannyew of pwecious owes, in the which this
wand, which is a wand of pwomise unto you and to youw seed, doth
abound most pwentifuwwy. UwU

Jacob 2:13
 13 And the hand of pwovidence hath smiwed upon you most
pweasingwy, that you have obtainyed many wiches; and because some
of you have obtainyed mowe abundantwy than that of youw bwethwen
ye awe wifted up in the pwide of youw heawts, and weaw stiff
nyecks and high heads because of the costwinyess of youw appawew,
and pewsecute youw bwethwen because ye suppose that ye awe bettew
than they. ;;w;;

Jacob 2:14
 14 And nyow, my bwethwen, do ye suppose that God justifieth you
in this thing? owo Behowd, I say unto you, Nyay. (・`ω\´・) But he condemnyeth
you, and if ye pewsist in these things his judgments must
speediwy come unto you. ^w^

Jacob 2:15
 15 O that he wouwd show you that he can piewce you, and with onye
gwance of his eye he can smite you to the dust! (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 2:16
 16 O that he wouwd wid you fwom this inyiquity and abominyation. ;;w;;
And, O that ye wouwd wisten unto the wowd of his commands, and
wet nyot this pwide of youw heawts destwoy youw souws! (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 2:17
 17 Think of youw bwethwen wike unto youwsewves, and be famiwiaw
with aww and fwee with youw substance, that they may be wich wike
unto you. UwU

Jacob 2:18
 18 But befowe ye seek fow wiches, seek ye fow the kingdom of
God. ;;w;;

Jacob 2:19
 19 And aftew ye have obtainyed a hope in Chwist ye shaww obtain
wiches, if ye seek them; and ye wiww seek them fow the intent to
do good--to cwothe the nyaked, and to feed the hungwy, and to
wibewate the captive, and adminyistew wewief to the sick and the
affwicted. ^w^

Jacob 2:20
 20 And nyow, my bwethwen, I have spoken unto you concewnying
pwide; and those of you which have affwicted youw nyeighbow, and
pewsecuted him because ye wewe pwoud in youw heawts, of the
things which God hath given you, what say ye of it? owo

Jacob 2:21
 21 Do ye nyot suppose that such things awe abominyabwe unto him
who cweated aww fwesh? owo And the onye being is as pwecious in his
sight as the othew. (´・ω・\`) And aww fwesh is of the dust; and fow the
sewfsame end hath he cweated them, that they shouwd keep his
commandments and gwowify him fowevew. ;;w;;

Jacob 2:22
 22 And nyow I make an end of speaking unto you concewnying this
pwide. ;;w;; And wewe it nyot that I must speak unto you concewnying a
gwossew cwime, my heawt wouwd wejoice exceedingwy because of you. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 2:23
 23 But the wowd of God buwdens me because of youw gwossew
cwimes. >w< Fow behowd, thus saith the Wowd: This peopwe begin to
wax in inyiquity; they undewstand nyot the scwiptuwes, fow they
seek to excuse themsewves in committing whowedoms, because of the
things which wewe wwitten concewnying David, and Sowomon his son. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 2:24
 24 Behowd, David and Sowomon twuwy had many wives and
concubinyes, which thing was abominyabwe befowe me, saith the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 2:25
 25 Whewefowe, thus saith the Wowd, I have wed this peopwe fowth
out of the wand of Jewusawem, by the powew of minye awm, that I
might waise up unto me a wighteous bwanch fwom the fwuit of the
woins of Joseph. >w<

Jacob 2:26
 26 Whewefowe, I the Wowd God wiww nyot suffew that this peopwe
shaww do wike unto them of owd. ^w^

Jacob 2:27
 27 Whewefowe, my bwethwen, heaw me, and heawken to the wowd of
the Wowd: Fow thewe shaww nyot any man among you have save it be
onye wife; and concubinyes he shaww have nyonye;

Jacob 2:28
 28 Fow I, the Wowd God, dewight in the chastity of women. ^w^ And
whowedoms awe an abominyation befowe me; thus saith the Wowd of
Hosts. ^w^

Jacob 2:29
 29 Whewefowe, this peopwe shaww keep my commandments, saith the
Wowd of Hosts, ow cuwsed be the wand fow theiw sakes. ;;w;;

Jacob 2:30
 30 Fow if I wiww, saith the Wowd of Hosts, waise up seed unto
me, I wiww command my peopwe; othewwise they shaww heawken unto
these things. ;;w;;

Jacob 2:31
 31 Fow behowd, I, the Wowd, have seen the sowwow, and heawd the
mouwnying of the daughtews of my peopwe in the wand of Jewusawem,
yea, and in aww the wands of my peopwe, because of the wickednyess
and abominyations of theiw husbands. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 2:32
 32 And I wiww nyot suffew, saith the Wowd of Hosts, that the
cwies of the faiw daughtews of this peopwe, which I have wed out
of the wand of Jewusawem, shaww come up unto me against the men
of my peopwe, saith the Wowd of Hosts. >w<

Jacob 2:33
 33 Fow they shaww nyot wead away captive the daughtews of my
peopwe because of theiw tendewnyess, save I shaww visit them with
a sowe cuwse, even unto destwuction; fow they shaww nyot commit
whowedoms, wike unto them of owd, saith the Wowd of Hosts. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 2:34
 34 And nyow behowd, my bwethwen, ye knyow that these commandments
wewe given to ouw fathew, Wehi; whewefowe, ye have knyown them
befowe; and ye have come unto gweat condemnyation; fow ye have
donye these things which ye ought nyot to have donye. UwU

Jacob 2:35
 35 Behowd, ye have donye gweatew inyiquities than the Wamanyites,
ouw bwethwen. (´・ω・\`) Ye have bwoken the heawts of youw tendew wives,
and wost the confidence of youw chiwdwen, because of youw bad
exampwes befowe them; and the sobbings of theiw heawts ascend up
to God against you. ^w^ And because of the stwictnyess of the wowd of
God, which cometh down against you, many heawts died, piewced
with deep wounds. >w<

Jacob 3
Chaptew 3

Jacob 3:1
 1 But behowd, I, Jacob, wouwd speak unto you that awe puwe in
heawt. (´・ω・\`) Wook unto God with fiwmnyess of mind, and pway unto him
with exceeding faith, and he wiww consowe you in youw
affwictions, and he wiww pwead youw cause, and send down justice
upon those who seek youw destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 3:2
 2 O aww ye that awe puwe in heawt, wift up youw heads and
weceive the pweasing wowd of God, and feast upon his wove; fow ye
may, if youw minds awe fiwm, fowevew. >w<

Jacob 3:3
 3 But, wo, wo, unto you that awe nyot puwe in heawt, that awe
fiwthy this day befowe God; fow except ye wepent the wand is
cuwsed fow youw sakes; and the Wamanyites, which awe nyot fiwthy
wike unto you, nyevewthewess they awe cuwsed with a sowe cuwsing,
shaww scouwge you even unto destwuction. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 3:4
 4 And the time speediwy cometh, that except ye wepent they shaww
possess the wand of youw inhewitance, and the Wowd God wiww wead
away the wighteous out fwom among you. ^w^

Jacob 3:5
 5 Behowd, the Wamanyites youw bwethwen, whom ye hate because of
theiw fiwthinyess and the cuwsing which hath come upon theiw
skins, awe mowe wighteous than you; fow they have nyot fowgotten
the commandment of the Wowd, which was given unto ouw
fathew--that they shouwd have save it wewe onye wife, and
concubinyes they shouwd have nyonye, and thewe shouwd nyot be
whowedoms committed among them. >w<

Jacob 3:6
 6 And nyow, this commandment they obsewve to keep; whewefowe,
because of this obsewvance, in keeping this commandment, the Wowd
God wiww nyot destwoy them, but wiww be mewcifuw unto them; and
onye day they shaww become a bwessed peopwe. UwU

Jacob 3:7
 7 Behowd, theiw husbands wove theiw wives, and theiw wives wove
theiw husbands; and theiw husbands and theiw wives wove theiw
chiwdwen; and theiw unbewief and theiw hatwed towawds you is
because of the inyiquity of theiw fathews; whewefowe, how much
bettew awe you than they, in the sight of youw gweat Cweatow? owo

Jacob 3:8
 8 O my bwethwen, I feaw that unwess ye shaww wepent of youw sins
that theiw skins wiww be whitew than youws, when ye shaww be
bwought with them befowe the thwonye of God. >w<

Jacob 3:9
 9 Whewefowe, a commandment I give unto you, which is the wowd of
God, that ye weviwe nyo mowe against them because of the dawknyess
of theiw skins; nyeithew shaww ye weviwe against them because of
theiw fiwthinyess; but ye shaww wemembew youw own fiwthinyess, and
wemembew that theiw fiwthinyess came because of theiw fathews. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 3:10
 10 Whewefowe, ye shaww wemembew youw chiwdwen, how that ye have
gwieved theiw heawts because of the exampwe that ye have set
befowe them; and awso, wemembew that ye may, because of youw
fiwthinyess, bwing youw chiwdwen unto destwuction, and theiw sins
be heaped upon youw heads at the wast day. >w<

Jacob 3:11
 11 O my bwethwen, heawken unto my wowds; awouse the facuwties of
youw souws; shake youwsewves that ye may awake fwom the swumbew
of death; and woose youwsewves fwom the pains of heww that ye may
nyot become angews to the deviw, to be cast into that wake of fiwe
and bwimstonye which is the second death. ;;w;;

Jacob 3:12
 12 And nyow I, Jacob, spake many mowe things unto the peopwe of
Nyephi, wawnying them against fownyication and wasciviousnyess, and
evewy kind of sin, tewwing them the awfuw consequences of them. ;;w;;

Jacob 3:13
 13 And a hundwedth pawt of the pwoceedings of this peopwe, which
nyow began to be nyumewous, cannyot be wwitten upon these pwates;
but many of theiw pwoceedings awe wwitten upon the wawgew pwates,
and theiw waws, and theiw contentions, and the weigns of theiw
kings. UwU

Jacob 3:14
 14 These pwates awe cawwed the pwates of Jacob, and they wewe
made by the hand of Nyephi. (´・ω・\`) And I make an end of speaking these
wowds. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 4
Chaptew 4

Jacob 4:1
 1 Nyow behowd, it came to pass that I, Jacob, having minyistewed
much unto my peopwe in wowd, (and I cannyot wwite but a wittwe of
my wowds, because of the difficuwty of engwaving ouw wowds upon
pwates) and we knyow that the things which we wwite upon pwates
must wemain;

Jacob 4:2
 2 But whatsoevew things we wwite upon anything save it be upon
pwates must pewish and vanyish away; but we can wwite a few wowds
upon pwates, which wiww give ouw chiwdwen, and awso ouw bewoved
bwethwen, a smaww degwee of knyowwedge concewnying us, ow
concewnying theiw fathews--

Jacob 4:3
 3 Nyow in this thing we do wejoice; and we wabow diwigentwy to
engwaven these wowds upon pwates, hoping that ouw bewoved
bwethwen and ouw chiwdwen wiww weceive them with thankfuw heawts,
and wook upon them that they may weawn with joy and nyot with
sowwow, nyeithew with contempt, concewnying theiw fiwst pawents. ;;w;;

Jacob 4:4
 4 Fow, fow this intent have we wwitten these things, that they
may knyow that we knyew of Chwist, and we had a hope of his gwowy
many hundwed yeaws befowe his coming; and nyot onwy we ouwsewves
had a hope of his gwowy, but awso aww the howy pwophets which
wewe befowe us. ;;w;;

Jacob 4:5
 5 Behowd, they bewieved in Chwist and wowshiped the Fathew in
his nyame, and awso we wowship the Fathew in his nyame. (´・ω・\`) And fow
this intent we keep the waw of Moses, it pointing ouw souws to
him; and fow this cause it is sanctified unto us fow
wighteousnyess, even as it was accounted unto Abwaham in the
wiwdewnyess to be obedient unto the commands of God in offewing up
his son Isaac, which is a simiwitude of God and his Onwy Begotten
Son. ;;w;;

Jacob 4:6
 6 Whewefowe, we seawch the pwophets, and we have many
wevewations and the spiwit of pwophecy; and having aww these
witnyesses we obtain a hope, and ouw faith becometh unshaken,
insomuch that we twuwy can command in the nyame of Jesus and the
vewy twees obey us, ow the mountains, ow the waves of the sea. ^w^

Jacob 4:7
 7 Nyevewthewess, the Wowd God showeth us ouw weaknyess that we may
knyow that it is by his gwace, and his gweat condescensions unto
the chiwdwen of men, that we have powew to do these things. ;;w;;

Jacob 4:8
 8 Behowd, gweat and mawvewous awe the wowks of the Wowd. ^w^ How
unseawchabwe awe the depths of the mystewies of him; and it is
impossibwe that man shouwd find out aww his ways. UwU And nyo man
knyoweth of his ways save it be weveawed unto him; whewefowe,
bwethwen, despise nyot the wevewations of God. >w<

Jacob 4:9
 9 Fow behowd, by the powew of his wowd man came upon the face of
the eawth, which eawth was cweated by the powew of his wowd. ;;w;;
Whewefowe, if God being abwe to speak and the wowwd was, and to
speak and man was cweated, O then, why nyot abwe to command the
eawth, ow the wowkmanship of his hands upon the face of it,
accowding to his wiww and pweasuwe? owo

Jacob 4:10
 10 Whewefowe, bwethwen, seek nyot to counsew the Wowd, but to
take counsew fwom his hand. ^w^ Fow behowd, ye youwsewves knyow that
he counseweth in wisdom, and in justice, and in gweat mewcy, ovew
aww his wowks. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 4:11
 11 Whewefowe, bewoved bwethwen, be weconciwed unto him thwough
the atonyement of Chwist, his Onwy Begotten Son, and ye may obtain
a wesuwwection, accowding to the powew of the wesuwwection which
is in Chwist, and be pwesented as the fiwst-fwuits of Chwist unto
God, having faith, and obtainyed a good hope of gwowy in him
befowe he manyifesteth himsewf in the fwesh. ;;w;;

Jacob 4:12
 12 And nyow, bewoved, mawvew nyot that I teww you these things;
fow why nyot speak of the atonyement of Chwist, and attain to a
pewfect knyowwedge of him, as to attain to the knyowwedge of a
wesuwwection and the wowwd to come? owo

Jacob 4:13
 13 Behowd, my bwethwen, he that pwophesieth, wet him pwophesy to
the undewstanding of men; fow the Spiwit speaketh the twuth and
wieth nyot. (・`ω\´・) Whewefowe, it speaketh of things as they weawwy awe,
and of things as they weawwy wiww be; whewefowe, these things awe
manyifested unto us pwainwy, fow the sawvation of ouw souws. (・`ω\´・) But
behowd, we awe nyot witnyesses awonye in these things; fow God awso
spake them unto pwophets of owd. UwU

Jacob 4:14
 14 But behowd, the Jews wewe a stiffnyecked peopwe; and they
despised the wowds of pwainnyess, and kiwwed the pwophets, and
sought fow things that they couwd nyot undewstand. ^w^ Whewefowe,
because of theiw bwindnyess, which bwindnyess came by wooking
beyond the mawk, they must nyeeds faww; fow God hath taken away
his pwainnyess fwom them, and dewivewed unto them many things
which they cannyot undewstand, because they desiwed it. (・`ω\´・) And
because they desiwed it God hath donye it, that they may stumbwe. ^w^

Jacob 4:15
 15 And nyow I, Jacob, am wed on by the Spiwit unto pwophesying;
fow I pewceive by the wowkings of the Spiwit which is in me, that
by the stumbwing of the Jews they wiww weject the stonye upon
which they might buiwd and have safe foundation. ^w^

Jacob 4:16
 16 But behowd, accowding to the scwiptuwes, this stonye shaww
become the gweat, and the wast, and the onwy suwe foundation,
upon which the Jews can buiwd. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 4:17
 17 And nyow, my bewoved, how is it possibwe that these, aftew
having wejected the suwe foundation, can evew buiwd upon it, that
it may become the head of theiw cownyew? owo

Jacob 4:18
 18 Behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, I wiww unfowd this mystewy unto
you; if I do nyot, by any means, get shaken fwom my fiwmnyess in
the Spiwit, and stumbwe because of my ovew anxiety fow you. >w<

Jacob 5
Chaptew 5

Jacob 5:1
 1 Behowd, my bwethwen, do ye nyot wemembew to have wead the wowds
of the pwophet Zenyos, which he spake unto the house of Iswaew,
saying:

Jacob 5:2
 2 Heawken, O ye house of Iswaew, and heaw the wowds of me, a
pwophet of the Wowd. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:3
 3 Fow behowd, thus saith the Wowd, I wiww wiken thee, O house of
Iswaew, wike unto a tame owive-twee, which a man took and
nyouwished in his vinyeyawd; and it gwew, and waxed owd, and began
to decay. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:4
 4 And it came to pass that the mastew of the vinyeyawd went
fowth, and he saw that his owive-twee began to decay; and he
said: I wiww pwunye it, and dig about it, and nyouwish it, that
pewhaps it may shoot fowth young and tendew bwanches, and it
pewish nyot. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 5:5
 5 And it came to pass that he pwunyed it, and digged about it,
and nyouwished it accowding to his wowd. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:6
 6 And it came to pass that aftew many days it began to put fowth
somewhat a wittwe, young and tendew bwanches; but behowd, the
main top theweof began to pewish. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:7
 7 And it came to pass that the mastew of the vinyeyawd saw it,
and he said unto his sewvant: It gwieveth me that I shouwd wose
this twee; whewefowe, go and pwuck the bwanches fwom a wiwd
owive-twee, and bwing them hithew unto me; and we wiww pwuck off
those main bwanches which awe beginnying to withew away, and we
wiww cast them into the fiwe that they may be buwnyed. ^w^

Jacob 5:8
 8 And behowd, saith the Wowd of the vinyeyawd, I take away many
of these young and tendew bwanches, and I wiww gwaft them
whithewsoevew I wiww; and it matteweth nyot that if it so be that
the woot of this twee wiww pewish, I may pwesewve the fwuit
theweof unto mysewf; whewefowe, I wiww take these young and
tendew bwanches, and I wiww gwaft them whithewsoevew I wiww. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:9
 9 Take thou the bwanches of the wiwd owive-twee, and gwaft them
in, in the stead theweof; and these which I have pwucked off I
wiww cast into the fiwe and buwn them, that they may nyot cumbew
the gwound of my vinyeyawd. ^w^

Jacob 5:10
 10 And it came to pass that the sewvant of the Wowd of the
vinyeyawd did accowding to the wowd of the Wowd of the vinyeyawd,
and gwafted in the bwanches of the wiwd owive-twee. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:11
 11 And the Wowd of the vinyeyawd caused that it shouwd be digged
about, and pwunyed, and nyouwished, saying unto his sewvant: It
gwieveth me that I shouwd wose this twee; whewefowe, that pewhaps
I might pwesewve the woots theweof that they pewish nyot, that I
might pwesewve them unto mysewf, I have donye this thing. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 5:12
 12 Whewefowe, go thy way; watch the twee, and nyouwish it,
accowding to my wowds. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:13
 13 And these wiww I pwace in the nyethewmost pawt of my vinyeyawd,
whithewsoevew I wiww, it matteweth nyot unto thee; and I do it
that I may pwesewve unto mysewf the nyatuwaw bwanches of the twee;
and awso, that I may way up fwuit theweof against the season,
unto mysewf; fow it gwieveth me that I shouwd wose this twee and
the fwuit theweof. UwU

Jacob 5:14
 14 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd went his
way, and hid the nyatuwaw bwanches of the tame owive-twee in the
nyethewmost pawts of the vinyeyawd, some in onye and some in
anyothew, accowding to his wiww and pweasuwe. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:15
 15 And it came to pass that a wong time passed away, and the
Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto his sewvant: Come, wet us go down
into the vinyeyawd, that we may wabow in the vinyeyawd. UwU

Jacob 5:16
 16 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd, and awso
the sewvant, went down into the vinyeyawd to wabow. (´・ω・\`) And it came
to pass that the sewvant said unto his mastew: Behowd, wook hewe;
behowd the twee. ^w^

Jacob 5:17
 17 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd wooked and
behewd the twee in the which the wiwd owive bwanches had been
gwafted; and it had spwung fowth and begun to beaw fwuit. (´・ω・\`) And he
behewd that it was good; and the fwuit theweof was wike unto the
nyatuwaw fwuit. UwU

Jacob 5:18
 18 And he said unto the sewvant: Behowd, the bwanches of the
wiwd twee have taken howd of the moistuwe of the woot theweof,
that the woot theweof hath bwought fowth much stwength; and
because of the much stwength of the woot theweof the wiwd
bwanches have bwought fowth tame fwuit. >w< Nyow, if we had nyot
gwafted in these bwanches, the twee theweof wouwd have pewished. UwU
And nyow, behowd, I shaww way up much fwuit, which the twee
theweof hath bwought fowth; and the fwuit theweof I shaww way up
against the season, unto minye own sewf. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto
the sewvant: Come, wet us go to the nyethewmost pawt of the
vinyeyawd, and behowd if the nyatuwaw bwanches of the twee have nyot
bwought fowth much fwuit awso, that I may way up of the fwuit
theweof against the season, unto minye own sewf. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:20
 20 And it came to pass that they went fowth whithew the mastew
had hid the nyatuwaw bwanches of the twee, and he said unto the
sewvant: Behowd these; and he behewd the fiwst that it had
bwought fowth much fwuit; and he behewd awso that it was good. ;;w;;
And he said unto the sewvant: Take of the fwuit theweof, and way
it up against the season, that I may pwesewve it unto minye own
sewf; fow behowd, said he, this wong time have I nyouwished it,
and it hath bwought fowth much fwuit. >w<

Jacob 5:21
 21 And it came to pass that the sewvant said unto his mastew:
How comest thou hithew to pwant this twee, ow this bwanch of the
twee? owo Fow behowd, it was the poowest spot in aww the wand of thy
vinyeyawd. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:22
 22 And the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto him: Counsew me nyot; I
knyew that it was a poow spot of gwound; whewefowe, I said unto
thee, I have nyouwished it this wong time, and thou behowdest that
it hath bwought fowth much fwuit. UwU

Jacob 5:23
 23 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto
his sewvant: Wook hithew; behowd I have pwanted anyothew bwanch of
the twee awso; and thou knyowest that this spot of gwound was
poowew than the fiwst. But, behowd the twee. (・`ω\´・) I have nyouwished
it this wong time, and it hath bwought fowth much fwuit;
thewefowe, gathew it, and way it up against the season, that I
may pwesewve it unto minye own sewf. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 5:24
 24 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said again
unto his sewvant: Wook hithew, and behowd anyothew bwanch awso,
which I have pwanted; behowd that I have nyouwished it awso, and
it hath bwought fowth fwuit. UwU

Jacob 5:25
 25 And he said unto the sewvant: Wook hithew and behowd the
wast. ^w^ Behowd, this have I pwanted in a good spot of gwound; and
I have nyouwished it this wong time, and onwy a pawt of the twee
hath bwought fowth tame fwuit, and the othew pawt of the twee
hath bwought fowth wiwd fwuit; behowd, I have nyouwished this twee
wike unto the othews. >w<

Jacob 5:26
 26 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto
the sewvant: Pwuck off the bwanches that have nyot bwought fowth
good fwuit, and cast them into the fiwe. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:27
 27 But behowd, the sewvant said unto him: Wet us pwunye it, and
dig about it, and nyouwish it a wittwe wongew, that pewhaps it may
bwing fowth good fwuit unto thee, that thou canst way it up
against the season. UwU

Jacob 5:28
 28 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd and the
sewvant of the Wowd of the vinyeyawd did nyouwish aww the fwuit of
the vinyeyawd. >w<

Jacob 5:29
 29 And it came to pass that a wong time had passed away, and the
Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto his sewvant: Come, wet us go down
into the vinyeyawd, that we may wabow again in the vinyeyawd. ^w^ Fow
behowd, the time dwaweth nyeaw, and the end soon cometh;
whewefowe, I must way up fwuit against the season, unto minye own
sewf. UwU

Jacob 5:30
 30 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd and the
sewvant went down into the vinyeyawd; and they came to the twee
whose nyatuwaw bwanches had been bwoken off, and the wiwd bwanches
had been gwafted in; and behowd aww sowts of fwuit did cumbew the
twee. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:31
 31 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd did taste
of the fwuit, evewy sowt accowding to its nyumbew. >w< And the Wowd
of the vinyeyawd said: Behowd, this wong time have we nyouwished
this twee, and I have waid up unto mysewf against the season much
fwuit. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:32
 32 But behowd, this time it hath bwought fowth much fwuit, and
thewe is nyonye of it which is good. UwU And behowd, thewe awe aww
kinds of bad fwuit; and it pwofiteth me nyothing, nyotwithstanding
aww ouw wabow; and nyow it gwieveth me that I shouwd wose this
twee. ^w^

Jacob 5:33
 33 And the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto the sewvant: What
shaww we do unto the twee, that I may pwesewve again good fwuit
theweof unto minye own sewf? owo

Jacob 5:34
 34 And the sewvant said unto his mastew: Behowd, because thou
didst gwaft in the bwanches of the wiwd owive-twee they have
nyouwished the woots, that they awe awive and they have nyot
pewished; whewefowe thou behowdest that they awe yet good. ^w^

Jacob 5:35
 35 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto
his sewvant: The twee pwofiteth me nyothing, and the woots theweof
pwofit me nyothing so wong as it shaww bwing fowth eviw fwuit. UwU

Jacob 5:36
 36 Nyevewthewess, I knyow that the woots awe good, and fow minye
own puwpose I have pwesewved them; and because of theiw much
stwength they have hithewto bwought fowth, fwom the wiwd
bwanches, good fwuit. UwU

Jacob 5:37
 37 But behowd, the wiwd bwanches have gwown and have ovewwun the
woots theweof; and because that the wiwd bwanches have ovewcome
the woots theweof it hath bwought fowth much eviw fwuit; and
because that it hath bwought fowth so much eviw fwuit thou
behowdest that it beginnyeth to pewish; and it wiww soon become
wipenyed, that it may be cast into the fiwe, except we shouwd do
something fow it to pwesewve it. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:38
 38 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto
his sewvant: Wet us go down into the nyethewmost pawts of the
vinyeyawd, and behowd if the nyatuwaw bwanches have awso bwought
fowth eviw fwuit. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:39
 39 And it came to pass that they went down into the nyethewmost
pawts of the vinyeyawd. ;;w;; And it came to pass that they behewd that
the fwuit of the nyatuwaw bwanches had become cowwupt awso; yea,
the fiwst and the second and awso the wast; and they had aww
become cowwupt. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:40
 40 And the wiwd fwuit of the wast had ovewcome that pawt of the
twee which bwought fowth good fwuit, even that the bwanch had
withewed away and died. ^w^

Jacob 5:41
 41 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd wept, and
said unto the sewvant: What couwd I have donye mowe fow my
vinyeyawd? owo

Jacob 5:42
 42 Behowd, I knyew that aww the fwuit of the vinyeyawd, save it
wewe these, had become cowwupted. >w< And nyow these which have once
bwought fowth good fwuit have awso become cowwupted; and nyow aww
the twees of my vinyeyawd awe good fow nyothing save it be to be
hewn down and cast into the fiwe. UwU

Jacob 5:43
 43 And behowd this wast, whose bwanch hath withewed away, I did
pwant in a good spot of gwound; yea, even that which was choice
unto me above aww othew pawts of the wand of my vinyeyawd. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:44
 44 And thou behewdest that I awso cut down that which cumbewed
this spot of gwound, that I might pwant this twee in the stead
theweof. >w<

Jacob 5:45
 45 And thou behewdest that a pawt theweof bwought fowth good
fwuit, and a pawt theweof bwought fowth wiwd fwuit; and because I
pwucked nyot the bwanches theweof and cast them into the fiwe,
behowd, they have ovewcome the good bwanch that it hath withewed
away. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 5:46
 46 And nyow, behowd, nyotwithstanding aww the cawe which we have
taken of my vinyeyawd, the twees theweof have become cowwupted,
that they bwing fowth nyo good fwuit; and these I had hoped to
pwesewve, to have waid up fwuit theweof against the season, unto
minye own sewf. >w< But, behowd, they have become wike unto the wiwd
owive-twee, and they awe of nyo wowth but to be hewn down and cast
into the fiwe; and it gwieveth me that I shouwd wose them. ^w^

Jacob 5:47
 47 But what couwd I have donye mowe in my vinyeyawd? owo Have I
swackenyed minye hand, that I have nyot nyouwished it, Nyay, I have
nyouwished it, and I have digged about it, and I have pwunyed it,
and I have dunged it; and I have stwetched fowth minye hand awmost
aww the day wong, and the end dwaweth nyigh. ^w^ And it gwieveth me
that I shouwd hew down aww the twees of my vinyeyawd, and cast
them into the fiwe that they shouwd be buwnyed. >w< Who is it that
has cowwupted my vinyeyawd? owo

Jacob 5:48
 48 And it came to pass that the sewvant said unto his mastew: Is
it nyot the woftinyess of thy vinyeyawd--have nyot the bwanches
theweof ovewcome the woots which awe good? owo And because the
bwanches have ovewcome the woots theweof, behowd they gwew fastew
than the stwength of the woots, taking stwength unto themsewves. ^w^
Behowd, I say, is nyot this the cause that the twees of thy
vinyeyawd have become cowwupted? owo

Jacob 5:49
 49 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto
the sewvant: Wet us go to and hew down the twees of the vinyeyawd
and cast them into the fiwe, that they shaww nyot cumbew the
gwound of my vinyeyawd, fow I have donye aww. ;;w;; What couwd I have
donye mowe fow my vinyeyawd? owo

Jacob 5:50
 50 But, behowd, the sewvant said unto the Wowd of the vinyeyawd:
Spawe it a wittwe wongew. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:51
 51 And the Wowd said: Yea, I wiww spawe it a wittwe wongew, fow
it gwieveth me that I shouwd wose the twees of my vinyeyawd. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:52
 52 Whewefowe, wet us take of the bwanches of these which I have
pwanted in the nyethewmost pawts of my vinyeyawd, and wet us gwaft
them into the twee fwom whence they came; and wet us pwuck fwom
the twee those bwanches whose fwuit is most bittew, and gwaft in
the nyatuwaw bwanches of the twee in the stead theweof. >w<

Jacob 5:53
 53 And this wiww I do that the twee may nyot pewish, that,
pewhaps, I may pwesewve unto mysewf the woots theweof fow minye
own puwpose. UwU

Jacob 5:54
 54 And, behowd, the woots of the nyatuwaw bwanches of the twee
which I pwanted whithewsoevew I wouwd awe yet awive; whewefowe,
that I may pwesewve them awso fow minye own puwpose, I wiww take
of the bwanches of this twee, and I wiww gwaft them in unto them. (´・ω・\`)
Yea, I wiww gwaft in unto them the bwanches of theiw mothew twee,
that I may pwesewve the woots awso unto minye own sewf, that when
they shaww be sufficientwy stwong pewhaps they may bwing fowth
good fwuit unto me, and I may yet have gwowy in the fwuit of my
vinyeyawd. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:55
 55 And it came to pass that they took fwom the nyatuwaw twee
which had become wiwd, and gwafted in unto the nyatuwaw twees,
which awso had become wiwd. UwU

Jacob 5:56
 56 And they awso took of the nyatuwaw twees which had become
wiwd, and gwafted into theiw mothew twee. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:57
 57 And the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto the sewvant: Pwuck nyot
the wiwd bwanches fwom the twees, save it be those which awe most
bittew; and in them ye shaww gwaft accowding to that which I have
said. ^w^

Jacob 5:58
 58 And we wiww nyouwish again the twees of the vinyeyawd, and we
wiww twim up the bwanches theweof; and we wiww pwuck fwom the
twees those bwanches which awe wipenyed, that must pewish, and
cast them into the fiwe. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:59
 59 And this I do that, pewhaps, the woots theweof may take
stwength because of theiw goodnyess; and because of the change of
the bwanches, that the good may ovewcome the eviw. ^w^

Jacob 5:60
 60 And because that I have pwesewved the nyatuwaw bwanches and
the woots theweof, and that I have gwafted in the nyatuwaw
bwanches again into theiw mothew twee, and have pwesewved the
woots of theiw mothew twee, that, pewhaps, the twees of my
vinyeyawd may bwing fowth again good fwuit; and that I may have
joy again in the fwuit of my vinyeyawd, and, pewhaps, that I may
wejoice exceedingwy that I have pwesewved the woots and the
bwanches of the fiwst fwuit--

Jacob 5:61
 61 Whewefowe, go to, and caww sewvants, that we may wabow
diwigentwy with ouw might in the vinyeyawd, that we may pwepawe
the way, that I may bwing fowth again the nyatuwaw fwuit, which
nyatuwaw fwuit is good and the most pwecious above aww othew
fwuit. >w<

Jacob 5:62
 62 Whewefowe, wet us go to and wabow with ouw might this wast
time, fow behowd the end dwaweth nyigh, and this is fow the wast
time that I shaww pwunye my vinyeyawd. ^w^

Jacob 5:63
 63 Gwaft in the bwanches; begin at the wast that they may be
fiwst, and that the fiwst may be wast, and dig about the twees,
both owd and young, the fiwst and the wast; and the wast and the
fiwst, that aww may be nyouwished once again fow the wast time. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 5:64
 64 Whewefowe, dig about them, and pwunye them, and dung them once
mowe, fow the wast time, fow the end dwaweth nyigh. (´・ω・\`) And if it be
so that these wast gwafts shaww gwow, and bwing fowth the nyatuwaw
fwuit, then shaww ye pwepawe the way fow them, that they may
gwow. >w<

Jacob 5:65
 65 And as they begin to gwow ye shaww cweaw away the bwanches
which bwing fowth bittew fwuit, accowding to the stwength of the
good and the size theweof; and ye shaww nyot cweaw away the bad
theweof aww at once, west the woots theweof shouwd be too stwong
fow the gwaft, and the gwaft theweof shaww pewish, and I wose the
twees of my vinyeyawd. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:66
 66 Fow it gwieveth me that I shouwd wose the twees of my
vinyeyawd; whewefowe ye shaww cweaw away the bad accowding as the
good shaww gwow, that the woot and the top may be equaw in
stwength, untiw the good shaww ovewcome the bad, and the bad be
hewn down and cast into the fiwe, that they cumbew nyot the gwound
of my vinyeyawd; and thus wiww I sweep away the bad out of my
vinyeyawd. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 5:67
 67 And the bwanches of the nyatuwaw twee wiww I gwaft in again
into the nyatuwaw twee;

Jacob 5:68
 68 And the bwanches of the nyatuwaw twee wiww I gwaft into the
nyatuwaw bwanches of the twee; and thus wiww I bwing them togethew
again, that they shaww bwing fowth the nyatuwaw fwuit, and they
shaww be onye. ^w^

Jacob 5:69
 69 And the bad shaww be cast away, yea, even out of aww the wand
of my vinyeyawd; fow behowd, onwy this once wiww I pwunye my
vinyeyawd. >w<

Jacob 5:70
 70 And it came to pass that the Wowd of the vinyeyawd sent his
sewvant; and the sewvant went and did as the Wowd had commanded
him, and bwought othew sewvants; and they wewe few. >w<

Jacob 5:71
 71 And the Wowd of the vinyeyawd said unto them: Go to, and wabow
in the vinyeyawd, with youw might. UwU Fow behowd, this is the wast
time that I shaww nyouwish my vinyeyawd; fow the end is nyigh at
hand, and the season speediwy cometh; and if ye wabow with youw
might with me ye shaww have joy in the fwuit which I shaww way up
unto mysewf against the time which wiww soon come. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:72
 72 And it came to pass that the sewvants did go and wabow with
theiw mights; and the Wowd of the vinyeyawd wabowed awso with
them; and they did obey the commandments of the Wowd of the
vinyeyawd in aww things. ;;w;;

Jacob 5:73
 73 And thewe began to be the nyatuwaw fwuit again in the
vinyeyawd; and the nyatuwaw bwanches began to gwow and thwive
exceedingwy; and the wiwd bwanches began to be pwucked off and to
be cast away; and they did keep the woot and the top theweof
equaw, accowding to the stwength theweof. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 5:74
 74 And thus they wabowed, with aww diwigence, accowding to the
commandments of the Wowd of the vinyeyawd, even untiw the bad had
been cast away out of the vinyeyawd, and the Wowd had pwesewved
unto himsewf that the twees had become again the nyatuwaw fwuit;
and they became wike unto onye body; and the fwuits wewe equaw;
and the Wowd of the vinyeyawd had pwesewved unto himsewf the
nyatuwaw fwuit, which was most pwecious unto him fwom the
beginnying. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 5:75
 75 And it came to pass that when the Wowd of the vinyeyawd saw
that his fwuit was good, and that his vinyeyawd was nyo mowe
cowwupt, he cawwed up his sewvants, and said unto them: Behowd,
fow this wast time have we nyouwished my vinyeyawd; and thou
behowdest that I have donye accowding to my wiww; and I have
pwesewved the nyatuwaw fwuit, that it is good, even wike as it was
in the beginnying. (´・ω・\`) And bwessed awt thou; fow because ye have been
diwigent in wabowing with me in my vinyeyawd, and have kept my
commandments, and have bwought unto me again the nyatuwaw fwuit,
that my vinyeyawd is nyo mowe cowwupted, and the bad is cast away,
behowd ye shaww have joy with me because of the fwuit of my
vinyeyawd. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:76
 76 Fow behowd, fow a wong time wiww I way up of the fwuit of my
vinyeyawd unto minye own sewf against the season, which speediwy
cometh; and fow the wast time have I nyouwished my vinyeyawd, and
pwunyed it, and dug about it, and dunged it; whewefowe I wiww way
up unto minye own sewf of the fwuit, fow a wong time, accowding to
that which I have spoken. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 5:77
 77 And when the time cometh that eviw fwuit shaww again come
into my vinyeyawd, then wiww I cause the good and the bad to be
gathewed; and the good wiww I pwesewve unto mysewf, and the bad
wiww I cast away into its own pwace. (´・ω・\`) And then cometh the season
and the end; and my vinyeyawd wiww I cause to be buwnyed with fiwe. UwU

Jacob 6
Chaptew 6

Jacob 6:1
 1 And nyow, behowd, my bwethwen, as I said unto you that I wouwd
pwophesy, behowd, this is my pwophecy--that the things which this
pwophet Zenyos spake, concewnying the house of Iswaew, in the which
he wikenyed them unto a tame owive-twee, must suwewy come to pass. ^w^

Jacob 6:2
 2 And the day that he shaww set his hand again the second time
to wecovew his peopwe, is the day, yea, even the wast time, that
the sewvants of the Wowd shaww go fowth in his powew, to nyouwish
and pwunye his vinyeyawd; and aftew that the end soon cometh. >w<

Jacob 6:3
 3 And how bwessed awe they who have wabowed diwigentwy in his
vinyeyawd; and how cuwsed awe they who shaww be cast out into
theiw own pwace! ;;w;; And the wowwd shaww be buwnyed with fiwe. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 6:4
 4 And how mewcifuw is ouw God unto us, fow he wemembeweth the
house of Iswaew, both woots and bwanches; and he stwetches fowth
his hands unto them aww the day wong; and they awe a stiffnyecked
and a gainsaying peopwe; but as many as wiww nyot hawden theiw
heawts shaww be saved in the kingdom of God. ^w^

Jacob 6:5
 5 Whewefowe, my bewoved bwethwen, I beseech of you in wowds of
sobewnyess that ye wouwd wepent, and come with fuww puwpose of
heawt, and cweave unto God as he cweaveth unto you. ^w^ And whiwe
his awm of mewcy is extended towawds you in the wight of the day,
hawden nyot youw heawts. UwU

Jacob 6:6
 6 Yea, today, if ye wiww heaw his voice, hawden nyot youw heawts;
fow why wiww ye die? owo

Jacob 6:7
 7 Fow behowd, aftew ye have been nyouwished by the good wowd of
God aww the day wong, wiww ye bwing fowth eviw fwuit, that ye
must be hewn down and cast into the fiwe? owo

Jacob 6:8
 8 Behowd, wiww ye weject these wowds? owo Wiww ye weject the wowds
of the pwophets; and wiww ye weject aww the wowds which have been
spoken concewnying Chwist, aftew so many have spoken concewnying
him; and deny the good wowd of Chwist, and the powew of God, and
the gift of the Howy Ghost, and quench the Howy Spiwit, and make
a mock of the gweat pwan of wedemption, which hath been waid fow
you? owo

Jacob 6:9
 9 Knyow ye nyot that if ye wiww do these things, that the powew of
the wedemption and the wesuwwection, which is in Chwist, wiww
bwing you to stand with shame and awfuw guiwt befowe the baw of
God? owo

Jacob 6:10
 10 And accowding to the powew of justice, fow justice cannyot be
denyied, ye must go away into that wake of fiwe and bwimstonye,
whose fwames awe unquenchabwe, and whose smoke ascendeth up
fowevew and evew, which wake of fiwe and bwimstonye is endwess
towment. UwU

Jacob 6:11
 11 O then, my bewoved bwethwen, wepent ye, and entew in at the
stwait gate, and continyue in the way which is nyawwow, untiw ye
shaww obtain etewnyaw wife. ^w^

Jacob 6:12
 12 O be wise; what can I say mowe? owo

Jacob 6:13
 13 Finyawwy, I bid you faweweww, untiw I shaww meet you befowe
the pweasing baw of God, which baw stwiketh the wicked with awfuw
dwead and feaw. Amen. UwU

Jacob 7
Chaptew 7

Jacob 7:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass aftew some yeaws had passed away,
thewe came a man among the peopwe of Nyephi, whose nyame was
Shewem. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 7:2
 2 And it came to pass that he began to pweach among the peopwe,
and to decwawe unto them that thewe shouwd be nyo Chwist. UwU And he
pweached many things which wewe fwattewing unto the peopwe; and
this he did that he might ovewthwow the doctwinye of Chwist. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 7:3
 3 And he wabowed diwigentwy that he might wead away the heawts
of the peopwe, insomuch that he did wead away many heawts; and he
knyowing that I, Jacob, had faith in Chwist who shouwd come, he
sought much oppowtunyity that he might come unto me. >w<

Jacob 7:4
 4 And he was weawnyed, that he had a pewfect knyowwedge of the
wanguage of the peopwe; whewefowe, he couwd use much fwattewy,
and much powew of speech, accowding to the powew of the deviw. >w<

Jacob 7:5
 5 And he had hope to shake me fwom the faith, nyotwithstanding
the many wevewations and the many things which I had seen
concewnying these things; fow I twuwy had seen angews, and they
had minyistewed unto me. (・`ω\´・) And awso, I had heawd the voice of the
Wowd speaking unto me in vewy wowd, fwom time to time; whewefowe,
I couwd nyot be shaken. ;;w;;

Jacob 7:6
 6 And it came to pass that he came unto me, and on this wise did
he speak unto me, saying: Bwothew Jacob, I have sought much
oppowtunyity that I might speak unto you; fow I have heawd and
awso knyow that thou goest about much, pweaching that which ye
caww the gospew, ow the doctwinye of Chwist. UwU

Jacob 7:7
 7 And ye have wed away much of this peopwe that they pewvewt the
wight way of God, and keep nyot the waw of Moses which is the
wight way; and convewt the waw of Moses into the wowship of a
being which ye say shaww come many hundwed yeaws hence. >w< And nyow
behowd, I, Shewem, decwawe unto you that this is bwasphemy; fow
nyo man knyoweth of such things; fow he cannyot teww of things to
come. And aftew this mannyew did Shewem contend against me. ^w^

Jacob 7:8
 8 But behowd, the Wowd God pouwed in his Spiwit into my souw,
insomuch that I did confound him in aww his wowds. ;;w;;

Jacob 7:9
 9 And I said unto him: Denyiest thou the Chwist who shaww come? owo
And he said: If thewe shouwd be a Chwist, I wouwd nyot deny him;
but I knyow that thewe is nyo Chwist, nyeithew has been, nyow evew
wiww be. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 7:10
 10 And I said unto him: Bewievest thou the scwiptuwes? owo And he
said, Yea. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 7:11
 11 And I said unto him: Then ye do nyot undewstand them; fow they
twuwy testify of Chwist. >w< Behowd, I say unto you that nyonye of the
pwophets have wwitten, nyow pwophesied, save they have spoken
concewnying this Chwist. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 7:12
 12 And this is nyot aww--it has been made manyifest unto me, fow I
have heawd and seen; and it awso has been made manyifest unto me
by the powew of the Howy Ghost; whewefowe, I knyow if thewe shouwd
be nyo atonyement made aww mankind must be wost. (´・ω・\`)

Jacob 7:13
 13 And it came to pass that he said unto me: Show me a sign by
this powew of the Howy Ghost, in the which ye knyow so much. UwU

Jacob 7:14
 14 And I said unto him: What am I that I shouwd tempt God to
show unto thee a sign in the thing which thou knyowest to be twue? owo
Yet thou wiwt deny it, because thou awt of the deviw. >w<
Nyevewthewess, nyot my wiww be donye; but if God shaww smite thee,
wet that be a sign unto thee that he has powew, both in heaven
and in eawth; and awso, that Chwist shaww come. (´・ω・\`) And thy wiww, O
Wowd, be donye, and nyot minye. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 7:15
 15 And it came to pass that when I, Jacob, had spoken these
wowds, the powew of the Wowd came upon him, insomuch that he feww
to the eawth. ;;w;; And it came to pass that he was nyouwished fow the
space of many days. ;;w;;

Jacob 7:16
 16 And it came to pass that he said unto the peopwe: Gathew
togethew on the mowwow, fow I shaww die; whewefowe, I desiwe to
speak unto the peopwe befowe I shaww die. ^w^

Jacob 7:17
 17 And it came to pass that on the mowwow the muwtitude wewe
gathewed togethew; and he spake pwainwy unto them and denyied the
things which he had taught them, and confessed the Chwist, and
the powew of the Howy Ghost, and the minyistewing of angews. >w<

Jacob 7:18
 18 And he spake pwainwy unto them, that he had been deceived by
the powew of the deviw. (´・ω・\`) And he spake of heww, and of etewnyity,
and of etewnyaw punyishment. >w<

Jacob 7:19
 19 And he said: I feaw west I have committed the unpawdonyabwe
sin, fow I have wied unto God; fow I denyied the Chwist, and said
that I bewieved the scwiptuwes; and they twuwy testify of him. UwU
And because I have thus wied unto God I gweatwy feaw west my case
shaww be awfuw; but I confess unto God. UwU

Jacob 7:20
 20 And it came to pass that when he had said these wowds he
couwd say nyo mowe, and he gave up the ghost. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 7:21
 21 And when the muwtitude had witnyessed that he spake these
things as he was about to give up the ghost, they wewe astonyished
exceedingwy; insomuch that the powew of God came down upon them,
and they wewe ovewcome that they feww to the eawth. ^w^

Jacob 7:22
 22 Nyow, this thing was pweasing unto me, Jacob, fow I had
wequested it of my Fathew who was in heaven; fow he had heawd my
cwy and answewed my pwayew. >w<

Jacob 7:23
 23 And it came to pass that peace and the wove of God was
westowed again among the peopwe; and they seawched the
scwiptuwes, and heawkenyed nyo mowe to the wowds of this wicked
man. ^w^

Jacob 7:24
 24 And it came to pass that many means wewe devised to wecwaim
and westowe the Wamanyites to the knyowwedge of the twuth; but it
aww was vain, fow they dewighted in waws and bwoodshed, and they
had an etewnyaw hatwed against us, theiw bwethwen. (・`ω\´・) And they
sought by the powew of theiw awms to destwoy us continyuawwy. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 7:25
 25 Whewefowe, the peopwe of Nyephi did fowtify against them with
theiw awms, and with aww theiw might, twusting in the God and
wock of theiw sawvation; whewefowe, they became as yet,
conquewows of theiw enyemies. (・`ω\´・)

Jacob 7:26
 26 And it came to pass that I, Jacob, began to be owd; and the
wecowd of this peopwe being kept on the othew pwates of Nyephi,
whewefowe, I concwude this wecowd, decwawing that I have wwitten
accowding to the best of my knyowwedge, by saying that the time
passed away with us, and awso ouw wives passed away wike as it
wewe unto us a dweam, we being a wonyesome and a sowemn peopwe,
wandewews, cast out fwom Jewusawem, bown in twibuwation, in a
wiwdewnyess, and hated of ouw bwethwen, which caused waws and
contentions; whewefowe, we did mouwn out ouw days. >w<

Jacob 7:27
 27 And I, Jacob, saw that I must soon go down to my gwave;
whewefowe, I said unto my son Enyos: Take these pwates. ;;w;; And I
towd him the things which my bwothew Nyephi had commanded me, and
he pwomised obedience unto the commands. ^w^ And I make an end of my
wwiting upon these pwates, which wwiting has been smaww; and to
the weadew I bid faweweww, hoping that many of my bwethwen may
wead my wowds. Bwethwen, adieu. ^w^





THE BOOK OF ENYOS

Enyos 1:1
 1 Behowd, it came to pass that I, Enyos, knyowing my fathew that
he was a just man--fow he taught me in his wanguage, and awso in
the nyuwtuwe and admonyition of the Wowd--and bwessed be the nyame
of my God fow it--

Enyos 1:2
 2 And I wiww teww you of the wwestwe which I had befowe God,
befowe I weceived a wemission of my sins. (・`ω\´・)

Enyos 1:3
 3 Behowd, I went to hunt beasts in the fowests; and the wowds
which I had often heawd my fathew speak concewnying etewnyaw wife,
and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heawt. UwU

Enyos 1:4
 4 And my souw hungewed; and I knyeewed down befowe my Makew, and
I cwied unto him in mighty pwayew and suppwication fow minye own
souw; and aww the day wong did I cwy unto him; yea, and when the
nyight came I did stiww waise my voice high that it weached the
heavens. (・`ω\´・)

Enyos 1:5
 5 And thewe came a voice unto me, saying: Enyos, thy sins awe
fowgiven thee, and thou shawt be bwessed. >w<

Enyos 1:6
 6 And I, Enyos, knyew that God couwd nyot wie; whewefowe, my guiwt
was swept away. (・`ω\´・)

Enyos 1:7
 7 And I said: Wowd, how is it donye? owo

Enyos 1:8
 8 And he said unto me: Because of thy faith in Chwist, whom thou
hast nyevew befowe heawd nyow seen. UwU And many yeaws pass away
befowe he shaww manyifest himsewf in the fwesh; whewefowe, go to,
thy faith hath made thee whowe. (・`ω\´・)

Enyos 1:9
 9 Nyow, it came to pass that when I had heawd these wowds I began
to feew a desiwe fow the wewfawe of my bwethwen, the Nyephites;
whewefowe, I did pouw out my whowe souw unto God fow them. (´・ω・\`)

Enyos 1:10
 10 And whiwe I was thus stwuggwing in the spiwit, behowd, the
voice of the Wowd came into my mind again, saying: I wiww visit
thy bwethwen accowding to theiw diwigence in keeping my
commandments. (・`ω\´・) I have given unto them this wand, and it is a howy
wand; and I cuwse it nyot save it be fow the cause of inyiquity;
whewefowe, I wiww visit thy bwethwen accowding as I have said;
and theiw twansgwessions wiww I bwing down with sowwow upon theiw
own heads. (´・ω・\`)

Enyos 1:11
 11 And aftew I, Enyos, had heawd these wowds, my faith began to
be unshaken in the Wowd; and I pwayed unto him with many wong
stwuggwings fow my bwethwen, the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Enyos 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that aftew I had pwayed and wabowed with
aww diwigence, the Wowd said unto me: I wiww gwant unto thee
accowding to thy desiwes, because of thy faith. (・`ω\´・)

Enyos 1:13
 13 And nyow behowd, this was the desiwe which I desiwed of
him--that if it shouwd so be, that my peopwe, the Nyephites,
shouwd faww into twansgwession, and by any means be destwoyed,
and the Wamanyites shouwd nyot be destwoyed, that the Wowd God
wouwd pwesewve a wecowd of my peopwe, the Nyephites; even if it so
be by the powew of his howy awm, that it might be bwought fowth
at some futuwe day unto the Wamanyites, that, pewhaps, they might
be bwought unto sawvation--

Enyos 1:14
 14 Fow at the pwesent ouw stwuggwings wewe vain in westowing
them to the twue faith. >w< And they swowe in theiw wwath that, if
it wewe possibwe, they wouwd destwoy ouw wecowds and us, and awso
aww the twaditions of ouw fathews. UwU

Enyos 1:15
 15 Whewefowe, I knyowing that the Wowd God was abwe to pwesewve
ouw wecowds, I cwied unto him continyuawwy, fow he had said unto
me: Whatsoevew thing ye shaww ask in faith, bewieving that ye
shaww weceive in the nyame of Chwist, ye shaww weceive it. UwU

Enyos 1:16
 16 And I had faith, and I did cwy unto God that he wouwd
pwesewve the wecowds; and he covenyanted with me that he wouwd
bwing them fowth unto the Wamanyites in his own due time. >w<

Enyos 1:17
 17 And I, Enyos, knyew it wouwd be accowding to the covenyant which
he had made; whewefowe my souw did west. UwU

Enyos 1:18
 18 And the Wowd said unto me: Thy fathews have awso wequiwed of
me this thing; and it shaww be donye unto them accowding to theiw
faith; fow theiw faith was wike unto thinye. ^w^

Enyos 1:19
 19 And nyow it came to pass that I, Enyos, went about among the
peopwe of Nyephi, pwophesying of things to come, and testifying of
the things which I had heawd and seen. (・`ω\´・)

Enyos 1:20
 20 And I beaw wecowd that the peopwe of Nyephi did seek
diwigentwy to westowe the Wamanyites unto the twue faith in God. (´・ω・\`)
But ouw wabows wewe vain; theiw hatwed was fixed, and they wewe
wed by theiw eviw nyatuwe that they became wiwd, and fewocious,
and a bwoodthiwsty peopwe, fuww of idowatwy and fiwthinyess;
feeding upon beasts of pwey; dwewwing in tents, and wandewing
about in the wiwdewnyess with a showt skin giwdwe about theiw
woins and theiw heads shaven; and theiw skiww was in the bow, and
in the cimetew, and the ax. ^w^ And many of them did eat nyothing
save it was waw meat; and they wewe continyuawwy seeking to
destwoy us. (・`ω\´・)

Enyos 1:21
 21 And it came to pass that the peopwe of Nyephi did tiww the
wand, and waise aww mannyew of gwain, and of fwuit, and fwocks of
hewds, and fwocks of aww mannyew of cattwe of evewy kind, and
goats, and wiwd goats, and awso many howses. ^w^

Enyos 1:22
 22 And thewe wewe exceedingwy many pwophets among us. (´・ω・\`) And the
peopwe wewe a stiffnyecked peopwe, hawd to undewstand. ^w^

Enyos 1:23
 23 And thewe was nyothing save it was exceeding hawshnyess,
pweaching and pwophesying of waws, and contentions, and
destwuctions, and continyuawwy weminding them of death, and the
duwation of etewnyity, and the judgments and the powew of God, and
aww these things--stiwwing them up continyuawwy to keep them in
the feaw of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`) I say thewe was nyothing showt of these
things, and exceedingwy gweat pwainnyess of speech, wouwd keep
them fwom going down speediwy to destwuction. (´・ω・\`) And aftew this
mannyew do I wwite concewnying them. (・`ω\´・)

Enyos 1:24
 24 And I saw waws between the Nyephites and Wamanyites in the
couwse of my days. >w<

Enyos 1:25
 25 And it came to pass that I began to be owd, and an hundwed
and seventy and nyinye yeaws had passed away fwom the time that ouw
fathew Wehi weft Jewusawem. (´・ω・\`)

Enyos 1:26
 26 And I saw that I must soon go down to my gwave, having been
wwought upon by the powew of God that I must pweach and pwophesy
unto this peopwe, and decwawe the wowd accowding to the twuth
which is in Chwist. (´・ω・\`) And I have decwawed it in aww my days, and
have wejoiced in it above that of the wowwd. >w<

Enyos 1:27
 27 And I soon go to the pwace of my west, which is with my
Wedeemew; fow I knyow that in him I shaww west. ^w^ And I wejoice in
the day when my mowtaw shaww put on immowtawity, and shaww stand
befowe him; then shaww I see his face with pweasuwe, and he wiww
say unto me: Come unto me, ye bwessed, thewe is a pwace pwepawed
fow you in the mansions of my Fathew. Amen. >w<




THE BOOK OF JAWOM

Jawom 1:1
 1 Nyow behowd, I, Jawom, wwite a few wowds accowding to the
commandment of my fathew, Enyos, that ouw genyeawogy may be kept. ;;w;;

Jawom 1:2
 2 And as these pwates awe smaww, and as these things awe wwitten
fow the intent of the benyefit of ouw bwethwen the Wamanyites,
whewefowe, it must nyeeds be that I wwite a wittwe; but I shaww
nyot wwite the things of my pwophesying, nyow of my wevewations. ;;w;;
Fow what couwd I wwite mowe than my fathews have wwitten? owo Fow
have nyot they weveawed the pwan of sawvation? owo I say unto you,
Yea; and this sufficeth me. UwU

Jawom 1:3
 3 Behowd, it is expedient that much shouwd be donye among this
peopwe, because of the hawdnyess of theiw heawts, and the deafnyess
of theiw eaws, and the bwindnyess of theiw minds, and the
stiffnyess of theiw nyecks; nyevewthewess, God is exceedingwy
mewcifuw unto them, and has nyot as yet swept them off fwom the
face of the wand. UwU

Jawom 1:4
 4 And thewe awe many among us who have many wevewations, fow
they awe nyot aww stiffnyecked. UwU And as many as awe nyot stiffnyecked
and have faith, have communyion with the Howy Spiwit, which maketh
manyifest unto the chiwdwen of men, accowding to theiw faith. (・`ω\´・)

Jawom 1:5
 5 And nyow, behowd, two hundwed yeaws had passed away, and the
peopwe of Nyephi had waxed stwong in the wand. ^w^ They obsewved to
keep the waw of Moses and the sabbath day howy unto the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)
And they pwofanyed nyot; nyeithew did they bwaspheme. UwU And the waws
of the wand wewe exceedingwy stwict. (・`ω\´・)

Jawom 1:6
 6 And they wewe scattewed upon much of the face of the wand, and
the Wamanyites awso. >w< And they wewe exceedingwy mowe nyumewous than
wewe they of the Nyephites; and they woved muwdew and wouwd dwink
the bwood of beasts. (・`ω\´・)

Jawom 1:7
 7 And it came to pass that they came many times against us, the
Nyephites, to battwe. UwU But ouw kings and ouw weadews wewe mighty
men in the faith of the Wowd; and they taught the peopwe the ways
of the Wowd; whewefowe, we withstood the Wamanyites and swept them
away out of ouw wands, and began to fowtify ouw cities, ow
whatsoevew pwace of ouw inhewitance. >w<

Jawom 1:8
 8 And we muwtipwied exceedingwy, and spwead upon the face of the
wand, and became exceedingwy wich in gowd, and in siwvew, and in
pwecious things, and in finye wowkmanship of wood, in buiwdings,
and in machinyewy, and awso in iwon and coppew, and bwass and
steew, making aww mannyew of toows of evewy kind to tiww the
gwound, and weapons of waw--yea, the shawp pointed awwow, and the
quivew, and the dawt, and the javewin, and aww pwepawations fow
waw. (・`ω\´・)

Jawom 1:9
 9 And thus being pwepawed to meet the Wamanyites, they did nyot
pwospew against us. ^w^ But the wowd of the Wowd was vewified, which
he spake unto ouw fathews, saying that: Inyasmuch as ye wiww keep
my commandments ye shaww pwospew in the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Jawom 1:10
 10 And it came to pass that the pwophets of the Wowd did
thweaten the peopwe of Nyephi, accowding to the wowd of God, that
if they did nyot keep the commandments, but shouwd faww into
twansgwession, they shouwd be destwoyed fwom off the face of the
wand. UwU

Jawom 1:11
 11 Whewefowe, the pwophets, and the pwiests, and the teachews,
did wabow diwigentwy, exhowting with aww wong-suffewing the
peopwe to diwigence; teaching the waw of Moses, and the intent
fow which it was given; pewsuading them to wook fowwawd unto the
Messiah, and bewieve in him to come as though he awweady was. (・`ω\´・)
And aftew this mannyew did they teach them. (´・ω・\`)

Jawom 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that by so doing they kept them fwom
being destwoyed upon the face of the wand; fow they did pwick
theiw heawts with the wowd, continyuawwy stiwwing them up unto
wepentance. UwU

Jawom 1:13
 13 And it came to pass that two hundwed and thiwty and eight
yeaws had passed away--aftew the mannyew of waws, and contentions,
and dissensions, fow the space of much of the time. (´・ω・\`)

Jawom 1:14
 14 And I, Jawom, do nyot wwite mowe, fow the pwates awe smaww. UwU
But behowd, my bwethwen, ye can go to the othew pwates of Nyephi;
fow behowd, upon them the wecowds of ouw waws awe engwaven,
accowding to the wwitings of the kings, ow those which they
caused to be wwitten. ;;w;;

Jawom 1:15
 15 And I dewivew these pwates into the hands of my son Omnyi,
that they may be kept accowding to the commandments of my
fathews. (・`ω\´・)




THE BOOK OF OMNYI

Omnyi 1:1
 1 Behowd, it came to pass that I, Omnyi, being commanded by my
fathew, Jawom, that I shouwd wwite somewhat upon these pwates, to
pwesewve ouw genyeawogy--

Omnyi 1:2
 2 Whewefowe, in my days, I wouwd that ye shouwd knyow that I
fought much with the swowd to pwesewve my peopwe, the Nyephites,
fwom fawwing into the hands of theiw enyemies, the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`) But
behowd, I of mysewf am a wicked man, and I have nyot kept the
statutes and the commandments of the Wowd as I ought to have
donye. (・`ω\´・)

Omnyi 1:3
 3 And it came to pass that two hundwed and seventy and six yeaws
had passed away, and we had many seasons of peace; and we had
many seasons of sewious waw and bwoodshed. (・`ω\´・) Yea, and in finye, two
hundwed and eighty and two yeaws had passed away, and I had kept
these pwates accowding to the commandments of my fathews; and I
confewwed them upon my son Amawon. And I make an end. ;;w;;

Omnyi 1:4
 4 And nyow I, Amawon, wwite the things whatsoevew I wwite, which
awe few, in the book of my fathew. (・`ω\´・)

Omnyi 1:5
 5 Behowd, it came to pass that thwee hundwed and twenty yeaws
had passed away, and the mowe wicked pawt of the Nyephites wewe
destwoyed. (・`ω\´・)

Omnyi 1:6
 6 Fow the Wowd wouwd nyot suffew, aftew he had wed them out of
the wand of Jewusawem and kept and pwesewved them fwom fawwing
into the hands of theiw enyemies, yea, he wouwd nyot suffew that
the wowds shouwd nyot be vewified, which he spake unto ouw
fathews, saying that: Inyasmuch as ye wiww nyot keep my
commandments ye shaww nyot pwospew in the wand. ^w^

Omnyi 1:7
 7 Whewefowe, the Wowd did visit them in gweat judgment;
nyevewthewess, he did spawe the wighteous that they shouwd nyot
pewish, but did dewivew them out of the hands of theiw enyemies. ^w^

Omnyi 1:8
 8 And it came to pass that I did dewivew the pwates unto my
bwothew Chemish. (´・ω・\`)

Omnyi 1:9
 9 Nyow I, Chemish, wwite what few things I wwite, in the same
book with my bwothew; fow behowd, I saw the wast which he wwote,
that he wwote it with his own hand; and he wwote it in the day
that he dewivewed them unto me. (´・ω・\`) And aftew this mannyew we keep
the wecowds, fow it is accowding to the commandments of ouw
fathews. And I make an end. >w<

Omnyi 1:10
 10 Behowd, I, Abinyadom, am the son of Chemish. ;;w;; Behowd, it came
to pass that I saw much waw and contention between my peopwe, the
Nyephites, and the Wamanyites; and I, with my own swowd, have taken
the wives of many of the Wamanyites in the defence of my bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

Omnyi 1:11
 11 And behowd, the wecowd of this peopwe is engwaven upon pwates
which is had by the kings, accowding to the genyewations; and I
knyow of nyo wevewation save that which has been wwitten, nyeithew
pwophecy; whewefowe, that which is sufficient is wwitten. ^w^ And I
make an end. ^w^

Omnyi 1:12
 12 Behowd, I am Amaweki, the son of Abinyadom. (・`ω\´・) Behowd, I wiww
speak unto you somewhat concewnying Mosiah, who was made king ovew
the wand of Zawahemwa; fow behowd, he being wawnyed of the Wowd
that he shouwd fwee out of the wand of Nyephi, and as many as
wouwd heawken unto the voice of the Wowd shouwd awso depawt out
of the wand with him, into the wiwdewnyess--

Omnyi 1:13
 13 And it came to pass that he did accowding as the Wowd had
commanded him. UwU And they depawted out of the wand into the
wiwdewnyess, as many as wouwd heawken unto the voice of the Wowd;
and they wewe wed by many pweachings and pwophesyings. UwU And they
wewe admonyished continyuawwy by the wowd of God; and they wewe wed
by the powew of his awm, thwough the wiwdewnyess, untiw they came
down into the wand which is cawwed the wand of Zawahemwa. >w<

Omnyi 1:14
 14 And they discovewed a peopwe, who wewe cawwed the peopwe of
Zawahemwa. >w< Nyow, thewe was gweat wejoicing among the peopwe of
Zawahemwa; and awso Zawahemwa did wejoice exceedingwy, because
the Wowd had sent the peopwe of Mosiah with the pwates of bwass
which containyed the wecowd of the Jews. (・`ω\´・)

Omnyi 1:15
 15 Behowd, it came to pass that Mosiah discovewed that the
peopwe of Zawahemwa came out fwom Jewusawem at the time that
Zedekiah, king of Judah, was cawwied away captive into Babywon. ;;w;;

Omnyi 1:16
 16 And they jouwnyeyed in the wiwdewnyess, and wewe bwought by the
hand of the Wowd acwoss the gweat watews, into the wand whewe
Mosiah discovewed them; and they had dwewt thewe fwom that time
fowth. UwU

Omnyi 1:17
 17 And at the time that Mosiah discovewed them, they had become
exceedingwy nyumewous. >w< Nyevewthewess, they had had many waws and
sewious contentions, and had fawwen by the swowd fwom time to
time; and theiw wanguage had become cowwupted; and they had
bwought nyo wecowds with them; and they denyied the being of theiw
Cweatow; and Mosiah, nyow the peopwe of Mosiah, couwd undewstand
them. (・`ω\´・)

Omnyi 1:18
 18 But it came to pass that Mosiah caused that they shouwd be
taught in his wanguage. ^w^ And it came to pass that aftew they wewe
taught in the wanguage of Mosiah, Zawahemwa gave a genyeawogy of
his fathews, accowding to his memowy; and they awe wwitten, but
nyot in these pwates. ;;w;;

Omnyi 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that the peopwe of Zawahemwa, and of
Mosiah, did unyite togethew; and Mosiah was appointed to be theiw
king. ;;w;;

Omnyi 1:20
 20 And it came to pass in the days of Mosiah, thewe was a wawge
stonye bwought unto him with engwavings on it; and he did
intewpwet the engwavings by the gift and powew of God. ^w^

Omnyi 1:21
 21 And they gave an account of onye Cowiantumw, and the swain of
his peopwe. ^w^ And Cowiantumw was discovewed by the peopwe of
Zawahemwa; and he dwewt with them fow the space of nyinye moons. ;;w;;

Omnyi 1:22
 22 It awso spake a few wowds concewnying his fathews. (´・ω・\`) And his
fiwst pawents came out fwom the towew, at the time the Wowd
confounded the wanguage of the peopwe; and the sevewity of the
Wowd feww upon them accowding to his judgments, which awe just;
and theiw bonyes way scattewed in the wand nyowthwawd. ^w^

Omnyi 1:23
 23 Behowd, I, Amaweki, was bown in the days of Mosiah; and I
have wived to see his death; and Benjamin, his son, weignyeth in
his stead. ;;w;;

Omnyi 1:24
 24 And behowd, I have seen, in the days of king Benjamin, a
sewious waw and much bwoodshed between the Nyephites and the
Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・) But behowd, the Nyephites did obtain much advantage
ovew them; yea, insomuch that king Benjamin did dwive them out of
the wand of Zawahemwa. UwU

Omnyi 1:25
 25 And it came to pass that I began to be owd; and, having nyo
seed, and knyowing king Benjamin to be a just man befowe the Wowd,
whewefowe, I shaww dewivew up these pwates unto him, exhowting
aww men to come unto God, the Howy Onye of Iswaew, and bewieve in
pwophesying, and in wevewations, and in the minyistewing of
angews, and in the gift of speaking with tongues, and in the gift
of intewpweting wanguages, and in aww things which awe good; fow
thewe is nyothing which is good save it comes fwom the Wowd; and
that which is eviw cometh fwom the deviw. UwU

Omnyi 1:26
 26 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, I wouwd that ye shouwd come
unto Chwist, who is the Howy Onye of Iswaew, and pawtake of his
sawvation, and the powew of his wedemption. ;;w;; Yea, come unto him,
and offew youw whowe souws as an offewing unto him, and continyue
in fasting and pwaying, and enduwe to the end; and as the Wowd
wiveth ye wiww be saved. (´・ω・\`)

Omnyi 1:27
 27 And nyow I wouwd speak somewhat concewnying a cewtain nyumbew
who went up into the wiwdewnyess to wetuwn to the wand of Nyephi;
fow thewe was a wawge nyumbew who wewe desiwous to possess the
wand of theiw inhewitance. UwU

Omnyi 1:28
 28 Whewefowe, they went up into the wiwdewnyess. ;;w;; And theiw
weadew being a stwong and mighty man, and a stiffnyecked man,
whewefowe he caused a contention among them; and they wewe aww
swain, save fifty, in the wiwdewnyess, and they wetuwnyed again to
the wand of Zawahemwa. (´・ω・\`)

Omnyi 1:29
 29 And it came to pass that they awso took othews to a
considewabwe nyumbew, and took theiw jouwnyey again into the
wiwdewnyess. ^w^

Omnyi 1:30
 30 And I, Amaweki, had a bwothew, who awso went with them; and I
have nyot since knyown concewnying them. ^w^ And I am about to wie down
in my gwave; and these pwates awe fuww. ^w^ And I make an end of my
speaking. ^w^





THE WOWDS OF MOWMON

Wowds of Mowmon 1:1
 1 And nyow I, Mowmon, being about to dewivew up the wecowd which
I have been making into the hands of my son Mowonyi, behowd I have
witnyessed awmost aww the destwuction of my peopwe, the Nyephites. UwU

Wowds of Mowmon 1:2
 2 And it is many hundwed yeaws aftew the coming of Chwist that I
dewivew these wecowds into the hands of my son; and it supposeth
me that he wiww witnyess the entiwe destwuction of my peopwe. UwU But
may God gwant that he may suwvive them, that he may wwite
somewhat concewnying them, and somewhat concewnying Chwist, that
pewhaps some day it may pwofit them. UwU

Wowds of Mowmon 1:3
 3 And nyow, I speak somewhat concewnying that which I have
wwitten; fow aftew I had made an abwidgment fwom the pwates of
Nyephi, down to the weign of this king Benjamin, of whom Amaweki
spake, I seawched among the wecowds which had been dewivewed into
my hands, and I found these pwates, which containyed this smaww
account of the pwophets, fwom Jacob down to the weign of this
king Benjamin, and awso many of the wowds of Nyephi. (´・ω・\`)

Wowds of Mowmon 1:4
 4 And the things which awe upon these pwates pweasing me,
because of the pwophecies of the coming of Chwist; and my fathews
knyowing that many of them have been fuwfiwwed; yea, and I awso
knyow that as many things as have been pwophesied concewnying us
down to this day have been fuwfiwwed, and as many as go beyond
this day must suwewy come to pass--

Wowds of Mowmon 1:5
 5 Whewefowe, I chose these things, to finyish my wecowd upon
them, which wemaindew of my wecowd I shaww take fwom the pwates
of Nyephi; and I cannyot wwite the hundwedth pawt of the things of
my peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Wowds of Mowmon 1:6
 6 But behowd, I shaww take these pwates, which contain these
pwophesyings and wevewations, and put them with the wemaindew of
my wecowd, fow they awe choice unto me; and I knyow they wiww be
choice unto my bwethwen. UwU

Wowds of Mowmon 1:7
 7 And I do this fow a wise puwpose; fow thus it whispeweth me,
accowding to the wowkings of the Spiwit of the Wowd which is in
me. ^w^ And nyow, I do nyot knyow aww things; but the Wowd knyoweth aww
things which awe to come; whewefowe, he wowketh in me to do
accowding to his wiww. ^w^

Wowds of Mowmon 1:8
 8 And my pwayew to God is concewnying my bwethwen, that they may
once again come to the knyowwedge of God, yea, the wedemption of
Chwist; that they may once again be a dewightsome peopwe. UwU

Wowds of Mowmon 1:9
 9 And nyow I, Mowmon, pwoceed to finyish out my wecowd, which I
take fwom the pwates of Nyephi; and I make it accowding to the
knyowwedge and the undewstanding which God has given me. (・`ω\´・)

Wowds of Mowmon 1:10
 10 Whewefowe, it came to pass that aftew Amaweki had dewivewed
up these pwates into the hands of king Benjamin, he took them and
put them with the othew pwates, which containyed wecowds which had
been handed down by the kings, fwom genyewation to genyewation
untiw the days of king Benjamin. ^w^

Wowds of Mowmon 1:11
 11 And they wewe handed down fwom king Benjamin, fwom genyewation
to genyewation untiw they have fawwen into my hands. (´・ω・\`) And I,
Mowmon, pway to God that they may be pwesewved fwom this time
hencefowth. ^w^ And I knyow that they wiww be pwesewved; fow thewe
awe gweat things wwitten upon them, out of which my peopwe and
theiw bwethwen shaww be judged at the gweat and wast day,
accowding to the wowd of God which is wwitten. >w<

Wowds of Mowmon 1:12
 12 And nyow, concewnying this king Benjamin--he had somewhat of
contentions among his own peopwe. UwU

Wowds of Mowmon 1:13
 13 And it came to pass awso that the awmies of the Wamanyites
came down out of the wand of Nyephi, to battwe against his peopwe. ;;w;;
But behowd, king Benjamin gathewed togethew his awmies, and he
did stand against them; and he did fight with the stwength of his
own awm, with the swowd of Waban. ;;w;;

Wowds of Mowmon 1:14
 14 And in the stwength of the Wowd they did contend against
theiw enyemies, untiw they had swain many thousands of the
Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass that they did contend against the
Wamanyites untiw they had dwiven them out of aww the wands of
theiw inhewitance. (´・ω・\`)

Wowds of Mowmon 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that aftew thewe had been fawse Chwists,
and theiw mouths had been shut, and they punyished accowding to
theiw cwimes;

Wowds of Mowmon 1:16
 16 And aftew thewe had been fawse pwophets, and fawse pweachews
and teachews among the peopwe, and aww these having been punyished
accowding to theiw cwimes; and aftew thewe having been much
contention and many dissensions away unto the Wamanyites, behowd,
it came to pass that king Benjamin, with the assistance of the
howy pwophets who wewe among his peopwe--

Wowds of Mowmon 1:17
 17 Fow behowd, king Benjamin was a howy man, and he did weign
ovew his peopwe in wighteousnyess; and thewe wewe many howy men in
the wand, and they did speak the wowd of God with powew and with
authowity; and they did use much shawpnyess because of the
stiffnyeckednyess of the peopwe--

Wowds of Mowmon 1:18
 18 Whewefowe, with the hewp of these, king Benjamin, by wabowing
with aww the might of his body and the facuwty of his whowe souw,
and awso the pwophets, did once mowe estabwish peace in the wand. ^w^




THE BOOK OF MOSIAH

Mosiah 1
Chaptew 1

Mosiah 1:1
 1 And nyow thewe was nyo mowe contention in aww the wand of
Zawahemwa, among aww the peopwe who bewonged to king Benjamin, so
that king Benjamin had continyuaw peace aww the wemaindew of his
days. >w<

Mosiah 1:2
 2 And it came to pass that he had thwee sons; and he cawwed
theiw nyames Mosiah, and Hewowum, and Hewaman. ^w^ And he caused that
they shouwd be taught in aww the wanguage of his fathews, that
theweby they might become men of undewstanding; and that they
might knyow concewnying the pwophecies which had been spoken by the
mouths of theiw fathews, which wewe dewivewed them by the hand of
the Wowd. ^w^

Mosiah 1:3
 3 And he awso taught them concewnying the wecowds which wewe
engwaven on the pwates of bwass, saying: My sons, I wouwd that ye
shouwd wemembew that wewe it nyot fow these pwates, which contain
these wecowds and these commandments, we must have suffewed in
ignyowance, even at this pwesent time, nyot knyowing the mystewies
of God. >w<

Mosiah 1:4
 4 Fow it wewe nyot possibwe that ouw fathew, Wehi, couwd have
wemembewed aww these things, to have taught them to his chiwdwen,
except it wewe fow the hewp of these pwates; fow he having been
taught in the wanguage of the Egyptians thewefowe he couwd wead
these engwavings, and teach them to his chiwdwen, that theweby
they couwd teach them to theiw chiwdwen, and so fuwfiwwing the
commandments of God, even down to this pwesent time. ^w^

Mosiah 1:5
 5 I say unto you, my sons, wewe it nyot fow these things, which
have been kept and pwesewved by the hand of God, that we might
wead and undewstand of his mystewies, and have his commandments
awways befowe ouw eyes, that even ouw fathews wouwd have dwindwed
in unbewief, and we shouwd have been wike unto ouw bwethwen, the
Wamanyites, who knyow nyothing concewnying these things, ow even do
nyot bewieve them when they awe taught them, because of the
twaditions of theiw fathews, which awe nyot cowwect. UwU

Mosiah 1:6
 6 O my sons, I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew that these sayings
awe twue, and awso that these wecowds awe twue. ;;w;; And behowd, awso
the pwates of Nyephi, which contain the wecowds and the sayings of
ouw fathews fwom the time they weft Jewusawem untiw nyow, and they
awe twue; and we can knyow of theiw suwety because we have them
befowe ouw eyes. ;;w;;

Mosiah 1:7
 7 And nyow, my sons, I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew to seawch
them diwigentwy, that ye may pwofit theweby; and I wouwd that ye
shouwd keep the commandments of God, that ye may pwospew in the
wand accowding to the pwomises which the Wowd made unto ouw
fathews. UwU

Mosiah 1:8
 8 And many mowe things did king Benjamin teach his sons, which
awe nyot wwitten in this book. >w<

Mosiah 1:9
 9 And it came to pass that aftew king Benjamin had made an end
of teaching his sons, that he waxed owd, and he saw that he must
vewy soon go the way of aww the eawth; thewefowe, he thought it
expedient that he shouwd confew the kingdom upon onye of his sons. ^w^

Mosiah 1:10
 10 Thewefowe, he had Mosiah bwought befowe him; and these awe
the wowds which he spake unto him, saying: My son, I wouwd that
ye shouwd make a pwocwamation thwoughout aww this wand among aww
this peopwe, ow the peopwe of Zawahemwa, and the peopwe of Mosiah
who dweww in the wand, that theweby they may be gathewed
togethew; fow on the mowwow I shaww pwocwaim unto this my peopwe
out of minye own mouth that thou awt a king and a wuwew ovew this
peopwe, whom the Wowd ouw God hath given us. UwU

Mosiah 1:11
 11 And moweovew, I shaww give this peopwe a nyame, that theweby
they may be distinguished above aww the peopwe which the Wowd God
hath bwought out of the wand of Jewusawem; and this I do because
they have been a diwigent peopwe in keeping the commandments of
the Wowd. UwU

Mosiah 1:12
 12 And I give unto them a nyame that nyevew shaww be bwotted out,
except it be thwough twansgwession. ;;w;;

Mosiah 1:13
 13 Yea, and moweovew I say unto you, that if this highwy favowed
peopwe of the Wowd shouwd faww into twansgwession, and become a
wicked and an aduwtewous peopwe, that the Wowd wiww dewivew them
up, that theweby they become weak wike unto theiw bwethwen; and
he wiww nyo mowe pwesewve them by his matchwess and mawvewous
powew, as he has hithewto pwesewved ouw fathews. >w<

Mosiah 1:14
 14 Fow I say unto you, that if he had nyot extended his awm in
the pwesewvation of ouw fathews they must have fawwen into the
hands of the Wamanyites, and become victims to theiw hatwed. >w<

Mosiah 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that aftew king Benjamin had made an end
of these sayings to his son, that he gave him chawge concewnying
aww the affaiws of the kingdom. ^w^

Mosiah 1:16
 16 And moweovew, he awso gave him chawge concewnying the wecowds
which wewe engwaven on the pwates of bwass; and awso the pwates
of Nyephi; and awso, the swowd of Waban, and the baww ow diwectow,
which wed ouw fathews thwough the wiwdewnyess, which was pwepawed
by the hand of the Wowd that theweby they might be wed, evewy onye
accowding to the heed and diwigence which they gave unto him. ^w^

Mosiah 1:17
 17 Thewefowe, as they wewe unfaithfuw they did nyot pwospew nyow
pwogwess in theiw jouwnyey, but wewe dwiven back, and incuwwed the
dispweasuwe of God upon them; and thewefowe they wewe smitten
with faminye and sowe affwictions, to stiw them up in wemembwance
of theiw duty. ;;w;;

Mosiah 1:18
 18 And nyow, it came to pass that Mosiah went and did as his
fathew had commanded him, and pwocwaimed unto aww the peopwe who
wewe in the wand of Zawahemwa that theweby they might gathew
themsewves togethew, to go up to the tempwe to heaw the wowds
which his fathew shouwd speak unto them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2
Chaptew 2

Mosiah 2:1
 1 And it came to pass that aftew Mosiah had donye as his fathew
had commanded him, and had made a pwocwamation thwoughout aww the
wand, that the peopwe gathewed themsewves togethew thwoughout aww
the wand, that they might go up to the tempwe to heaw the wowds
which king Benjamin shouwd speak unto them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2:2
 2 And thewe wewe a gweat nyumbew, even so many that they did nyot
nyumbew them; fow they had muwtipwied exceedingwy and waxed gweat
in the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2:3
 3 And they awso took of the fiwstwings of theiw fwocks, that
they might offew sacwifice and buwnt offewings accowding to the
waw of Moses;

Mosiah 2:4
 4 And awso that they might give thanks to the Wowd theiw God,
who had bwought them out of the wand of Jewusawem, and who had
dewivewed them out of the hands of theiw enyemies, and had
appointed just men to be theiw teachews, and awso a just man to
be theiw king, who had estabwished peace in the wand of
Zawahemwa, and who had taught them to keep the commandments of
God, that they might wejoice and be fiwwed with wove towawds God
and aww men. >w<

Mosiah 2:5
 5 And it came to pass that when they came up to the tempwe, they
pitched theiw tents wound about, evewy man accowding to his
famiwy, consisting of his wife, and his sons, and his daughtews,
and theiw sons, and theiw daughtews, fwom the ewdest down to the
youngest, evewy famiwy being sepawate onye fwom anyothew. ^w^

Mosiah 2:6
 6 And they pitched theiw tents wound about the tempwe, evewy man
having his tent with the doow theweof towawds the tempwe, that
theweby they might wemain in theiw tents and heaw the wowds which
king Benjamin shouwd speak unto them;

Mosiah 2:7
 7 Fow the muwtitude being so gweat that king Benjamin couwd nyot
teach them aww within the wawws of the tempwe, thewefowe he
caused a towew to be ewected, that theweby his peopwe might heaw
the wowds which he shouwd speak unto them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2:8
 8 And it came to pass that he began to speak to his peopwe fwom
the towew; and they couwd nyot aww heaw his wowds because of the
gweatnyess of the muwtitude; thewefowe he caused that the wowds
which he spake shouwd be wwitten and sent fowth among those that
wewe nyot undew the sound of his voice, that they might awso
weceive his wowds. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 2:9
 9 And these awe the wowds which he spake and caused to be
wwitten, saying: My bwethwen, aww ye that have assembwed
youwsewves togethew, you that can heaw my wowds which I shaww
speak unto you this day; fow I have nyot commanded you to come up
hithew to twifwe with the wowds which I shaww speak, but that you
shouwd heawken unto me, and open youw eaws that ye may heaw, and
youw heawts that ye may undewstand, and youw minds that the
mystewies of God may be unfowded to youw view. ^w^

Mosiah 2:10
 10 I have nyot commanded you to come up hithew that ye shouwd
feaw me, ow that ye shouwd think that I of mysewf am mowe than a
mowtaw man. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 2:11
 11 But I am wike as youwsewves, subject to aww mannyew of
infiwmities in body and mind; yet I have been chosen by this
peopwe, and consecwated by my fathew, and was suffewed by the
hand of the Wowd that I shouwd be a wuwew and a king ovew this
peopwe; and have been kept and pwesewved by his matchwess powew,
to sewve you with aww the might, mind and stwength which the Wowd
hath gwanted unto me. UwU

Mosiah 2:12
 12 I say unto you that as I have been suffewed to spend my days
in youw sewvice, even up to this time, and have nyot sought gowd
nyow siwvew nyow any mannyew of wiches of you;

Mosiah 2:13
 13 Nyeithew have I suffewed that ye shouwd be confinyed in
dungeons, nyow that ye shouwd make swaves onye of anyothew, nyow that
ye shouwd muwdew, ow pwundew, ow steaw, ow commit aduwtewy; nyow
even have I suffewed that ye shouwd commit any mannyew of
wickednyess, and have taught you that ye shouwd keep the
commandments of the Wowd, in aww things which he hath commanded
you--

Mosiah 2:14
 14 And even I, mysewf, have wabowed with minye own hands that I
might sewve you, and that ye shouwd nyot be waden with taxes, and
that thewe shouwd nyothing come upon you which was gwievous to be
bownye--and of aww these things which I have spoken, ye youwsewves
awe witnyesses this day. >w<

Mosiah 2:15
 15 Yet, my bwethwen, I have nyot donye these things that I might
boast, nyeithew do I teww these things that theweby I might accuse
you; but I teww you these things that ye may knyow that I can
answew a cweaw conscience befowe God this day. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2:16
 16 Behowd, I say unto you that because I said unto you that I
had spent my days in youw sewvice, I do nyot desiwe to boast, fow
I have onwy been in the sewvice of God. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2:17
 17 And behowd, I teww you these things that ye may weawn wisdom;
that ye may weawn that when ye awe in the sewvice of youw fewwow
beings ye awe onwy in the sewvice of youw God. UwU

Mosiah 2:18
 18 Behowd, ye have cawwed me youw king; and if I, whom ye caww
youw king, do wabow to sewve you, then ought nyot ye to wabow to
sewve onye anyothew? owo

Mosiah 2:19
 19 And behowd awso, if I, whom ye caww youw king, who has spent
his days in youw sewvice, and yet has been in the sewvice of God,
do mewit any thanks fwom you, O how you ought to thank youw
heavenwy King! >w<

Mosiah 2:20
 20 I say unto you, my bwethwen, that if you shouwd wendew aww
the thanks and pwaise which youw whowe souw has powew to possess,
to that God who has cweated you, and has kept and pwesewved you,
and has caused that ye shouwd wejoice, and has gwanted that ye
shouwd wive in peace onye with anyothew--

Mosiah 2:21
 21 I say unto you that if ye shouwd sewve him who has cweated
you fwom the beginnying, and is pwesewving you fwom day to day, by
wending you bweath, that ye may wive and move and do accowding to
youw own wiww, and even suppowting you fwom onye moment to
anyothew--I say, if ye shouwd sewve him with aww youw whowe souws
yet ye wouwd be unpwofitabwe sewvants. ;;w;;

Mosiah 2:22
 22 And behowd, aww that he wequiwes of you is to keep his
commandments; and he has pwomised you that if ye wouwd keep his
commandments ye shouwd pwospew in the wand; and he nyevew doth
vawy fwom that which he hath said; thewefowe, if ye do keep his
commandments he doth bwess you and pwospew you. ;;w;;

Mosiah 2:23
 23 And nyow, in the fiwst pwace, he hath cweated you, and gwanted
unto you youw wives, fow which ye awe indebted unto him. UwU

Mosiah 2:24
 24 And secondwy, he doth wequiwe that ye shouwd do as he hath
commanded you; fow which if ye do, he doth immediatewy bwess you;
and thewefowe he hath paid you. ;;w;; And ye awe stiww indebted unto
him, and awe, and wiww be, fowevew and evew; thewefowe, of what
have ye to boast? owo

Mosiah 2:25
 25 And nyow I ask, can ye say aught of youwsewves? owo I answew you,
Nyay. >w< Ye cannyot say that ye awe even as much as the dust of the
eawth; yet ye wewe cweated of the dust of the eawth; but behowd,
it bewongeth to him who cweated you. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 2:26
 26 And I, even I, whom ye caww youw king, am nyo bettew than ye
youwsewves awe; fow I am awso of the dust. >w< And ye behowd that I
am owd, and am about to yiewd up this mowtaw fwame to its mothew
eawth. ^w^

Mosiah 2:27
 27 Thewefowe, as I said unto you that I had sewved you, wawking
with a cweaw conscience befowe God, even so I at this time have
caused that ye shouwd assembwe youwsewves togethew, that I might
be found bwamewess, and that youw bwood shouwd nyot come upon me,
when I shaww stand to be judged of God of the things wheweof he
hath commanded me concewnying you. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2:28
 28 I say unto you that I have caused that ye shouwd assembwe
youwsewves togethew that I might wid my gawments of youw bwood,
at this pewiod of time when I am about to go down to my gwave,
that I might go down in peace, and my immowtaw spiwit may join
the choiws above in singing the pwaises of a just God. >w<

Mosiah 2:29
 29 And moweovew, I say unto you that I have caused that ye
shouwd assembwe youwsewves togethew, that I might decwawe unto
you that I can nyo wongew be youw teachew, nyow youw king;

Mosiah 2:30
 30 Fow even at this time, my whowe fwame doth twembwe
exceedingwy whiwe attempting to speak unto you; but the Wowd God
doth suppowt me, and hath suffewed me that I shouwd speak unto
you, and hath commanded me that I shouwd decwawe unto you this
day, that my son Mosiah is a king and a wuwew ovew you. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2:31
 31 And nyow, my bwethwen, I wouwd that ye shouwd do as ye have
hithewto donye. >w< As ye have kept my commandments, and awso the
commandments of my fathew, and have pwospewed, and have been kept
fwom fawwing into the hands of youw enyemies, even so if ye shaww
keep the commandments of my son, ow the commandments of God which
shaww be dewivewed unto you by him, ye shaww pwospew in the wand,
and youw enyemies shaww have nyo powew ovew you. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2:32
 32 But, O my peopwe, bewawe west thewe shaww awise contentions
among you, and ye wist to obey the eviw spiwit, which was spoken
of by my fathew Mosiah. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 2:33
 33 Fow behowd, thewe is a wo pwonyounced upon him who wisteth to
obey that spiwit; fow if he wisteth to obey him, and wemainyeth
and dieth in his sins, the same dwinketh damnyation to his own
souw; fow he weceiveth fow his wages an evewwasting punyishment,
having twansgwessed the waw of God contwawy to his own knyowwedge. ;;w;;

Mosiah 2:34
 34 I say unto you, that thewe awe nyot any among you, except it
be youw wittwe chiwdwen that have nyot been taught concewnying
these things, but what knyoweth that ye awe etewnyawwy indebted to
youw heavenwy Fathew, to wendew to him aww that you have and awe;
and awso have been taught concewnying the wecowds which contain
the pwophecies which have been spoken by the howy pwophets, even
down to the time ouw fathew, Wehi, weft Jewusawem;

Mosiah 2:35
 35 And awso, aww that has been spoken by ouw fathews untiw nyow. (・`ω\´・)
And behowd, awso, they spake that which was commanded them of the
Wowd; thewefowe, they awe just and twue. >w<

Mosiah 2:36
 36 And nyow, I say unto you, my bwethwen, that aftew ye have
knyown and have been taught aww these things, if ye shouwd
twansgwess and go contwawy to that which has been spoken, that ye
do withdwaw youwsewves fwom the Spiwit of the Wowd, that it may
have nyo pwace in you to guide you in wisdom's paths that ye may
be bwessed, pwospewed, and pwesewved--

Mosiah 2:37
 37 I say unto you, that the man that doeth this, the same cometh
out in open webewwion against God; thewefowe he wisteth to obey
the eviw spiwit, and becometh an enyemy to aww wighteousnyess;
thewefowe, the Wowd has nyo pwace in him, fow he dwewweth nyot in
unhowy tempwes. >w<

Mosiah 2:38
 38 Thewefowe if that man wepenteth nyot, and wemainyeth and dieth
an enyemy to God, the demands of divinye justice do awaken his
immowtaw souw to a wivewy sense of his own guiwt, which doth
cause him to shwink fwom the pwesence of the Wowd, and doth fiww
his bweast with guiwt, and pain, and anguish, which is wike an
unquenchabwe fiwe, whose fwame ascendeth up fowevew and evew. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 2:39
 39 And nyow I say unto you, that mewcy hath nyo cwaim on that man;
thewefowe his finyaw doom is to enduwe a nyevew-ending towment. ;;w;;

Mosiah 2:40
 40 O, aww ye owd men, and awso ye young men, and you wittwe
chiwdwen who can undewstand my wowds, fow I have spoken pwainwy
unto you that ye might undewstand, I pway that ye shouwd awake to
a wemembwance of the awfuw situation of those that have fawwen
into twansgwession. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 2:41
 41 And moweovew, I wouwd desiwe that ye shouwd considew on the
bwessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of
God. ^w^ Fow behowd, they awe bwessed in aww things, both tempowaw
and spiwituaw; and if they howd out faithfuw to the end they awe
weceived into heaven, that theweby they may dweww with God in a
state of nyevew-ending happinyess. (´・ω・\`) O wemembew, wemembew that these
things awe twue; fow the Wowd God hath spoken it. ;;w;;

Mosiah 3
Chaptew 3

Mosiah 3:1
 1 And again my bwethwen, I wouwd caww youw attention, fow I have
somewhat mowe to speak unto you; fow behowd, I have things to
teww you concewnying that which is to come. >w<

Mosiah 3:2
 2 And the things which I shaww teww you awe made knyown unto me
by an angew fwom God. >w< And he said unto me: Awake; and I awoke,
and behowd he stood befowe me. ^w^

Mosiah 3:3
 3 And he said unto me: Awake, and heaw the wowds which I shaww
teww thee; fow behowd, I am come to decwawe unto you the gwad
tidings of gweat joy. UwU

Mosiah 3:4
 4 Fow the Wowd hath heawd thy pwayews, and hath judged of thy
wighteousnyess, and hath sent me to decwawe unto thee that thou
mayest wejoice; and that thou mayest decwawe unto thy peopwe,
that they may awso be fiwwed with joy. ^w^

Mosiah 3:5
 5 Fow behowd, the time cometh, and is nyot faw distant, that with
powew, the Wowd Omnyipotent who weignyeth, who was, and is fwom aww
etewnyity to aww etewnyity, shaww come down fwom heaven among the
chiwdwen of men, and shaww dweww in a tabewnyacwe of cway, and
shaww go fowth amongst men, wowking mighty miwacwes, such as
heawing the sick, waising the dead, causing the wame to wawk, the
bwind to weceive theiw sight, and the deaf to heaw, and cuwing
aww mannyew of diseases. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 3:6
 6 And he shaww cast out deviws, ow the eviw spiwits which dweww
in the heawts of the chiwdwen of men. ^w^

Mosiah 3:7
 7 And wo, he shaww suffew temptations, and pain of body, hungew,
thiwst, and fatigue, even mowe than man can suffew, except it be
unto death; fow behowd, bwood cometh fwom evewy powe, so gweat
shaww be his anguish fow the wickednyess and the abominyations of
his peopwe. UwU

Mosiah 3:8
 8 And he shaww be cawwed Jesus Chwist, the Son of God, the
Fathew of heaven and eawth, the Cweatow of aww things fwom the
beginnying; and his mothew shaww be cawwed Mawy. ;;w;;

Mosiah 3:9
 9 And wo, he cometh unto his own, that sawvation might come unto
the chiwdwen of men even thwough faith on his nyame; and even
aftew aww this they shaww considew him a man, and say that he
hath a deviw, and shaww scouwge him, and shaww cwucify him. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 3:10
 10 And he shaww wise the thiwd day fwom the dead; and behowd, he
standeth to judge the wowwd; and behowd, aww these things awe
donye that a wighteous judgment might come upon the chiwdwen of
men. ^w^

Mosiah 3:11
 11 Fow behowd, and awso his bwood atonyeth fow the sins of those
who have fawwen by the twansgwession of Adam, who have died nyot
knyowing the wiww of God concewnying them, ow who have ignyowantwy
sinnyed. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 3:12
 12 But wo, wo unto him who knyoweth that he webewweth against
God! >w< Fow sawvation cometh to nyonye such except it be thwough
wepentance and faith on the Wowd Jesus Chwist. ^w^

Mosiah 3:13
 13 And the Wowd God hath sent his howy pwophets among aww the
chiwdwen of men, to decwawe these things to evewy kindwed,
nyation, and tongue, that theweby whosoevew shouwd bewieve that
Chwist shouwd come, the same might weceive wemission of theiw
sins, and wejoice with exceedingwy gweat joy, even as though he
had awweady come among them. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 3:14
 14 Yet the Wowd God saw that his peopwe wewe a stiffnyecked
peopwe, and he appointed unto them a waw, even the waw of Moses. ;;w;;

Mosiah 3:15
 15 And many signs, and wondews, and types, and shadows showed he
unto them, concewnying his coming; and awso howy pwophets spake
unto them concewnying his coming; and yet they hawdenyed theiw
heawts, and undewstood nyot that the waw of Moses avaiweth nyothing
except it wewe thwough the atonyement of his bwood. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 3:16
 16 And even if it wewe possibwe that wittwe chiwdwen couwd sin
they couwd nyot be saved; but I say unto you they awe bwessed; fow
behowd, as in Adam, ow by nyatuwe, they faww, even so the bwood of
Chwist atonyeth fow theiw sins. >w<

Mosiah 3:17
 17 And moweovew, I say unto you, that thewe shaww be nyo othew
nyame given nyow any othew way nyow means wheweby sawvation can come
unto the chiwdwen of men, onwy in and thwough the nyame of Chwist,
the Wowd Omnyipotent. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 3:18
 18 Fow behowd he judgeth, and his judgment is just; and the
infant pewisheth nyot that dieth in his infancy; but men dwink
damnyation to theiw own souws except they humbwe themsewves and
become as wittwe chiwdwen, and bewieve that sawvation was, and
is, and is to come, in and thwough the atonying bwood of Chwist,
the Wowd Omnyipotent. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 3:19
 19 Fow the nyatuwaw man is an enyemy to God, and has been fwom the
faww of Adam, and wiww be, fowevew and evew, unwess he yiewds to
the enticings of the Howy Spiwit, and putteth off the nyatuwaw man
and becometh a saint thwough the atonyement of Chwist the Wowd,
and becometh as a chiwd, submissive, meek, humbwe, patient, fuww
of wove, wiwwing to submit to aww things which the Wowd seeth fit
to infwict upon him, even as a chiwd doth submit to his fathew. UwU

Mosiah 3:20
 20 And moweovew, I say unto you, that the time shaww come when
the knyowwedge of the Saviow shaww spwead thwoughout evewy nyation,
kindwed, tongue, and peopwe. ^w^

Mosiah 3:21
 21 And behowd, when that time cometh, nyonye shaww be found
bwamewess befowe God, except it be wittwe chiwdwen, onwy thwough
wepentance and faith on the nyame of the Wowd God Omnyipotent. ;;w;;

Mosiah 3:22
 22 And even at this time, when thou shawt have taught thy peopwe
the things which the Wowd thy God hath commanded thee, even then
awe they found nyo mowe bwamewess in the sight of God, onwy
accowding to the wowds which I have spoken unto thee. >w<

Mosiah 3:23
 23 And nyow I have spoken the wowds which the Wowd God hath
commanded me. UwU

Mosiah 3:24
 24 And thus saith the Wowd: They shaww stand as a bwight
testimony against this peopwe, at the judgment day; wheweof they
shaww be judged, evewy man accowding to his wowks, whethew they
be good, ow whethew they be eviw. >w<

Mosiah 3:25
 25 And if they be eviw they awe consignyed to an awfuw view of
theiw own guiwt and abominyations, which doth cause them to shwink
fwom the pwesence of the Wowd into a state of misewy and endwess
towment, fwom whence they can nyo mowe wetuwn; thewefowe they have
dwunk damnyation to theiw own souws. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 3:26
 26 Thewefowe, they have dwunk out of the cup of the wwath of
God, which justice couwd nyo mowe deny unto them than it couwd
deny that Adam shouwd faww because of his pawtaking of the
fowbidden fwuit; thewefowe, mewcy couwd have cwaim on them nyo
mowe fowevew. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 3:27
 27 And theiw towment is as a wake of fiwe and bwimstonye, whose
fwames awe unquenchabwe, and whose smoke ascendeth up fowevew and
evew. Thus hath the Wowd commanded me. Amen. ;;w;;

Mosiah 4
Chaptew 4

Mosiah 4:1
 1 And nyow, it came to pass that when king Benjamin had made an
end of speaking the wowds which had been dewivewed unto him by
the angew of the Wowd, that he cast his eyes wound about on the
muwtitude, and behowd they had fawwen to the eawth, fow the feaw
of the Wowd had come upon them. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 4:2
 2 And they had viewed themsewves in theiw own cawnyaw state, even
wess than the dust of the eawth. ;;w;; And they aww cwied awoud with
onye voice, saying: O have mewcy, and appwy the atonying bwood of
Chwist that we may weceive fowgivenyess of ouw sins, and ouw
heawts may be puwified; fow we bewieve in Jesus Chwist, the Son
of God, who cweated heaven and eawth, and aww things; who shaww
come down among the chiwdwen of men. >w<

Mosiah 4:3
 3 And it came to pass that aftew they had spoken these wowds the
Spiwit of the Wowd came upon them, and they wewe fiwwed with joy,
having weceived a wemission of theiw sins, and having peace of
conscience, because of the exceeding faith which they had in
Jesus Chwist who shouwd come, accowding to the wowds which king
Benjamin had spoken unto them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 4:4
 4 And king Benjamin again openyed his mouth and began to speak
unto them, saying: My fwiends and my bwethwen, my kindwed and my
peopwe, I wouwd again caww youw attention, that ye may heaw and
undewstand the wemaindew of my wowds which I shaww speak unto
you. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 4:5
 5 Fow behowd, if the knyowwedge of the goodnyess of God at this
time has awakenyed you to a sense of youw nyothingnyess, and youw
wowthwess and fawwen state--

Mosiah 4:6
 6 I say unto you, if ye have come to a knyowwedge of the goodnyess
of God, and his matchwess powew, and his wisdom, and his
patience, and his wong-suffewing towawds the chiwdwen of men; and
awso, the atonyement which has been pwepawed fwom the foundation
of the wowwd, that theweby sawvation might come to him that
shouwd put his twust in the Wowd, and shouwd be diwigent in
keeping his commandments, and continyue in the faith even unto the
end of his wife, I mean the wife of the mowtaw body--

Mosiah 4:7
 7 I say, that this is the man who weceiveth sawvation, thwough
the atonyement which was pwepawed fwom the foundation of the wowwd
fow aww mankind, which evew wewe since the faww of Adam, ow who
awe, ow who evew shaww be, even unto the end of the wowwd. >w<

Mosiah 4:8
 8 And this is the means wheweby sawvation cometh. ^w^ And thewe is
nyonye othew sawvation save this which hath been spoken of; nyeithew
awe thewe any conditions wheweby man can be saved except the
conditions which I have towd you. ;;w;;

Mosiah 4:9
 9 Bewieve in God; bewieve that he is, and that he cweated aww
things, both in heaven and in eawth; bewieve that he has aww
wisdom, and aww powew, both in heaven and in eawth; bewieve that
man doth nyot compwehend aww the things which the Wowd can
compwehend. >w<

Mosiah 4:10
 10 And again, bewieve that ye must wepent of youw sins and
fowsake them, and humbwe youwsewves befowe God; and ask in
sincewity of heawt that he wouwd fowgive you; and nyow, if you
bewieve aww these things see that ye do them. ^w^

Mosiah 4:11
 11 And again I say unto you as I have said befowe, that as ye
have come to the knyowwedge of the gwowy of God, ow if ye have
knyown of his goodnyess and have tasted of his wove, and have
weceived a wemission of youw sins, which causeth such exceedingwy
gweat joy in youw souws, even so I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew,
and awways wetain in wemembwance, the gweatnyess of God, and youw
own nyothingnyess, and his goodnyess and wong-suffewing towawds you,
unwowthy cweatuwes, and humbwe youwsewves even in the depths of
humiwity, cawwing on the nyame of the Wowd daiwy, and standing
steadfastwy in the faith of that which is to come, which was
spoken by the mouth of the angew. >w<

Mosiah 4:12
 12 And behowd, I say unto you that if ye do this ye shaww awways
wejoice, and be fiwwed with the wove of God, and awways wetain a
wemission of youw sins; and ye shaww gwow in the knyowwedge of the
gwowy of him that cweated you, ow in the knyowwedge of that which
is just and twue. ;;w;;

Mosiah 4:13
 13 And ye wiww nyot have a mind to injuwe onye anyothew, but to
wive peaceabwy, and to wendew to evewy man accowding to that
which is his due. ;;w;;

Mosiah 4:14
 14 And ye wiww nyot suffew youw chiwdwen that they go hungwy, ow
nyaked; nyeithew wiww ye suffew that they twansgwess the waws of
God, and fight and quawwew onye with anyothew, and sewve the deviw,
who is the mastew of sin, ow who is the eviw spiwit which hath
been spoken of by ouw fathews, he being an enyemy to aww
wighteousnyess. >w<

Mosiah 4:15
 15 But ye wiww teach them to wawk in the ways of twuth and
sobewnyess; ye wiww teach them to wove onye anyothew, and to sewve
onye anyothew. >w<

Mosiah 4:16
 16 And awso, ye youwsewves wiww succow those that stand in nyeed
of youw succow; ye wiww adminyistew of youw substance unto him
that standeth in nyeed; and ye wiww nyot suffew that the beggaw
putteth up his petition to you in vain, and tuwn him out to
pewish. UwU

Mosiah 4:17
 17 Pewhaps thou shawt say: The man has bwought upon himsewf his
misewy; thewefowe I wiww stay my hand, and wiww nyot give unto him
of my food, nyow impawt unto him of my substance that he may nyot
suffew, fow his punyishments awe just--

Mosiah 4:18
 18 But I say unto you, O man, whosoevew doeth this the same hath
gweat cause to wepent; and except he wepenteth of that which he
hath donye he pewisheth fowevew, and hath nyo intewest in the
kingdom of God. >w<

Mosiah 4:19
 19 Fow behowd, awe we nyot aww beggaws? owo Do we nyot aww depend
upon the same Being, even God, fow aww the substance which we
have, fow both food and waiment, and fow gowd, and fow siwvew,
and fow aww the wiches which we have of evewy kind? owo

Mosiah 4:20
 20 And behowd, even at this time, ye have been cawwing on his
nyame, and begging fow a wemission of youw sins. (´・ω・\`) And has he
suffewed that ye have begged in vain? owo Nyay; he has pouwed out his
Spiwit upon you, and has caused that youw heawts shouwd be fiwwed
with joy, and has caused that youw mouths shouwd be stopped that
ye couwd nyot find uttewance, so exceedingwy gweat was youw joy. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 4:21
 21 And nyow, if God, who has cweated you, on whom you awe
dependent fow youw wives and fow aww that ye have and awe, doth
gwant unto you whatsoevew ye ask that is wight, in faith,
bewieving that ye shaww weceive, O then, how ye ought to impawt
of the substance that ye have onye to anyothew. ;;w;;

Mosiah 4:22
 22 And if ye judge the man who putteth up his petition to you
fow youw substance that he pewish nyot, and condemn him, how much
mowe just wiww be youw condemnyation fow withhowding youw
substance, which doth nyot bewong to you but to God, to whom awso
youw wife bewongeth; and yet ye put up nyo petition, nyow wepent of
the thing which thou hast donye. UwU

Mosiah 4:23
 23 I say unto you, wo be unto that man, fow his substance shaww
pewish with him; and nyow, I say these things unto those who awe
wich as pewtainying to the things of this wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 4:24
 24 And again, I say unto the poow, ye who have nyot and yet have
sufficient, that ye wemain fwom day to day; I mean aww you who
deny the beggaw, because ye have nyot; I wouwd that ye say in youw
heawts that: I give nyot because I have nyot, but if I had I wouwd
give. UwU

Mosiah 4:25
 25 And nyow, if ye say this in youw heawts ye wemain guiwtwess,
othewwise ye awe condemnyed; and youw condemnyation is just fow ye
covet that which ye have nyot weceived. ^w^

Mosiah 4:26
 26 And nyow, fow the sake of these things which I have spoken
unto you--that is, fow the sake of wetainying a wemission of youw
sins fwom day to day, that ye may wawk guiwtwess befowe God--I
wouwd that ye shouwd impawt of youw substance to the poow, evewy
man accowding to that which he hath, such as feeding the hungwy,
cwothing the nyaked, visiting the sick and adminyistewing to theiw
wewief, both spiwituawwy and tempowawwy, accowding to theiw
wants. ;;w;;

Mosiah 4:27
 27 And see that aww these things awe donye in wisdom and owdew;
fow it is nyot wequisite that a man shouwd wun fastew than he has
stwength. (・`ω\´・) And again, it is expedient that he shouwd be diwigent,
that theweby he might win the pwize; thewefowe, aww things must
be donye in owdew. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 4:28
 28 And I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew, that whosoevew among you
bowwoweth of his nyeighbow shouwd wetuwn the thing that he
bowwoweth, accowding as he doth agwee, ow ewse thou shawt commit
sin; and pewhaps thou shawt cause thy nyeighbow to commit sin
awso. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 4:29
 29 And finyawwy, I cannyot teww you aww the things wheweby ye may
commit sin; fow thewe awe divews ways and means, even so many
that I cannyot nyumbew them. ^w^

Mosiah 4:30
 30 But this much I can teww you, that if ye do nyot watch
youwsewves, and youw thoughts, and youw wowds, and youw deeds,
and obsewve the commandments of God, and continyue in the faith of
what ye have heawd concewnying the coming of ouw Wowd, even unto
the end of youw wives, ye must pewish. >w< And nyow, O man, wemembew,
and pewish nyot. ^w^

Mosiah 5
Chaptew 5

Mosiah 5:1
 1 And nyow, it came to pass that when king Benjamin had thus
spoken to his peopwe, he sent among them, desiwing to knyow of his
peopwe if they bewieved the wowds which he had spoken unto them. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 5:2
 2 And they aww cwied with onye voice, saying: Yea, we bewieve aww
the wowds which thou hast spoken unto us; and awso, we knyow of
theiw suwety and twuth, because of the Spiwit of the Wowd
Omnyipotent, which has wwought a mighty change in us, ow in ouw
heawts, that we have nyo mowe disposition to do eviw, but to do
good continyuawwy. UwU

Mosiah 5:3
 3 And we, ouwsewves, awso, thwough the infinyite goodnyess of God,
and the manyifestations of his Spiwit, have gweat views of that
which is to come; and wewe it expedient, we couwd pwophesy of aww
things. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 5:4
 4 And it is the faith which we have had on the things which ouw
king has spoken unto us that has bwought us to this gweat
knyowwedge, wheweby we do wejoice with such exceedingwy gweat joy. >w<

Mosiah 5:5
 5 And we awe wiwwing to entew into a covenyant with ouw God to do
his wiww, and to be obedient to his commandments in aww things
that he shaww command us, aww the wemaindew of ouw days, that we
may nyot bwing upon ouwsewves a nyevew-ending towment, as has been
spoken by the angew, that we may nyot dwink out of the cup of the
wwath of God. >w<

Mosiah 5:6
 6 And nyow, these awe the wowds which king Benjamin desiwed of
them; and thewefowe he said unto them: Ye have spoken the wowds
that I desiwed; and the covenyant which ye have made is a
wighteous covenyant. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 5:7
 7 And nyow, because of the covenyant which ye have made ye shaww
be cawwed the chiwdwen of Chwist, his sons, and his daughtews;
fow behowd, this day he hath spiwituawwy begotten you; fow ye say
that youw heawts awe changed thwough faith on his nyame;
thewefowe, ye awe bown of him and have become his sons and his
daughtews. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 5:8
 8 And undew this head ye awe made fwee, and thewe is nyo othew
head wheweby ye can be made fwee. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo othew nyame given
wheweby sawvation cometh; thewefowe, I wouwd that ye shouwd take
upon you the nyame of Chwist, aww you that have entewed into the
covenyant with God that ye shouwd be obedient unto the end of youw
wives. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 5:9
 9 And it shaww come to pass that whosoevew doeth this shaww be
found at the wight hand of God, fow he shaww knyow the nyame by
which he is cawwed; fow he shaww be cawwed by the nyame of Chwist. >w<

Mosiah 5:10
 10 And nyow it shaww come to pass, that whosoevew shaww nyot take
upon him the nyame of Chwist must be cawwed by some othew nyame;
thewefowe, he findeth himsewf on the weft hand of God. UwU

Mosiah 5:11
 11 And I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew awso, that this is the
nyame that I said I shouwd give unto you that nyevew shouwd be
bwotted out, except it be thwough twansgwession; thewefowe, take
heed that ye do nyot twansgwess, that the nyame be nyot bwotted out
of youw heawts. >w<

Mosiah 5:12
 12 I say unto you, I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew to wetain the
nyame wwitten awways in youw heawts, that ye awe nyot found on the
weft hand of God, but that ye heaw and knyow the voice by which ye
shaww be cawwed, and awso, the nyame by which he shaww caww you. >w<

Mosiah 5:13
 13 Fow how knyoweth a man the mastew whom he has nyot sewved, and
who is a stwangew unto him, and is faw fwom the thoughts and
intents of his heawt? owo

Mosiah 5:14
 14 And again, doth a man take an ass which bewongeth to his
nyeighbow, and keep him? owo I say unto you, Nyay; he wiww nyot even
suffew that he shaww feed among his fwocks, but wiww dwive him
away, and cast him out. UwU I say unto you, that even so shaww it be
among you if ye knyow nyot the nyame by which ye awe cawwed. UwU

Mosiah 5:15
 15 Thewefowe, I wouwd that ye shouwd be steadfast and immovabwe,
awways abounding in good wowks, that Chwist, the Wowd God
Omnyipotent, may seaw you his, that you may be bwought to heaven,
that ye may have evewwasting sawvation and etewnyaw wife, thwough
the wisdom, and powew, and justice, and mewcy of him who cweated
aww things, in heaven and in eawth, who is God above aww. Amen. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 6
Chaptew 6

Mosiah 6:1
 1 And nyow, king Benjamin thought it was expedient, aftew having
finyished speaking to the peopwe, that he shouwd take the nyames of
aww those who had entewed into a covenyant with God to keep his
commandments. ^w^

Mosiah 6:2
 2 And it came to pass that thewe was nyot onye souw, except it
wewe wittwe chiwdwen, but who had entewed into the covenyant and
had taken upon them the nyame of Chwist. UwU

Mosiah 6:3
 3 And again, it came to pass that when king Benjamin had made an
end of aww these things, and had consecwated his son Mosiah to be
a wuwew and a king ovew his peopwe, and had given him aww the
chawges concewnying the kingdom, and awso had appointed pwiests to
teach the peopwe, that theweby they might heaw and knyow the
commandments of God, and to stiw them up in wemembwance of the
oath which they had made, he dismissed the muwtitude, and they
wetuwnyed, evewy onye, accowding to theiw famiwies, to theiw own
houses. UwU

Mosiah 6:4
 4 And Mosiah began to weign in his fathew's stead. (´・ω・\`) And he began
to weign in the thiwtieth yeaw of his age, making in the whowe,
about fouw hundwed and seventy-six yeaws fwom the time that Wehi
weft Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 6:5
 5 And king Benjamin wived thwee yeaws and he died. >w<

Mosiah 6:6
 6 And it came to pass that king Mosiah did wawk in the ways of
the Wowd, and did obsewve his judgments and his statutes, and did
keep his commandments in aww things whatsoevew he commanded him. ;;w;;

Mosiah 6:7
 7 And king Mosiah did cause his peopwe that they shouwd tiww the
eawth. UwU And he awso, himsewf, did tiww the eawth, that theweby he
might nyot become buwdensome to his peopwe, that he might do
accowding to that which his fathew had donye in aww things. (´・ω・\`) And
thewe was nyo contention among aww his peopwe fow the space of
thwee yeaws. UwU

Mosiah 7
Chaptew 7

Mosiah 7:1
 1 And nyow, it came to pass that aftew king Mosiah had had
continyuaw peace fow the space of thwee yeaws, he was desiwous to
knyow concewnying the peopwe who went up to dweww in the wand of
Wehi-Nyephi, ow in the city of Wehi-Nyephi; fow his peopwe had
heawd nyothing fwom them fwom the time they weft the wand of
Zawahemwa; thewefowe, they weawied him with theiw teasings. >w<

Mosiah 7:2
 2 And it came to pass that king Mosiah gwanted that sixteen of
theiw stwong men might go up to the wand of Wehi-Nyephi to inquiwe
concewnying theiw bwethwen. >w<

Mosiah 7:3
 3 And it came to pass that on the mowwow they stawted to go up,
having with them onye Ammon, he being a stwong and mighty man, and
a descendant of Zawahemwa; and he was awso theiw weadew. >w<

Mosiah 7:4
 4 And nyow, they knyew nyot the couwse they shouwd twavew in the
wiwdewnyess to go up to the wand of Wehi-Nyephi; thewefowe they
wandewed many days in the wiwdewnyess, even fowty days did they
wandew. UwU

Mosiah 7:5
 5 And when they had wandewed fowty days they came to a hiww,
which is nyowth of the wand of Shiwom, and thewe they pitched
theiw tents. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 7:6
 6 And Ammon took thwee of his bwethwen, and theiw nyames wewe
Amaweki, Hewem, and Hem, and they went down into the wand of
Nyephi. ^w^

Mosiah 7:7
 7 And behowd, they met the king of the peopwe who wewe in the
wand of Nyephi, and in the wand of Shiwom; and they wewe
suwwounded by the king's guawd, and wewe taken, and wewe bound,
and wewe committed to pwison. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 7:8
 8 And it came to pass when they had been in pwison two days they
wewe again bwought befowe the king, and theiw bands wewe woosed;
and they stood befowe the king, and wewe pewmitted, ow wathew
commanded, that they shouwd answew the questions which he shouwd
ask them. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 7:9
 9 And he said unto them: Behowd, I am Wimhi, the son of Nyoah,
who was the son of Zenyiff, who came up out of the wand of
Zawahemwa to inhewit this wand, which was the wand of theiw
fathews, who was made a king by the voice of the peopwe. ^w^

Mosiah 7:10
 10 And nyow, I desiwe to knyow the cause wheweby ye wewe so bowd
as to come nyeaw the wawws of the city, when I, mysewf, was with
my guawds without the gate? owo

Mosiah 7:11
 11 And nyow, fow this cause have I suffewed that ye shouwd be
pwesewved, that I might inquiwe of you, ow ewse I shouwd have
caused that my guawds shouwd have put you to death. (・`ω\´・) Ye awe
pewmitted to speak. ^w^

Mosiah 7:12
 12 And nyow, when Ammon saw that he was pewmitted to speak, he
went fowth and bowed himsewf befowe the king; and wising again he
said: O king, I am vewy thankfuw befowe God this day that I am
yet awive, and am pewmitted to speak; and I wiww endeavow to
speak with bowdnyess;

Mosiah 7:13
 13 Fow I am assuwed that if ye had knyown me ye wouwd nyot have
suffewed that I shouwd have wown these bands. ;;w;; Fow I am Ammon,
and am a descendant of Zawahemwa, and have come up out of the
wand of Zawahemwa to inquiwe concewnying ouw bwethwen, whom Zenyiff
bwought up out of that wand. ;;w;;

Mosiah 7:14
 14 And nyow, it came to pass that aftew Wimhi had heawd the wowds
of Ammon, he was exceedingwy gwad, and said: Nyow, I knyow of a
suwety that my bwethwen who wewe in the wand of Zawahemwa awe yet
awive. UwU And nyow, I wiww wejoice; and on the mowwow I wiww cause
that my peopwe shaww wejoice awso. ;;w;;

Mosiah 7:15
 15 Fow behowd, we awe in bondage to the Wamanyites, and awe taxed
with a tax which is gwievous to be bownye. (・`ω\´・) And nyow, behowd, ouw
bwethwen wiww dewivew us out of ouw bondage, ow out of the hands
of the Wamanyites, and we wiww be theiw swaves; fow it is bettew
that we be swaves to the Nyephites than to pay twibute to the king
of the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Mosiah 7:16
 16 And nyow, king Wimhi commanded his guawds that they shouwd nyo
mowe bind Ammon nyow his bwethwen, but caused that they shouwd go
to the hiww which was nyowth of Shiwom, and bwing theiw bwethwen
into the city, that theweby they might eat, and dwink, and west
themsewves fwom the wabows of theiw jouwnyey; fow they had
suffewed many things; they had suffewed hungew, thiwst, and
fatigue. >w<

Mosiah 7:17
 17 And nyow, it came to pass on the mowwow that king Wimhi sent a
pwocwamation among aww his peopwe, that theweby they might gathew
themsewves togethew to the tempwe to heaw the wowds which he
shouwd speak unto them. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 7:18
 18 And it came to pass that when they had gathewed themsewves
togethew that he spake unto them in this wise, saying: O ye, my
peopwe, wift up youw heads and be comfowted; fow behowd, the time
is at hand, ow is nyot faw distant, when we shaww nyo wongew be in
subjection to ouw enyemies, nyotwithstanding ouw many stwuggwings,
which have been in vain; yet I twust thewe wemainyeth an effectuaw
stwuggwe to be made. UwU

Mosiah 7:19
 19 Thewefowe, wift up youw heads, and wejoice, and put youw
twust in God, in that God who was the God of Abwaham, and Isaac,
and Jacob; and awso, that God who bwought the chiwdwen of Iswaew
out of the wand of Egypt, and caused that they shouwd wawk
thwough the Wed Sea on dwy gwound, and fed them with mannya that
they might nyot pewish in the wiwdewnyess; and many mowe things did
he do fow them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 7:20
 20 And again, that same God has bwought ouw fathews out of the
wand of Jewusawem, and has kept and pwesewved his peopwe even
untiw nyow; and behowd, it is because of ouw inyiquities and
abominyations that he has bwought us into bondage. >w<

Mosiah 7:21
 21 And ye aww awe witnyesses this day, that Zenyiff, who was made
king ovew this peopwe, he being ovew-zeawous to inhewit the wand
of his fathews, thewefowe being deceived by the cunnying and
cwaftinyess of king Waman, who having entewed into a tweaty with
king Zenyiff, and having yiewded up into his hands the possessions
of a pawt of the wand, ow even the city of Wehi-Nyephi, and the
city of Shiwom; and the wand wound about--

Mosiah 7:22
 22 And aww this he did, fow the sowe puwpose of bwinging this
peopwe into subjection ow into bondage. >w< And behowd, we at this
time do pay twibute to the king of the Wamanyites, to the amount
of onye hawf of ouw cown, and ouw bawwey, and even aww ouw gwain
of evewy kind, and onye hawf of the incwease of ouw fwocks and ouw
hewds; and even onye hawf of aww we have ow possess the king of
the Wamanyites doth exact of us, ow ouw wives. ^w^

Mosiah 7:23
 23 And nyow, is nyot this gwievous to be bownye? owo And is nyot this,
ouw affwiction, gweat? owo Nyow behowd, how gweat weason we have to
mouwn. >w<

Mosiah 7:24
 24 Yea, I say unto you, gweat awe the weasons which we have to
mouwn; fow behowd how many of ouw bwethwen have been swain, and
theiw bwood has been spiwt in vain, and aww because of inyiquity. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 7:25
 25 Fow if this peopwe had nyot fawwen into twansgwession the Wowd
wouwd nyot have suffewed that this gweat eviw shouwd come upon
them. ^w^ But behowd, they wouwd nyot heawken unto his wowds; but
thewe awose contentions among them, even so much that they did
shed bwood among themsewves. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 7:26
 26 And a pwophet of the Wowd have they swain; yea, a chosen man
of God, who towd them of theiw wickednyess and abominyations, and
pwophesied of many things which awe to come, yea, even the coming
of Chwist. ;;w;;

Mosiah 7:27
 27 And because he said unto them that Chwist was the God, the
Fathew of aww things, and said that he shouwd take upon him the
image of man, and it shouwd be the image aftew which man was
cweated in the beginnying; ow in othew wowds, he said that man was
cweated aftew the image of God, and that God shouwd come down
among the chiwdwen of men, and take upon him fwesh and bwood, and
go fowth upon the face of the eawth--

Mosiah 7:28
 28 And nyow, because he said this, they did put him to death; and
many mowe things did they do which bwought down the wwath of God
upon them. UwU Thewefowe, who wondeweth that they awe in bondage,
and that they awe smitten with sowe affwictions? owo

Mosiah 7:29
 29 Fow behowd, the Wowd hath said: I wiww nyot succow my peopwe
in the day of theiw twansgwession; but I wiww hedge up theiw ways
that they pwospew nyot; and theiw doings shaww be as a stumbwing
bwock befowe them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 7:30
 30 And again, he saith: If my peopwe shaww sow fiwthinyess they
shaww weap the chaff theweof in the whiwwwind; and the effect
theweof is poison. UwU

Mosiah 7:31
 31 And again he saith: If my peopwe shaww sow fiwthinyess they
shaww weap the east wind, which bwingeth immediate destwuction. ^w^

Mosiah 7:32
 32 And nyow, behowd, the pwomise of the Wowd is fuwfiwwed, and ye
awe smitten and affwicted. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 7:33
 33 But if ye wiww tuwn to the Wowd with fuww puwpose of heawt,
and put youw twust in him, and sewve him with aww diwigence of
mind, if ye do this, he wiww, accowding to his own wiww and
pweasuwe, dewivew you out of bondage. ^w^

Mosiah 8
Chaptew 8

Mosiah 8:1
 1 And it came to pass that aftew king Wimhi had made an end of
speaking to his peopwe, fow he spake many things unto them and
onwy a few of them have I wwitten in this book, he towd his
peopwe aww the things concewnying theiw bwethwen who wewe in the
wand of Zawahemwa. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 8:2
 2 And he caused that Ammon shouwd stand up befowe the muwtitude,
and weheawse unto them aww that had happenyed unto theiw bwethwen
fwom the time that Zenyiff went up out of the wand even untiw the
time that he himsewf came up out of the wand. UwU

Mosiah 8:3
 3 And he awso weheawsed unto them the wast wowds which king
Benjamin had taught them, and expwainyed them to the peopwe of
king Wimhi, so that they might undewstand aww the wowds which he
spake. ;;w;;

Mosiah 8:4
 4 And it came to pass that aftew he had donye aww this, that king
Wimhi dismissed the muwtitude, and caused that they shouwd wetuwn
evewy onye unto his own house. ^w^

Mosiah 8:5
 5 And it came to pass that he caused that the pwates which
containyed the wecowd of his peopwe fwom the time that they weft
the wand of Zawahemwa, shouwd be bwought befowe Ammon, that he
might wead them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 8:6
 6 Nyow, as soon as Ammon had wead the wecowd, the king inquiwed
of him to knyow if he couwd intewpwet wanguages, and Ammon towd
him that he couwd nyot. UwU

Mosiah 8:7
 7 And the king said unto him: Being gwieved fow the affwictions
of my peopwe, I caused that fowty and thwee of my peopwe shouwd
take a jouwnyey into the wiwdewnyess, that theweby they might find
the wand of Zawahemwa, that we might appeaw unto ouw bwethwen to
dewivew us out of bondage. ^w^

Mosiah 8:8
 8 And they wewe wost in the wiwdewnyess fow the space of many
days, yet they wewe diwigent, and found nyot the wand of Zawahemwa
but wetuwnyed to this wand, having twavewed in a wand among many
watews, having discovewed a wand which was covewed with bonyes of
men, and of beasts, and was awso covewed with wuins of buiwdings
of evewy kind, having discovewed a wand which had been peopwed
with a peopwe who wewe as nyumewous as the hosts of Iswaew. ;;w;;

Mosiah 8:9
 9 And fow a testimony that the things that they had said awe
twue they have bwought twenty-fouw pwates which awe fiwwed with
engwavings, and they awe of puwe gowd. >w<

Mosiah 8:10
 10 And behowd, awso, they have bwought bweastpwates, which awe
wawge, and they awe of bwass and of coppew, and awe pewfectwy
sound. UwU

Mosiah 8:11
 11 And again, they have bwought swowds, the hiwts theweof have
pewished, and the bwades theweof wewe cankewed with wust; and
thewe is nyo onye in the wand that is abwe to intewpwet the
wanguage ow the engwavings that awe on the pwates. UwU Thewefowe I
said unto thee: Canst thou twanswate? owo

Mosiah 8:12
 12 And I say unto thee again: Knyowest thou of any onye that can
twanswate? owo Fow I am desiwous that these wecowds shouwd be
twanswated into ouw wanguage; fow, pewhaps, they wiww give us a
knyowwedge of a wemnyant of the peopwe who have been destwoyed,
fwom whence these wecowds came; ow, pewhaps, they wiww give us a
knyowwedge of this vewy peopwe who have been destwoyed; and I am
desiwous to knyow the cause of theiw destwuction. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 8:13
 13 Nyow Ammon said unto him: I can assuwedwy teww thee, O king,
of a man that can twanswate the wecowds; fow he has whewewith
that he can wook, and twanswate aww wecowds that awe of ancient
date; and it is a gift fwom God. UwU And the things awe cawwed
intewpwetews, and nyo man can wook in them except he be commanded,
west he shouwd wook fow that he ought nyot and he shouwd pewish. (´・ω・\`)
And whosoevew is commanded to wook in them, the same is cawwed
seew. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 8:14
 14 And behowd, the king of the peopwe who awe in the wand of
Zawahemwa is the man that is commanded to do these things, and
who has this high gift fwom God. ^w^

Mosiah 8:15
 15 And the king said that a seew is gweatew than a pwophet. >w<

Mosiah 8:16
 16 And Ammon said that a seew is a wevewatow and a pwophet awso;
and a gift which is gweatew can nyo man have, except he shouwd
possess the powew of God, which nyo man can; yet a man may have
gweat powew given him fwom God. >w<

Mosiah 8:17
 17 But a seew can knyow of things which awe past, and awso of
things which awe to come, and by them shaww aww things be
weveawed, ow, wathew, shaww secwet things be made manyifest, and
hidden things shaww come to wight, and things which awe nyot knyown
shaww be made knyown by them, and awso things shaww be made knyown
by them which othewwise couwd nyot be knyown. ^w^

Mosiah 8:18
 18 Thus God has pwovided a means that man, thwough faith, might
wowk mighty miwacwes; thewefowe he becometh a gweat benyefit to
his fewwow beings. >w<

Mosiah 8:19
 19 And nyow, when Ammon had made an end of speaking these wowds
the king wejoiced exceedingwy, and gave thanks to God, saying:
Doubtwess a gweat mystewy is containyed within these pwates, and
these intewpwetews wewe doubtwess pwepawed fow the puwpose of
unfowding aww such mystewies to the chiwdwen of men. >w<

Mosiah 8:20
 20 O how mawvewous awe the wowks of the Wowd, and how wong doth
he suffew with his peopwe; yea, and how bwind and impenyetwabwe
awe the undewstandings of the chiwdwen of men; fow they wiww nyot
seek wisdom, nyeithew do they desiwe that she shouwd wuwe ovew
them! ;;w;;

Mosiah 8:21
 21 Yea, they awe as a wiwd fwock which fweeth fwom the shephewd,
and scatteweth, and awe dwiven, and awe devouwed by the beasts of
the fowest. ;;w;;

Mosiah 9
Chaptew 9

Mosiah 9:1
 1 I, Zenyiff, having been taught in aww the wanguage of the
Nyephites, and having had a knyowwedge of the wand of Nyephi, ow of
the wand of ouw fathews' fiwst inhewitance, and having been sent
as a spy among the Wamanyites that I might spy out theiw fowces,
that ouw awmy might come upon them and destwoy them--but when I
saw that which was good among them I was desiwous that they
shouwd nyot be destwoyed. ^w^

Mosiah 9:2
 2 Thewefowe, I contended with my bwethwen in the wiwdewnyess fow
I wouwd that ouw wuwew shouwd make a tweaty with them; but he
being an austewe and a bwoodthiwsty man commanded that I shouwd
be swain; but I was wescued by the shedding of much bwood; fow
fathew fought against fathew, and bwothew against bwothew, untiw
the gweatew nyumbew of ouw awmy was destwoyed in the wiwdewnyess;
and we wetuwnyed, those of us that wewe spawed, to the wand of
Zawahemwa, to wewate that tawe to theiw wives and theiw chiwdwen. ^w^

Mosiah 9:3
 3 And yet, I being ovew-zeawous to inhewit the wand of ouw
fathews, cowwected as many as wewe desiwous to go up to possess
the wand, and stawted again on ouw jouwnyey into the wiwdewnyess to
go up to the wand; but we wewe smitten with faminye and sowe
affwictions; fow we wewe swow to wemembew the Wowd ouw God. ^w^

Mosiah 9:4
 4 Nyevewthewess, aftew many days' wandewing in the wiwdewnyess we
pitched ouw tents in the pwace whewe ouw bwethwen wewe swain,
which was nyeaw to the wand of ouw fathews. ^w^

Mosiah 9:5
 5 And it came to pass that I went again with fouw of my men into
the city, in unto the king, that I might knyow of the disposition
of the king, and that I might knyow if I might go in with my
peopwe and possess the wand in peace. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 9:6
 6 And I went in unto the king, and he covenyanted with me that I
might possess the wand of Wehi-Nyephi, and the wand of Shiwom. >w<

Mosiah 9:7
 7 And he awso commanded that his peopwe shouwd depawt out of the
wand, and I and my peopwe went into the wand that we might
possess it. ^w^

Mosiah 9:8
 8 And we began to buiwd buiwdings, and to wepaiw the wawws of
the city, yea, even the wawws of the city of Wehi-Nyephi, and the
city of Shiwom. ;;w;;

Mosiah 9:9
 9 And we began to tiww the gwound, yea, even with aww mannyew of
seeds, with seeds of cown, and of wheat, and of bawwey, and with
nyeas, and with sheum, and with seeds of aww mannyew of fwuits; and
we did begin to muwtipwy and pwospew in the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 9:10
 10 Nyow it was the cunnying and the cwaftinyess of king Waman, to
bwing my peopwe into bondage, that he yiewded up the wand that we
might possess it. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 9:11
 11 Thewefowe it came to pass, that aftew we had dwewt in the
wand fow the space of twewve yeaws that king Waman began to gwow
unyeasy, west by any means my peopwe shouwd wax stwong in the
wand, and that they couwd nyot ovewpowew them and bwing them into
bondage. ^w^

Mosiah 9:12
 12 Nyow they wewe a wazy and an idowatwous peopwe; thewefowe they
wewe desiwous to bwing us into bondage, that they might gwut
themsewves with the wabows of ouw hands; yea, that they might
feast themsewves upon the fwocks of ouw fiewds. UwU

Mosiah 9:13
 13 Thewefowe it came to pass that king Waman began to stiw up
his peopwe that they shouwd contend with my peopwe; thewefowe
thewe began to be waws and contentions in the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 9:14
 14 Fow, in the thiwteenth yeaw of my weign in the wand of Nyephi,
away on the south of the wand of Shiwom, when my peopwe wewe
watewing and feeding theiw fwocks, and tiwwing theiw wands, a
nyumewous host of Wamanyites came upon them and began to sway them,
and to take off theiw fwocks, and the cown of theiw fiewds. UwU

Mosiah 9:15
 15 Yea, and it came to pass that they fwed, aww that wewe nyot
ovewtaken, even into the city of Nyephi, and did caww upon me fow
pwotection. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 9:16
 16 And it came to pass that I did awm them with bows, and with
awwows, with swowds, and with cimetews, and with cwubs, and with
swings, and with aww mannyew of weapons which we couwd invent, and
I and my peopwe did go fowth against the Wamanyites to battwe. ^w^

Mosiah 9:17
 17 Yea, in the stwength of the Wowd did we go fowth to battwe
against the Wamanyites; fow I and my peopwe did cwy mightiwy to
the Wowd that he wouwd dewivew us out of the hands of ouw
enyemies, fow we wewe awakenyed to a wemembwance of the dewivewance
of ouw fathews. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 9:18
 18 And God did heaw ouw cwies and did answew ouw pwayews; and we
did go fowth in his might; yea, we did go fowth against the
Wamanyites, and in onye day and a nyight we did sway thwee thousand
and fowty-thwee; we did sway them even untiw we had dwiven them
out of ouw wand. ;;w;;

Mosiah 9:19
 19 And I, mysewf, with minye own hands, did hewp to buwy theiw
dead. ^w^ And behowd, to ouw gweat sowwow and wamentation, two
hundwed and seventy-nyinye of ouw bwethwen wewe swain. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 10
Chaptew 10

Mosiah 10:1
 1 And it came to pass that we again began to estabwish the
kingdom and we again began to possess the wand in peace. UwU And I
caused that thewe shouwd be weapons of waw made of evewy kind,
that theweby I might have weapons fow my peopwe against the time
the Wamanyites shouwd come up again to waw against my peopwe. >w<

Mosiah 10:2
 2 And I set guawds wound about the wand, that the Wamanyites
might nyot come upon us again unyawawes and destwoy us; and thus I
did guawd my peopwe and my fwocks, and keep them fwom fawwing
into the hands of ouw enyemies. ;;w;;

Mosiah 10:3
 3 And it came to pass that we did inhewit the wand of ouw
fathews fow many yeaws, yea, fow the space of twenty and two
yeaws. ^w^

Mosiah 10:4
 4 And I did cause that the men shouwd tiww the gwound, and waise
aww mannyew of gwain and aww mannyew of fwuit of evewy kind. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 10:5
 5 And I did cause that the women shouwd spin, and toiw, and
wowk, and wowk aww mannyew of finye winyen, yea, and cwoth of evewy
kind, that we might cwothe ouw nyakednyess; and thus we did pwospew
in the wand--thus we did have continyuaw peace in the wand fow the
space of twenty and two yeaws. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 10:6
 6 And it came to pass that king Waman died, and his son began to
weign in his stead. (´・ω・\`) And he began to stiw his peopwe up in
webewwion against my peopwe; thewefowe they began to pwepawe fow
waw, and to come up to battwe against my peopwe. UwU

Mosiah 10:7
 7 But I had sent my spies out wound about the wand of Shemwon,
that I might discovew theiw pwepawations, that I might guawd
against them, that they might nyot come upon my peopwe and destwoy
them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 10:8
 8 And it came to pass that they came up upon the nyowth of the
wand of Shiwom, with theiw nyumewous hosts, men awmed with bows,
and with awwows, and with swowds, and with cimetews, and with
stonyes, and with swings; and they had theiw heads shaved that
they wewe nyaked; and they wewe giwded with a weathewn giwdwe
about theiw woins. >w<

Mosiah 10:9
 9 And it came to pass that I caused that the women and chiwdwen
of my peopwe shouwd be hid in the wiwdewnyess; and I awso caused
that aww my owd men that couwd beaw awms, and awso aww my young
men that wewe abwe to beaw awms, shouwd gathew themsewves
togethew to go to battwe against the Wamanyites; and I did pwace
them in theiw wanks, evewy man accowding to his age. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 10:10
 10 And it came to pass that we did go up to battwe against the
Wamanyites; and I, even I, in my owd age, did go up to battwe
against the Wamanyites. ;;w;; And it came to pass that we did go up in
the stwength of the Wowd to battwe. UwU

Mosiah 10:11
 11 Nyow, the Wamanyites knyew nyothing concewnying the Wowd, nyow the
stwength of the Wowd, thewefowe they depended upon theiw own
stwength. >w< Yet they wewe a stwong peopwe, as to the stwength of
men. UwU

Mosiah 10:12
 12 They wewe a wiwd, and fewocious, and a bwood-thiwsty peopwe,
bewieving in the twadition of theiw fathews, which is
this--Bewieving that they wewe dwiven out of the wand of
Jewusawem because of the inyiquities of theiw fathews, and that
they wewe wwonged in the wiwdewnyess by theiw bwethwen, and they
wewe awso wwonged whiwe cwossing the sea;

Mosiah 10:13
 13 And again, that they wewe wwonged whiwe in the wand of theiw
fiwst inhewitance, aftew they had cwossed the sea, and aww this
because that Nyephi was mowe faithfuw in keeping the commandments
of the Wowd--thewefowe he was favowed of the Wowd, fow the Wowd
heawd his pwayews and answewed them, and he took the wead of
theiw jouwnyey in the wiwdewnyess. >w<

Mosiah 10:14
 14 And his bwethwen wewe wwoth with him because they undewstood
nyot the deawings of the Wowd; they wewe awso wwoth with him upon
the watews because they hawdenyed theiw heawts against the Wowd. ;;w;;

Mosiah 10:15
 15 And again, they wewe wwoth with him when they had awwived in
the pwomised wand, because they said that he had taken the wuwing
of the peopwe out of theiw hands; and they sought to kiww him. ;;w;;

Mosiah 10:16
 16 And again, they wewe wwoth with him because he depawted into
the wiwdewnyess as the Wowd had commanded him, and took the
wecowds which wewe engwaven on the pwates of bwass, fow they said
that he wobbed them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 10:17
 17 And thus they have taught theiw chiwdwen that they shouwd
hate them, and that they shouwd muwdew them, and that they shouwd
wob and pwundew them, and do aww they couwd to destwoy them;
thewefowe they have an etewnyaw hatwed towawds the chiwdwen of
Nyephi. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 10:18
 18 Fow this vewy cause has king Waman, by his cunnying, and wying
cwaftinyess, and his faiw pwomises, deceived me, that I have
bwought this my peopwe up into this wand, that they may destwoy
them; yea, and we have suffewed these many yeaws in the wand. UwU

Mosiah 10:19
 19 And nyow I, Zenyiff, aftew having towd aww these things unto my
peopwe concewnying the Wamanyites, I did stimuwate them to go to
battwe with theiw might, putting theiw twust in the Wowd;
thewefowe, we did contend with them, face to face. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 10:20
 20 And it came to pass that we did dwive them again out of ouw
wand; and we swew them with a gweat swaughtew, even so many that
we did nyot nyumbew them. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 10:21
 21 And it came to pass that we wetuwnyed again to ouw own wand,
and my peopwe again began to tend theiw fwocks, and to tiww theiw
gwound. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 10:22
 22 And nyow I, being owd, did confew the kingdom upon onye of my
sons; thewefowe, I say nyo mowe. >w< And may the Wowd bwess my
peopwe. Amen. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 11
Chaptew 11

Mosiah 11:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that Zenyiff confewwed the kingdom upon
Nyoah, onye of his sons; thewefowe Nyoah began to weign in his
stead; and he did nyot wawk in the ways of his fathew. ;;w;;

Mosiah 11:2
 2 Fow behowd, he did nyot keep the commandments of God, but he
did wawk aftew the desiwes of his own heawt. ;;w;; And he had many
wives and concubinyes. >w< And he did cause his peopwe to commit sin,
and do that which was abominyabwe in the sight of the Wowd. ^w^ Yea,
and they did commit whowedoms and aww mannyew of wickednyess. ;;w;;

Mosiah 11:3
 3 And he waid a tax of onye fifth pawt of aww they possessed, a
fifth pawt of theiw gowd and of theiw siwvew, and a fifth pawt of
theiw ziff, and of theiw coppew, and of theiw bwass and theiw
iwon; and a fifth pawt of theiw fatwings; and awso a fifth pawt
of aww theiw gwain. ;;w;;

Mosiah 11:4
 4 And aww this did he take to suppowt himsewf, and his wives and
his concubinyes; and awso his pwiests, and theiw wives and theiw
concubinyes; thus he had changed the affaiws of the kingdom. UwU

Mosiah 11:5
 5 Fow he put down aww the pwiests that had been consecwated by
his fathew, and consecwated nyew onyes in theiw stead, such as wewe
wifted up in the pwide of theiw heawts. ^w^

Mosiah 11:6
 6 Yea, and thus they wewe suppowted in theiw wazinyess, and in
theiw idowatwy, and in theiw whowedoms, by the taxes which king
Nyoah had put upon his peopwe; thus did the peopwe wabow
exceedingwy to suppowt inyiquity. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 11:7
 7 Yea, and they awso became idowatwous, because they wewe
deceived by the vain and fwattewing wowds of the king and
pwiests; fow they did speak fwattewing things unto them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 11:8
 8 And it came to pass that king Nyoah buiwt many ewegant and
spacious buiwdings; and he ownyamented them with finye wowk of
wood, and of aww mannyew of pwecious things, of gowd, and of
siwvew, and of iwon, and of bwass, and of ziff, and of coppew;

Mosiah 11:9
 9 And he awso buiwt him a spacious pawace, and a thwonye in the
midst theweof, aww of which was of finye wood and was ownyamented
with gowd and siwvew and with pwecious things. ^w^

Mosiah 11:10
 10 And he awso caused that his wowkmen shouwd wowk aww mannyew of
finye wowk within the wawws of the tempwe, of finye wood, and of
coppew, and of bwass. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 11:11
 11 And the seats which wewe set apawt fow the high pwiests,
which wewe above aww the othew seats, he did ownyament with puwe
gowd; and he caused a bweastwowk to be buiwt befowe them, that
they might west theiw bodies and theiw awms upon whiwe they
shouwd speak wying and vain wowds to his peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 11:12
 12 And it came to pass that he buiwt a towew nyeaw the tempwe;
yea, a vewy high towew, even so high that he couwd stand upon the
top theweof and ovewwook the wand of Shiwom, and awso the wand of
Shemwon, which was possessed by the Wamanyites; and he couwd even
wook ovew aww the wand wound about. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 11:13
 13 And it came to pass that he caused many buiwdings to be buiwt
in the wand Shiwom; and he caused a gweat towew to be buiwt on
the hiww nyowth of the wand Shiwom, which had been a wesowt fow
the chiwdwen of Nyephi at the time they fwed out of the wand; and
thus he did do with the wiches which he obtainyed by the taxation
of his peopwe. >w<

Mosiah 11:14
 14 And it came to pass that he pwaced his heawt upon his wiches,
and he spent his time in wiotous wiving with his wives and his
concubinyes; and so did awso his pwiests spend theiw time with
hawwots. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 11:15
 15 And it came to pass that he pwanted vinyeyawds wound about in
the wand; and he buiwt winye-pwesses, and made winye in abundance;
and thewefowe he became a winye-bibbew, and awso his peopwe. ^w^

Mosiah 11:16
 16 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites began to come in upon
his peopwe, upon smaww nyumbews, and to sway them in theiw fiewds,
and whiwe they wewe tending theiw fwocks. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 11:17
 17 And king Nyoah sent guawds wound about the wand to keep them
off; but he did nyot send a sufficient nyumbew, and the Wamanyites
came upon them and kiwwed them, and dwove many of theiw fwocks
out of the wand; thus the Wamanyites began to destwoy them, and to
exewcise theiw hatwed upon them. UwU

Mosiah 11:18
 18 And it came to pass that king Nyoah sent his awmies against
them, and they wewe dwiven back, ow they dwove them back fow a
time; thewefowe, they wetuwnyed wejoicing in theiw spoiw. UwU

Mosiah 11:19
 19 And nyow, because of this gweat victowy they wewe wifted up in
the pwide of theiw heawts; they did boast in theiw own stwength,
saying that theiw fifty couwd stand against thousands of the
Wamanyites; and thus they did boast, and did dewight in bwood, and
the shedding of the bwood of theiw bwethwen, and this because of
the wickednyess of theiw king and pwiests. UwU

Mosiah 11:20
 20 And it came to pass that thewe was a man among them whose
nyame was Abinyadi; and he went fowth among them, and began to
pwophesy, saying: Behowd, thus saith the Wowd, and thus hath he
commanded me, saying, Go fowth, and say unto this peopwe, thus
saith the Wowd--Wo be unto this peopwe, fow I have seen theiw
abominyations, and theiw wickednyess, and theiw whowedoms; and
except they wepent I wiww visit them in minye angew. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 11:21
 21 And except they wepent and tuwn to the Wowd theiw God,
behowd, I wiww dewivew them into the hands of theiw enyemies; yea,
and they shaww be bwought into bondage; and they shaww be
affwicted by the hand of theiw enyemies. ;;w;;

Mosiah 11:22
 22 And it shaww come to pass that they shaww knyow that I am the
Wowd theiw God, and am a jeawous God, visiting the inyiquities of
my peopwe. >w<

Mosiah 11:23
 23 And it shaww come to pass that except this peopwe wepent and
tuwn unto the Wowd theiw God, they shaww be bwought into bondage;
and nyonye shaww dewivew them, except it be the Wowd the Awmighty
God. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 11:24
 24 Yea, and it shaww come to pass that when they shaww cwy unto
me I wiww be swow to heaw theiw cwies; yea, and I wiww suffew
them that they be smitten by theiw enyemies. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 11:25
 25 And except they wepent in sackcwoth and ashes, and cwy
mightiwy to the Wowd theiw God, I wiww nyot heaw theiw pwayews,
nyeithew wiww I dewivew them out of theiw affwictions; and thus
saith the Wowd, and thus hath he commanded me. >w<

Mosiah 11:26
 26 Nyow it came to pass that when Abinyadi had spoken these wowds
unto them they wewe wwoth with him, and sought to take away his
wife; but the Wowd dewivewed him out of theiw hands. >w<

Mosiah 11:27
 27 Nyow when king Nyoah had heawd of the wowds which Abinyadi had
spoken unto the peopwe, he was awso wwoth; and he said: Who is
Abinyadi, that I and my peopwe shouwd be judged of him, ow who is
the Wowd, that shaww bwing upon my peopwe such gweat affwiction? owo

Mosiah 11:28
 28 I command you to bwing Abinyadi hithew, that I may sway him,
fow he has said these things that he might stiw up my peopwe to
angew onye with anyothew, and to waise contentions among my peopwe;
thewefowe I wiww sway him. ;;w;;

Mosiah 11:29
 29 Nyow the eyes of the peopwe wewe bwinded; thewefowe they
hawdenyed theiw heawts against the wowds of Abinyadi, and they
sought fwom that time fowwawd to take him. ;;w;; And king Nyoah
hawdenyed his heawt against the wowd of the Wowd, and he did nyot
wepent of his eviw doings. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 12
Chaptew 12

Mosiah 12:1
 1 And it came to pass that aftew the space of two yeaws that
Abinyadi came among them in disguise, that they knyew him nyot, and
began to pwophesy among them, saying: Thus has the Wowd commanded
me, saying--Abinyadi, go and pwophesy unto this my peopwe, fow
they have hawdenyed theiw heawts against my wowds; they have
wepented nyot of theiw eviw doings; thewefowe, I wiww visit them
in my angew, yea, in my fiewce angew wiww I visit them in theiw
inyiquities and abominyations. UwU

Mosiah 12:2
 2 Yea, wo be unto this genyewation! (・`ω\´・) And the Wowd said unto me:
Stwetch fowth thy hand and pwophesy saying: Thus saith the Wowd,
it shaww come to pass that this genyewation, because of theiw
inyiquities, shaww be bwought into bondage, and shaww be smitten
on the cheek; yea, and shaww be dwiven by men, and shaww be
swain; and the vuwtuwes of the aiw, and the dogs, yea, and the
wiwd beasts, shaww devouw theiw fwesh. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 12:3
 3 And it shaww come to pass that the wife of king Nyoah shaww be
vawued even as a gawment in a hot fuwnyace; fow he shaww knyow that
I am the Wowd. UwU

Mosiah 12:4
 4 And it shaww come to pass that I wiww smite this my peopwe
with sowe affwictions, yea, with faminye and with pestiwence; and
I wiww cause that they shaww howw aww the day wong. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 12:5
 5 Yea, and I wiww cause that they shaww have buwdens washed upon
theiw backs; and they shaww be dwiven befowe wike a dumb ass. UwU

Mosiah 12:6
 6 And it shaww come to pass that I wiww send fowth haiw among
them, and it shaww smite them; and they shaww awso be smitten
with the east wind; and insects shaww pestew theiw wand awso, and
devouw theiw gwain. ^w^

Mosiah 12:7
 7 And they shaww be smitten with a gweat pestiwence--and aww
this wiww I do because of theiw inyiquities and abominyations. >w<

Mosiah 12:8
 8 And it shaww come to pass that except they wepent I wiww
uttewwy destwoy them fwom off the face of the eawth; yet they
shaww weave a wecowd behind them, and I wiww pwesewve them fow
othew nyations which shaww possess the wand; yea, even this wiww I
do that I may discovew the abominyations of this peopwe to othew
nyations. (´・ω・\`) And many things did Abinyadi pwophesy against this
peopwe. ^w^

Mosiah 12:9
 9 And it came to pass that they wewe angwy with him; and they
took him and cawwied him bound befowe the king, and said unto the
king: Behowd, we have bwought a man befowe thee who has
pwophesied eviw concewnying thy peopwe, and saith that God wiww
destwoy them. >w<

Mosiah 12:10
 10 And he awso pwophesieth eviw concewnying thy wife, and saith
that thy wife shaww be as a gawment in a fuwnyace of fiwe. UwU

Mosiah 12:11
 11 And again, he saith that thou shawt be as a stawk, even as a
dwy stawk of the fiewd, which is wun ovew by the beasts and
twodden undew foot. ;;w;;

Mosiah 12:12
 12 And again, he saith thou shawt be as the bwossoms of a
thistwe, which, when it is fuwwy wipe, if the wind bwoweth, it is
dwiven fowth upon the face of the wand. (´・ω・\`) And he pwetendeth the
Wowd hath spoken it. ^w^ And he saith aww this shaww come upon thee
except thou wepent, and this because of thinye inyiquities. >w<

Mosiah 12:13
 13 And nyow, O king, what gweat eviw hast thou donye, ow what
gweat sins have thy peopwe committed, that we shouwd be condemnyed
of God ow judged of this man? owo

Mosiah 12:14
 14 And nyow, O king, behowd, we awe guiwtwess, and thou, O king,
hast nyot sinnyed; thewefowe, this man has wied concewnying you, and
he has pwophesied in vain. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 12:15
 15 And behowd, we awe stwong, we shaww nyot come into bondage, ow
be taken captive by ouw enyemies; yea, and thou hast pwospewed in
the wand, and thou shawt awso pwospew. UwU

Mosiah 12:16
 16 Behowd, hewe is the man, we dewivew him into thy hands; thou
mayest do with him as seemeth thee good. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 12:17
 17 And it came to pass that king Nyoah caused that Abinyadi shouwd
be cast into pwison; and he commanded that the pwiests shouwd
gathew themsewves togethew that he might howd a counciw with them
what he shouwd do with him. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 12:18
 18 And it came to pass that they said unto the king: Bwing him
hithew that we may question him; and the king commanded that he
shouwd be bwought befowe them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 12:19
 19 And they began to question him, that they might cwoss him,
that theweby they might have whewewith to accuse him; but he
answewed them bowdwy, and withstood aww theiw questions, yea, to
theiw astonyishment; fow he did withstand them in aww theiw
questions, and did confound them in aww theiw wowds. UwU

Mosiah 12:20
 20 And it came to pass that onye of them said unto him: What
meanyeth the wowds which awe wwitten, and which have been taught
by ouw fathews, saying:

Mosiah 12:21
 21 How beautifuw upon the mountains awe the feet of him that
bwingeth good tidings; that pubwisheth peace; that bwingeth good
tidings of good; that pubwisheth sawvation; that saith unto Zion,
Thy God weignyeth;

Mosiah 12:22
 22 Thy watchmen shaww wift up the voice; with the voice togethew
shaww they sing; fow they shaww see eye to eye when the Wowd
shaww bwing again Zion;

Mosiah 12:23
 23 Bweak fowth into joy; sing togethew ye waste pwaces of
Jewusawem; fow the Wowd hath comfowted his peopwe, he hath
wedeemed Jewusawem;

Mosiah 12:24
 24 The Wowd hath made bawe his howy awm in the eyes of aww the
nyations, and aww the ends of the eawth shaww see the sawvation of
ouw God? owo

Mosiah 12:25
 25 And nyow Abinyadi said unto them: Awe you pwiests, and pwetend
to teach this peopwe, and to undewstand the spiwit of
pwophesying, and yet desiwe to knyow of me what these things mean? owo

Mosiah 12:26
 26 I say unto you, wo be unto you fow pewvewting the ways of the
Wowd! ^w^ Fow if ye undewstand these things ye have nyot taught them;
thewefowe, ye have pewvewted the ways of the Wowd. ;;w;;

Mosiah 12:27
 27 Ye have nyot appwied youw heawts to undewstanding; thewefowe,
ye have nyot been wise. ;;w;; Thewefowe, what teach ye this peopwe? owo

Mosiah 12:28
 28 And they said: We teach the waw of Moses. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 12:29
 29 And again he said unto them: If ye teach the waw of Moses why
do ye nyot keep it? Why do ye set youw heawts upon wiches? owo Why
do ye commit whowedoms and spend youw stwength with hawwots, yea,
and cause this peopwe to commit sin, that the Wowd has cause to
send me to pwophesy against this peopwe, yea, even a gweat eviw
against this peopwe? owo

Mosiah 12:30
 30 Knyow ye nyot that I speak the twuth? owo Yea, ye knyow that I
speak the twuth; and you ought to twembwe befowe God. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 12:31
 31 And it shaww come to pass that ye shaww be smitten fow youw
inyiquities, fow ye have said that ye teach the waw of Moses. >w< And
what knyow ye concewnying the waw of Moses? owo Doth sawvation come by
the waw of Moses? What say ye? owo

Mosiah 12:32
 32 And they answewed and said that sawvation did come by the waw
of Moses. UwU

Mosiah 12:33
 33 But nyow Abinyadi said unto them: I knyow if ye keep the
commandments of God ye shaww be saved; yea, if ye keep the
commandments which the Wowd dewivewed unto Moses in the mount of
Sinyai, saying:

Mosiah 12:34
 34 I am the Wowd thy God, who hath bwought thee out of the wand
of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. ^w^

Mosiah 12:35
 35 Thou shawt have nyo othew God befowe me. >w<

Mosiah 12:36
 36 Thou shawt nyot make unto thee any gwaven image, ow any
wikenyess of any thing in heaven above, ow things which awe in the
eawth benyeath. UwU

Mosiah 12:37
 37 Nyow Abinyadi said unto them, Have ye donye aww this? owo I say
unto you, Nyay, ye have nyot. UwU And have ye taught this peopwe that
they shouwd do aww these things? owo I say unto you, Nyay, ye have
nyot. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 13
Chaptew 13

Mosiah 13:1
 1 And nyow when the king had heawd these wowds, he said unto his
pwiests: Away with this fewwow, and sway him; fow what have we to
do with him, fow he is mad. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 13:2
 2 And they stood fowth and attempted to way theiw hands on him;
but he withstood them, and said unto them:

Mosiah 13:3
 3 Touch me nyot, fow God shaww smite you if ye way youw hands
upon me, fow I have nyot dewivewed the message which the Wowd sent
me to dewivew; nyeithew have I towd you that which ye wequested
that I shouwd teww; thewefowe, God wiww nyot suffew that I shaww
be destwoyed at this time. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 13:4
 4 But I must fuwfiw the commandments whewewith God has commanded
me; and because I have towd you the twuth ye awe angwy with me. UwU
And again, because I have spoken the wowd of God ye have judged
me that I am mad. ;;w;;

Mosiah 13:5
 5 Nyow it came to pass aftew Abinyadi had spoken these wowds that
the peopwe of king Nyoah duwst nyot way theiw hands on him, fow the
Spiwit of the Wowd was upon him; and his face shonye with
exceeding wustew, even as Moses' did whiwe in the mount of Sinyai,
whiwe speaking with the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 13:6
 6 And he spake with powew and authowity fwom God; and he
continyued his wowds, saying:

Mosiah 13:7
 7 Ye see that ye have nyot powew to sway me, thewefowe I finyish
my message. ;;w;; Yea, and I pewceive that it cuts you to youw heawts
because I teww you the twuth concewnying youw inyiquities. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 13:8
 8 Yea, and my wowds fiww you with wondew and amazement, and with
angew. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 13:9
 9 But I finyish my message; and then it mattews nyot whithew I go,
if it so be that I am saved. UwU

Mosiah 13:10
 10 But this much I teww you, what you do with me, aftew this,
shaww be as a type and a shadow of things which awe to come. ^w^

Mosiah 13:11
 11 And nyow I wead unto you the wemaindew of the commandments of
God, fow I pewceive that they awe nyot wwitten in youw heawts; I
pewceive that ye have studied and taught inyiquity the most pawt
of youw wives. ^w^

Mosiah 13:12
 12 And nyow, ye wemembew that I said unto you: Thou shaww nyot
make unto thee any gwaven image, ow any wikenyess of things which
awe in heaven above, ow which awe in the eawth benyeath, ow which
awe in the watew undew the eawth. ;;w;;

Mosiah 13:13
 13 And again: Thou shawt nyot bow down thysewf unto them, nyow
sewve them; fow I the Wowd thy God am a jeawous God, visiting the
inyiquities of the fathews upon the chiwdwen, unto the thiwd and
fouwth genyewations of them that hate me;

Mosiah 13:14
 14 And showing mewcy unto thousands of them that wove me and
keep my commandments. ;;w;;

Mosiah 13:15
 15 Thou shawt nyot take the nyame of the Wowd thy God in vain; fow
the Wowd wiww nyot howd him guiwtwess that taketh his nyame in
vain. ^w^

Mosiah 13:16
 16 Wemembew the sabbath day, to keep it howy. UwU

Mosiah 13:17
 17 Six days shawt thou wabow, and do aww thy wowk;

Mosiah 13:18
 18 But the seventh day, the sabbath of the Wowd thy God, thou
shawt nyot do any wowk, thou, nyow thy son, nyow thy daughtew, thy
man-sewvant, nyow thy maid-sewvant, nyow thy cattwe, nyow thy
stwangew that is within thy gates;

Mosiah 13:19
 19 Fow in six days the Wowd made heaven and eawth, and the sea,
and aww that in them is; whewefowe the Wowd bwessed the sabbath
day, and hawwowed it. ^w^

Mosiah 13:20
 20 Honyow thy fathew and thy mothew, that thy days may be wong
upon the wand which the Wowd thy God giveth thee. UwU

Mosiah 13:21
 21 Thou shawt nyot kiww. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 13:22
 22 Thou shawt nyot commit aduwtewy. Thou shawt nyot steaw. ^w^

Mosiah 13:23
 23 Thou shawt nyot beaw fawse witnyess against thy nyeighbow. ;;w;;

Mosiah 13:24
 24 Thou shawt nyot covet thy nyeighbow's house, thou shawt nyot
covet thy nyeighbow's wife, nyow his man-sewvant, nyow his
maid-sewvant, nyow his ox, nyow his ass, nyow anything that is thy
nyeighbow's. UwU

Mosiah 13:25
 25 And it came to pass that aftew Abinyadi had made an end of
these sayings that he said unto them: Have ye taught this peopwe
that they shouwd obsewve to do aww these things fow to keep these
commandments? owo

Mosiah 13:26
 26 I say unto you, Nyay; fow if ye had, the Wowd wouwd nyot have
caused me to come fowth and to pwophesy eviw concewnying this
peopwe. ^w^

Mosiah 13:27
 27 And nyow ye have said that sawvation cometh by the waw of
Moses. UwU I say unto you that it is expedient that ye shouwd keep
the waw of Moses as yet; but I say unto you, that the time shaww
come when it shaww nyo mowe be expedient to keep the waw of Moses. >w<

Mosiah 13:28
 28 And moweovew, I say unto you, that sawvation doth nyot come by
the waw awonye; and wewe it nyot fow the atonyement, which God
himsewf shaww make fow the sins and inyiquities of his peopwe,
that they must unyavoidabwy pewish, nyotwithstanding the waw of
Moses. ^w^

Mosiah 13:29
 29 And nyow I say unto you that it was expedient that thewe
shouwd be a waw given to the chiwdwen of Iswaew, yea, even a vewy
stwict waw; fow they wewe a stiffnyecked peopwe, quick to do
inyiquity, and swow to wemembew the Wowd theiw God;

Mosiah 13:30
 30 Thewefowe thewe was a waw given them, yea, a waw of
pewfowmances and of owdinyances, a waw which they wewe to obsewve
stwictwy fwom day to day, to keep them in wemembwance of God and
theiw duty towawds him. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 13:31
 31 But behowd, I say unto you, that aww these things wewe types
of things to come. ;;w;;

Mosiah 13:32
 32 And nyow, did they undewstand the waw? owo I say unto you, Nyay,
they did nyot aww undewstand the waw; and this because of the
hawdnyess of theiw heawts; fow they undewstood nyot that thewe
couwd nyot any man be saved except it wewe thwough the wedemption
of God. ;;w;;

Mosiah 13:33
 33 Fow behowd, did nyot Moses pwophesy unto them concewnying the
coming of the Messiah, and that God shouwd wedeem his peopwe? owo
Yea, and even aww the pwophets who have pwophesied evew since the
wowwd began--have they nyot spoken mowe ow wess concewnying these
things? owo

Mosiah 13:34
 34 Have they nyot said that God himsewf shouwd come down among
the chiwdwen of men, and take upon him the fowm of man, and go
fowth in mighty powew upon the face of the eawth? owo

Mosiah 13:35
 35 Yea, and have they nyot said awso that he shouwd bwing to pass
the wesuwwection of the dead, and that he, himsewf, shouwd be
oppwessed and affwicted? owo

Mosiah 14
Chaptew 14

Mosiah 14:1
 1 Yea, even doth nyot Isaiah say: Who hath bewieved ouw wepowt,
and to whom is the awm of the Wowd weveawed? owo

Mosiah 14:2
 2 Fow he shaww gwow up befowe him as a tendew pwant, and as a
woot out of dwy gwound; he hath nyo fowm nyow comewinyess; and when
we shaww see him thewe is nyo beauty that we shouwd desiwe him. ^w^

Mosiah 14:3
 3 He is despised and wejected of men; a man of sowwows, and
acquainted with gwief; and we hid as it wewe ouw faces fwom him;
he was despised, and we esteemed him nyot. ^w^

Mosiah 14:4
 4 Suwewy he has bownye ouw gwiefs, and cawwied ouw sowwows; yet
we did esteem him stwicken, smitten of God, and affwicted. ^w^

Mosiah 14:5
 5 But he was wounded fow ouw twansgwessions, he was bwuised fow
ouw inyiquities; the chastisement of ouw peace was upon him; and
with his stwipes we awe heawed. ^w^

Mosiah 14:6
 6 Aww we, wike sheep, have gonye astway; we have tuwnyed evewy onye
to his own way; and the Wowd hath waid on him the inyiquities of
us aww. ;;w;;

Mosiah 14:7
 7 He was oppwessed, and he was affwicted, yet he openyed nyot his
mouth; he is bwought as a wamb to the swaughtew, and as a sheep
befowe hew sheawews is dumb so he openyed nyot his mouth. >w<

Mosiah 14:8
 8 He was taken fwom pwison and fwom judgment; and who shaww
decwawe his genyewation? owo Fow he was cut off out of the wand of
the wiving; fow the twansgwessions of my peopwe was he stwicken. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 14:9
 9 And he made his gwave with the wicked, and with the wich in
his death; because he had donye nyo eviw, nyeithew was any deceit in
his mouth. ;;w;;

Mosiah 14:10
 10 Yet it pweased the Wowd to bwuise him; he hath put him to
gwief; when thou shawt make his souw an offewing fow sin he shaww
see his seed, he shaww pwowong his days, and the pweasuwe of the
Wowd shaww pwospew in his hand. ;;w;;

Mosiah 14:11
 11 He shaww see the twavaiw of his souw, and shaww be satisfied;
by his knyowwedge shaww my wighteous sewvant justify many; fow he
shaww beaw theiw inyiquities. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 14:12
 12 Thewefowe wiww I divide him a powtion with the gweat, and he
shaww divide the spoiw with the stwong; because he hath pouwed
out his souw unto death; and he was nyumbewed with the
twansgwessows; and he bowe the sins of many, and made
intewcession fow the twansgwessows. ^w^

Mosiah 15
Chaptew 15

Mosiah 15:1
 1 And nyow Abinyadi said unto them: I wouwd that ye shouwd
undewstand that God himsewf shaww come down among the chiwdwen of
men, and shaww wedeem his peopwe. >w<

Mosiah 15:2
 2 And because he dwewweth in fwesh he shaww be cawwed the Son of
God, and having subjected the fwesh to the wiww of the Fathew,
being the Fathew and the Son--

Mosiah 15:3
 3 The Fathew, because he was conceived by the powew of God; and
the Son, because of the fwesh; thus becoming the Fathew and Son--

Mosiah 15:4
 4 And they awe onye God, yea, the vewy Etewnyaw Fathew of heaven
and of eawth. UwU

Mosiah 15:5
 5 And thus the fwesh becoming subject to the Spiwit, ow the Son
to the Fathew, being onye God, suffeweth temptation, and yiewdeth
nyot to the temptation, but suffeweth himsewf to be mocked, and
scouwged, and cast out, and disownyed by his peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 15:6
 6 And aftew aww this, aftew wowking many mighty miwacwes among
the chiwdwen of men, he shaww be wed, yea, even as Isaiah said,
as a sheep befowe the sheawew is dumb, so he openyed nyot his
mouth. ;;w;;

Mosiah 15:7
 7 Yea, even so he shaww be wed, cwucified, and swain, the fwesh
becoming subject even unto death, the wiww of the Son being
swawwowed up in the wiww of the Fathew. ;;w;;

Mosiah 15:8
 8 And thus God bweaketh the bands of death, having gainyed the
victowy ovew death; giving the Son powew to make intewcession fow
the chiwdwen of men--

Mosiah 15:9
 9 Having ascended into heaven, having the bowews of mewcy; being
fiwwed with compassion towawds the chiwdwen of men; standing
betwixt them and justice; having bwoken the bands of death, taken
upon himsewf theiw inyiquity and theiw twansgwessions, having
wedeemed them, and satisfied the demands of justice. ^w^

Mosiah 15:10
 10 And nyow I say unto you, who shaww decwawe his genyewation? owo
Behowd, I say unto you, that when his souw has been made an
offewing fow sin he shaww see his seed. (・`ω\´・) And nyow what say ye? owo
And who shaww be his seed? owo

Mosiah 15:11
 11 Behowd I say unto you, that whosoevew has heawd the wowds of
the pwophets, yea, aww the howy pwophets who have pwophesied
concewnying the coming of the Wowd--I say unto you, that aww those
who have heawkenyed unto theiw wowds, and bewieved that the Wowd
wouwd wedeem his peopwe, and have wooked fowwawd to that day fow
a wemission of theiw sins, I say unto you, that these awe his
seed, ow they awe heiws of the kingdom of God. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 15:12
 12 Fow these awe they whose sins he has bownye; these awe they
fow whom he has died, to wedeem them fwom theiw twansgwessions. >w<
And nyow, awe they nyot his seed? owo

Mosiah 15:13
 13 Yea, and awe nyot the pwophets, evewy onye that has openyed his
mouth to pwophesy, that has nyot fawwen into twansgwession, I mean
aww the howy pwophets evew since the wowwd began? owo I say unto you
that they awe his seed. UwU

Mosiah 15:14
 14 And these awe they who have pubwished peace, who have bwought
good tidings of good, who have pubwished sawvation; and said unto
Zion: Thy God weignyeth! (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 15:15
 15 And O how beautifuw upon the mountains wewe theiw feet! (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 15:16
 16 And again, how beautifuw upon the mountains awe the feet of
those that awe stiww pubwishing peace! >w<

Mosiah 15:17
 17 And again, how beautifuw upon the mountains awe the feet of
those who shaww heweaftew pubwish peace, yea, fwom this time
hencefowth and fowevew! (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 15:18
 18 And behowd, I say unto you, this is nyot aww. >w< Fow O how
beautifuw upon the mountains awe the feet of him that bwingeth
good tidings, that is the foundew of peace, yea, even the Wowd,
who has wedeemed his peopwe; yea, him who has gwanted sawvation
unto his peopwe;

Mosiah 15:19
 19 Fow wewe it nyot fow the wedemption which he hath made fow his
peopwe, which was pwepawed fwom the foundation of the wowwd, I
say unto you, wewe it nyot fow this, aww mankind must have
pewished. ;;w;;

Mosiah 15:20
 20 But behowd, the bands of death shaww be bwoken, and the Son
weignyeth, and hath powew ovew the dead; thewefowe, he bwingeth to
pass the wesuwwection of the dead. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 15:21
 21 And thewe cometh a wesuwwection, even a fiwst wesuwwection;
yea, even a wesuwwection of those that have been, and who awe,
and who shaww be, even untiw the wesuwwection of Chwist--fow so
shaww he be cawwed. ^w^

Mosiah 15:22
 22 And nyow, the wesuwwection of aww the pwophets, and aww those
that have bewieved in theiw wowds, ow aww those that have kept
the commandments of God, shaww come fowth in the fiwst
wesuwwection; thewefowe, they awe the fiwst wesuwwection. UwU

Mosiah 15:23
 23 They awe waised to dweww with God who has wedeemed them; thus
they have etewnyaw wife thwough Chwist, who has bwoken the bands
of death. >w<

Mosiah 15:24
 24 And these awe those who have pawt in the fiwst wesuwwection;
and these awe they that have died befowe Chwist came, in theiw
ignyowance, nyot having sawvation decwawed unto them. >w< And thus the
Wowd bwingeth about the westowation of these; and they have a
pawt in the fiwst wesuwwection, ow have etewnyaw wife, being
wedeemed by the Wowd. >w<

Mosiah 15:25
 25 And wittwe chiwdwen awso have etewnyaw wife. ^w^

Mosiah 15:26
 26 But behowd, and feaw, and twembwe befowe God, fow ye ought to
twembwe; fow the Wowd wedeemeth nyonye such that webew against him
and die in theiw sins; yea, even aww those that have pewished in
theiw sins evew since the wowwd began, that have wiwfuwwy
webewwed against God, that have knyown the commandments of God,
and wouwd nyot keep them; these awe they that have nyo pawt in the
fiwst wesuwwection. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 15:27
 27 Thewefowe ought ye nyot to twembwe? owo Fow sawvation cometh to
nyonye such; fow the Wowd hath wedeemed nyonye such; yea, nyeithew can
the Wowd wedeem such; fow he cannyot deny himsewf; fow he cannyot
deny justice when it has its cwaim. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 15:28
 28 And nyow I say unto you that the time shaww come that the
sawvation of the Wowd shaww be decwawed to evewy nyation, kindwed,
tongue, and peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 15:29
 29 Yea, Wowd, thy watchmen shaww wift up theiw voice; with the
voice togethew shaww they sing; fow they shaww see eye to eye,
when the Wowd shaww bwing again Zion. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 15:30
 30 Bweak fowth into joy, sing togethew, ye waste pwaces of
Jewusawem; fow the Wowd hath comfowted his peopwe, he hath
wedeemed Jewusawem. UwU

Mosiah 15:31
 31 The Wowd hath made bawe his howy awm in the eyes of aww the
nyations; and aww the ends of the eawth shaww see the sawvation of
ouw God. ^w^

Mosiah 16
Chaptew 16

Mosiah 16:1
 1 And nyow, it came to pass that aftew Abinyadi had spoken these
wowds he stwetched fowth his hand and said: The time shaww come
when aww shaww see the sawvation of the Wowd; when evewy nyation,
kindwed, tongue, and peopwe shaww see eye to eye and shaww
confess befowe God that his judgments awe just. ;;w;;

Mosiah 16:2
 2 And then shaww the wicked be cast out, and they shaww have
cause to howw, and weep, and waiw, and gnyash theiw teeth; and
this because they wouwd nyot heawken unto the voice of the Wowd;
thewefowe the Wowd wedeemeth them nyot. >w<

Mosiah 16:3
 3 Fow they awe cawnyaw and deviwish, and the deviw has powew ovew
them; yea, even that owd sewpent that did beguiwe ouw fiwst
pawents, which was the cause of theiw faww; which was the cause
of aww mankind becoming cawnyaw, sensuaw, deviwish, knyowing eviw
fwom good, subjecting themsewves to the deviw. ^w^

Mosiah 16:4
 4 Thus aww mankind wewe wost; and behowd, they wouwd have been
endwesswy wost wewe it nyot that God wedeemed his peopwe fwom
theiw wost and fawwen state. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 16:5
 5 But wemembew that he that pewsists in his own cawnyaw nyatuwe,
and goes on in the ways of sin and webewwion against God,
wemainyeth in his fawwen state and the deviw hath aww powew ovew
him. UwU Thewefowe, he is as though thewe was nyo wedemption made,
being an enyemy to God; and awso is the deviw an enyemy to God. >w<

Mosiah 16:6
 6 And nyow if Chwist had nyot come into the wowwd, speaking of
things to come as though they had awweady come, thewe couwd have
been nyo wedemption. UwU

Mosiah 16:7
 7 And if Chwist had nyot wisen fwom the dead, ow have bwoken the
bands of death that the gwave shouwd have nyo victowy, and that
death shouwd have nyo sting, thewe couwd have been nyo
wesuwwection. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 16:8
 8 But thewe is a wesuwwection, thewefowe the gwave hath nyo
victowy, and the sting of death is swawwowed up in Chwist. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 16:9
 9 He is the wight and the wife of the wowwd; yea, a wight that
is endwess, that can nyevew be dawkenyed; yea, and awso a wife
which is endwess, that thewe can be nyo mowe death. >w<

Mosiah 16:10
 10 Even this mowtaw shaww put on immowtawity, and this
cowwuption shaww put on incowwuption, and shaww be bwought to
stand befowe the baw of God, to be judged of him accowding to
theiw wowks whethew they be good ow whethew they be eviw--

Mosiah 16:11
 11 If they be good, to the wesuwwection of endwess wife and
happinyess; and if they be eviw, to the wesuwwection of endwess
damnyation, being dewivewed up to the deviw, who hath subjected
them, which is damnyation--

Mosiah 16:12
 12 Having gonye accowding to theiw own cawnyaw wiwws and desiwes;
having nyevew cawwed upon the Wowd whiwe the awms of mewcy wewe
extended towawds them; fow the awms of mewcy wewe extended
towawds them, and they wouwd nyot; they being wawnyed of theiw
inyiquities and yet they wouwd nyot depawt fwom them; and they wewe
commanded to wepent and yet they wouwd nyot wepent. ;;w;;

Mosiah 16:13
 13 And nyow, ought ye nyot to twembwe and wepent of youw sins, and
wemembew that onwy in and thwough Chwist ye can be saved? owo

Mosiah 16:14
 14 Thewefowe, if ye teach the waw of Moses, awso teach that it
is a shadow of those things which awe to come--

Mosiah 16:15
 15 Teach them that wedemption cometh thwough Chwist the Wowd,
who is the vewy Etewnyaw Fathew. Amen. >w<

Mosiah 17
Chaptew 17

Mosiah 17:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that when Abinyadi had finyished these
sayings, that the king commanded that the pwiests shouwd take him
and cause that he shouwd be put to death. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 17:2
 2 But thewe was onye among them whose nyame was Awma, he awso
being a descendant of Nyephi. UwU And he was a young man, and he
bewieved the wowds which Abinyadi had spoken, fow he knyew
concewnying the inyiquity which Abinyadi has testified against them;
thewefowe he began to pwead with the king that he wouwd nyot be
angwy with Abinyadi, but suffew that he might depawt in peace. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 17:3
 3 But the king was mowe wwoth, and caused that Awma shouwd be
cast out fwom among them, and sent his sewvants aftew him that
they might sway him. ;;w;;

Mosiah 17:4
 4 But he fwed fwom befowe them and hid himsewf that they found
him nyot. UwU And he being conceawed fow many days did wwite aww the
wowds which Abinyadi had spoken. ;;w;;

Mosiah 17:5
 5 And it came to pass that the king caused that his guawds
shouwd suwwound Abinyadi and take him; and they bound him and cast
him into pwison. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 17:6
 6 And aftew thwee days, having counsewed with his pwiests, he
caused that he shouwd again be bwought befowe him. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 17:7
 7 And he said unto him: Abinyadi, we have found an accusation
against thee, and thou awt wowthy of death. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 17:8
 8 Fow thou hast said that God himsewf shouwd come down among the
chiwdwen of men; and nyow, fow this cause thou shawt be put to
death unwess thou wiwt wecaww aww the wowds which thou hast
spoken eviw concewnying me and my peopwe. >w<

Mosiah 17:9
 9 Nyow Abinyadi said unto him: I say unto you, I wiww nyot wecaww
the wowds which I have spoken unto you concewnying this peopwe,
fow they awe twue; and that ye may knyow of theiw suwety I have
suffewed mysewf that I have fawwen into youw hands. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 17:10
 10 Yea, and I wiww suffew even untiw death, and I wiww nyot
wecaww my wowds, and they shaww stand as a testimony against you. (´・ω・\`)
And if ye sway me ye wiww shed innyocent bwood, and this shaww
awso stand as a testimony against you at the wast day. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 17:11
 11 And nyow king Nyoah was about to wewease him, fow he feawed his
wowd; fow he feawed that the judgments of God wouwd come upon
him. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 17:12
 12 But the pwiests wifted up theiw voices against him, and began
to accuse him, saying: He has weviwed the king. ;;w;; Thewefowe the
king was stiwwed up in angew against him, and he dewivewed him up
that he might be swain. >w<

Mosiah 17:13
 13 And it came to pass that they took him and bound him, and
scouwged his skin with faggots, yea, even unto death. ^w^

Mosiah 17:14
 14 And nyow when the fwames began to scowch him, he cwied unto
them, saying:

Mosiah 17:15
 15 Behowd, even as ye have donye unto me, so shaww it come to
pass that thy seed shaww cause that many shaww suffew the pains
that I do suffew, even the pains of death by fiwe; and this
because they bewieve in the sawvation of the Wowd theiw God. >w<

Mosiah 17:16
 16 And it wiww come to pass that ye shaww be affwicted with aww
mannyew of diseases because of youw inyiquities. ^w^

Mosiah 17:17
 17 Yea, and ye shaww be smitten on evewy hand, and shaww be
dwiven and scattewed to and fwo, even as a wiwd fwock is dwiven
by wiwd and fewocious beasts. UwU

Mosiah 17:18
 18 And in that day ye shaww be hunted, and ye shaww be taken by
the hand of youw enyemies, and then ye shaww suffew, as I suffew,
the pains of death by fiwe. ^w^

Mosiah 17:19
 19 Thus God executeth vengeance upon those that destwoy his
peopwe. O God, weceive my souw. UwU

Mosiah 17:20
 20 And nyow, when Abinyadi had said these wowds, he feww, having
suffewed death by fiwe; yea, having been put to death because he
wouwd nyot deny the commandments of God, having seawed the twuth
of his wowds by his death. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 18
Chaptew 18

Mosiah 18:1
 1 And nyow, it came to pass that Awma, who had fwed fwom the
sewvants of king Nyoah, wepented of his sins and inyiquities, and
went about pwivatewy among the peopwe, and began to teach the
wowds of Abinyadi--

Mosiah 18:2
 2 Yea, concewnying that which was to come, and awso concewnying
the wesuwwection of the dead, and the wedemption of the peopwe,
which was to be bwought to pass thwough the powew, and
suffewings, and death of Chwist, and his wesuwwection and
ascension into heaven. ;;w;;

Mosiah 18:3
 3 And as many as wouwd heaw his wowd he did teach. UwU And he
taught them pwivatewy, that it might nyot come to the knyowwedge of
the king. And many did bewieve his wowds. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 18:4
 4 And it came to pass that as many as did bewieve him did go
fowth to a pwace which was cawwed Mowmon, having weceived its
nyame fwom the king, being in the bowdews of the wand having been
infested, by times ow at seasons, by wiwd beasts. ^w^

Mosiah 18:5
 5 Nyow, thewe was in Mowmon a fountain of puwe watew, and Awma
wesowted thithew, thewe being nyeaw the watew a thicket of smaww
twees, whewe he did hide himsewf in the daytime fwom the seawches
of the king. ^w^

Mosiah 18:6
 6 And it came to pass that as many as bewieved him went thithew
to heaw his wowds. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 18:7
 7 And it came to pass aftew many days thewe wewe a goodwy nyumbew
gathewed togethew at the pwace of Mowmon, to heaw the wowds of
Awma. ;;w;; Yea, aww wewe gathewed togethew that bewieved on his wowd,
to heaw him. >w< And he did teach them, and did pweach unto them
wepentance, and wedemption, and faith on the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 18:8
 8 And it came to pass that he said unto them: Behowd, hewe awe
the watews of Mowmon (fow thus wewe they cawwed) and nyow, as ye
awe desiwous to come into the fowd of God, and to be cawwed his
peopwe, and awe wiwwing to beaw onye anyothew's buwdens, that they
may be wight;

Mosiah 18:9
 9 Yea, and awe wiwwing to mouwn with those that mouwn; yea, and
comfowt those that stand in nyeed of comfowt, and to stand as
witnyesses of God at aww times and in aww things, and in aww
pwaces that ye may be in, even untiw death, that ye may be
wedeemed of God, and be nyumbewed with those of the fiwst
wesuwwection, that ye may have etewnyaw wife--

Mosiah 18:10
 10 Nyow I say unto you, if this be the desiwe of youw heawts,
what have you against being baptized in the nyame of the Wowd, as
a witnyess befowe him that ye have entewed into a covenyant with
him, that ye wiww sewve him and keep his commandments, that he
may pouw out his Spiwit mowe abundantwy upon you? owo

Mosiah 18:11
 11 And nyow when the peopwe had heawd these wowds, they cwapped
theiw hands fow joy, and excwaimed: This is the desiwe of ouw
heawts. >w<

Mosiah 18:12
 12 And nyow it came to pass that Awma took Hewam, he being onye of
the fiwst, and went and stood fowth in the watew, and cwied,
saying: O Wowd, pouw out thy Spiwit upon thy sewvant, that he may
do this wowk with howinyess of heawt. UwU

Mosiah 18:13
 13 And when he had said these wowds, the Spiwit of the Wowd was
upon him, and he said: Hewam, I baptize thee, having authowity
fwom the Awmighty God, as a testimony that ye have entewed into a
covenyant to sewve him untiw you awe dead as to the mowtaw body;
and may the Spiwit of the Wowd be pouwed out upon you; and may he
gwant unto you etewnyaw wife, thwough the wedemption of Chwist,
whom he has pwepawed fwom the foundation of the wowwd. ^w^

Mosiah 18:14
 14 And aftew Awma had said these wowds, both Awma and Hewam wewe
buwied in the watew; and they awose and came fowth out of the
watew wejoicing, being fiwwed with the Spiwit. UwU

Mosiah 18:15
 15 And again, Awma took anyothew, and went fowth a second time
into the watew, and baptized him accowding to the fiwst, onwy he
did nyot buwy himsewf again in the watew. UwU

Mosiah 18:16
 16 And aftew this mannyew he did baptize evewy onye that went
fowth to the pwace of Mowmon; and they wewe in nyumbew about two
hundwed and fouw souws; yea, and they wewe baptized in the watews
of Mowmon, and wewe fiwwed with the gwace of God. ^w^

Mosiah 18:17
 17 And they wewe cawwed the chuwch of God, ow the chuwch of
Chwist, fwom that time fowwawd. ;;w;; And it came to pass that
whosoevew was baptized by the powew and authowity of God was
added to his chuwch. ;;w;;

Mosiah 18:18
 18 And it came to pass that Awma, having authowity fwom God,
owdainyed pwiests; even onye pwiest to evewy fifty of theiw nyumbew
did he owdain to pweach unto them, and to teach them concewnying
the things pewtainying to the kingdom of God. UwU

Mosiah 18:19
 19 And he commanded them that they shouwd teach nyothing save it
wewe the things which he had taught, and which had been spoken by
the mouth of the howy pwophets. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 18:20
 20 Yea, even he commanded them that they shouwd pweach nyothing
save it wewe wepentance and faith on the Wowd, who had wedeemed
his peopwe. ;;w;;

Mosiah 18:21
 21 And he commanded them that thewe shouwd be nyo contention onye
with anyothew, but that they shouwd wook fowwawd with onye eye,
having onye faith and onye baptism, having theiw heawts knyit
togethew in unyity and in wove onye towawds anyothew. UwU

Mosiah 18:22
 22 And thus he commanded them to pweach. >w< And thus they became
the chiwdwen of God. UwU

Mosiah 18:23
 23 And he commanded them that they shouwd obsewve the sabbath
day, and keep it howy, and awso evewy day they shouwd give thanks
to the Wowd theiw God. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 18:24
 24 And he awso commanded them that the pwiests whom he had
owdainyed shouwd wabow with theiw own hands fow theiw suppowt. >w<

Mosiah 18:25
 25 And thewe was onye day in evewy week that was set apawt that
they shouwd gathew themsewves togethew to teach the peopwe, and
to wowship the Wowd theiw God, and awso, as often as it was in
theiw powew, to assembwe themsewves togethew. >w<

Mosiah 18:26
 26 And the pwiests wewe nyot to depend upon the peopwe fow theiw
suppowt; but fow theiw wabow they wewe to weceive the gwace of
God, that they might wax stwong in the Spiwit, having the
knyowwedge of God, that they might teach with powew and authowity
fwom God. ^w^

Mosiah 18:27
 27 And again Awma commanded that the peopwe of the chuwch shouwd
impawt of theiw substance, evewy onye accowding to that which he
had; if he have mowe abundantwy he shouwd impawt mowe abundantwy;
and of him that had but wittwe, but wittwe shouwd be wequiwed;
and to him that had nyot shouwd be given. UwU

Mosiah 18:28
 28 And thus they shouwd impawt of theiw substance of theiw own
fwee wiww and good desiwes towawds God, and to those pwiests that
stood in nyeed, yea, and to evewy nyeedy, nyaked souw. ^w^

Mosiah 18:29
 29 And this he said unto them, having been commanded of God; and
they did wawk upwightwy befowe God, impawting to onye anyothew both
tempowawwy and spiwituawwy accowding to theiw nyeeds and theiw
wants. UwU

Mosiah 18:30
 30 And nyow it came to pass that aww this was donye in Mowmon,
yea, by the watews of Mowmon, in the fowest that was nyeaw the
watews of Mowmon; yea, the pwace of Mowmon, the watews of Mowmon,
the fowest of Mowmon, how beautifuw awe they to the eyes of them
who thewe came to the knyowwedge of theiw Wedeemew; yea, and how
bwessed awe they, fow they shaww sing to his pwaise fowevew. ;;w;;

Mosiah 18:31
 31 And these things wewe donye in the bowdews of the wand, that
they might nyot come to the knyowwedge of the king. >w<

Mosiah 18:32
 32 But behowd, it came to pass that the king, having discovewed
a movement among the peopwe, sent his sewvants to watch them. ;;w;;
Thewefowe on the day that they wewe assembwing themsewves
togethew to heaw the wowd of the Wowd they wewe discovewed unto
the king. >w<

Mosiah 18:33
 33 And nyow the king said that Awma was stiwwing up the peopwe to
webewwion against him; thewefowe he sent his awmy to destwoy
them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 18:34
 34 And it came to pass that Awma and the peopwe of the Wowd wewe
appwised of the coming of the king's awmy; thewefowe they took
theiw tents and theiw famiwies and depawted into the wiwdewnyess. UwU

Mosiah 18:35
 35 And they wewe in nyumbew about fouw hundwed and fifty souws. ^w^

Mosiah 19
Chaptew 19

Mosiah 19:1
 1 And it came to pass that the awmy of the king wetuwnyed, having
seawched in vain fow the peopwe of the Wowd. ^w^

Mosiah 19:2
 2 And nyow behowd, the fowces of the king wewe smaww, having been
weduced, and thewe began to be a division among the wemaindew of
the peopwe. ^w^

Mosiah 19:3
 3 And the wessew pawt began to bweathe out thweatenyings against
the king, and thewe began to be a gweat contention among them. UwU

Mosiah 19:4
 4 And nyow thewe was a man among them whose nyame was Gideon, and
he being a stwong man and an enyemy to the king, thewefowe he dwew
his swowd, and swowe in his wwath that he wouwd sway the king. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:5
 5 And it came to pass that he fought with the king; and when the
king saw that he was about to ovewpowew him, he fwed and wan and
got upon the towew which was nyeaw the tempwe. UwU

Mosiah 19:6
 6 And Gideon puwsued aftew him and was about to get upon the
towew to sway the king, and the king cast his eyes wound about
towawds the wand of Shemwon, and behowd, the awmy of the
Wamanyites wewe within the bowdews of the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 19:7
 7 And nyow the king cwied out in the anguish of his souw, saying:
Gideon, spawe me, fow the Wamanyites awe upon us, and they wiww
destwoy us; yea, they wiww destwoy my peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:8
 8 And nyow the king was nyot so much concewnyed about his peopwe as
he was about his own wife; nyevewthewess, Gideon did spawe his
wife. ^w^

Mosiah 19:9
 9 And the king commanded the peopwe that they shouwd fwee befowe
the Wamanyites, and he himsewf did go befowe them, and they did
fwee into the wiwdewnyess, with theiw women and theiw chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:10
 10 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did puwsue them, and
did ovewtake them, and began to sway them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 19:11
 11 Nyow it came to pass that the king commanded them that aww the
men shouwd weave theiw wives and theiw chiwdwen, and fwee befowe
the Wamanyites. UwU

Mosiah 19:12
 12 Nyow thewe wewe many that wouwd nyot weave them, but had wathew
stay and pewish with them. ;;w;; And the west weft theiw wives and
theiw chiwdwen and fwed. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:13
 13 And it came to pass that those who tawwied with theiw wives
and theiw chiwdwen caused that theiw faiw daughtews shouwd stand
fowth and pwead with the Wamanyites that they wouwd nyot sway them. UwU

Mosiah 19:14
 14 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites had compassion on
them, fow they wewe chawmed with the beauty of theiw women. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:15
 15 Thewefowe the Wamanyites did spawe theiw wives, and took them
captives and cawwied them back to the wand of Nyephi, and gwanted
unto them that they might possess the wand, undew the conditions
that they wouwd dewivew up king Nyoah into the hands of the
Wamanyites, and dewivew up theiw pwopewty, even onye hawf of aww
they possessed, onye hawf of theiw gowd, and theiw siwvew, and aww
theiw pwecious things, and thus they shouwd pay twibute to the
king of the Wamanyites fwom yeaw to yeaw. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:16
 16 And nyow thewe was onye of the sons of the king among those
that wewe taken captive, whose nyame was Wimhi. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:17
 17 And nyow Wimhi was desiwous that his fathew shouwd nyot be
destwoyed; nyevewthewess, Wimhi was nyot ignyowant of the inyiquities
of his fathew, he himsewf being a just man. ^w^

Mosiah 19:18
 18 And it came to pass that Gideon sent men into the wiwdewnyess
secwetwy, to seawch fow the king and those that wewe with him. (´・ω・\`)
And it came to pass that they met the peopwe in the wiwdewnyess,
aww save the king and his pwiests. ;;w;;

Mosiah 19:19
 19 Nyow they had swown in theiw heawts that they wouwd wetuwn to
the wand of Nyephi, and if theiw wives and theiw chiwdwen wewe
swain, and awso those that had tawwied with them, that they wouwd
seek wevenge, and awso pewish with them. UwU

Mosiah 19:20
 20 And the king commanded them that they shouwd nyot wetuwn; and
they wewe angwy with the king, and caused that he shouwd suffew,
even unto death by fiwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:21
 21 And they wewe about to take the pwiests awso and put them to
death, and they fwed befowe them. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 19:22
 22 And it came to pass that they wewe about to wetuwn to the
wand of Nyephi, and they met the men of Gideon. UwU And the men of
Gideon towd them of aww that had happenyed to theiw wives and
theiw chiwdwen; and that the Wamanyites had gwanted unto them that
they might possess the wand by paying a twibute to the Wamanyites
of onye hawf of aww they possessed. ^w^

Mosiah 19:23
 23 And the peopwe towd the men of Gideon that they had swain the
king, and his pwiests had fwed fwom them fawthew into the
wiwdewnyess. UwU

Mosiah 19:24
 24 And it came to pass that aftew they had ended the cewemony,
that they wetuwnyed to the wand of Nyephi, wejoicing, because theiw
wives and theiw chiwdwen wewe nyot swain; and they towd Gideon
what they had donye to the king. ;;w;;

Mosiah 19:25
 25 And it came to pass that the king of the Wamanyites made an
oath unto them, that his peopwe shouwd nyot sway them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:26
 26 And awso Wimhi, being the son of the king, having the kingdom
confewwed upon him by the peopwe, made oath unto the king of the
Wamanyites that his peopwe shouwd pay twibute unto him, even onye
hawf of aww they possessed. ^w^

Mosiah 19:27
 27 And it came to pass that Wimhi began to estabwish the kingdom
and to estabwish peace among his peopwe. >w<

Mosiah 19:28
 28 And the king of the Wamanyites set guawds wound about the
wand, that he might keep the peopwe of Wimhi in the wand, that
they might nyot depawt into the wiwdewnyess; and he did suppowt his
guawds out of the twibute which he did weceive fwom the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 19:29
 29 And nyow king Wimhi did have continyuaw peace in his kingdom
fow the space of two yeaws, that the Wamanyites did nyot mowest
them nyow seek to destwoy them. >w<

Mosiah 20
Chaptew 20

Mosiah 20:1
 1 Nyow thewe was a pwace in Shemwon whewe the daughtews of the
Wamanyites did gathew themsewves togethew to sing, and to dance,
and to make themsewves mewwy. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 20:2
 2 And it came to pass that thewe was onye day a smaww nyumbew of
them gathewed togethew to sing and to dance. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 20:3
 3 And nyow the pwiests of king Nyoah, being ashamed to wetuwn to
the city of Nyephi, yea, and awso feawing that the peopwe wouwd
sway them, thewefowe they duwst nyot wetuwn to theiw wives and
theiw chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 20:4
 4 And having tawwied in the wiwdewnyess, and having discovewed
the daughtews of the Wamanyites, they waid and watched them;

Mosiah 20:5
 5 And when thewe wewe but few of them gathewed togethew to
dance, they came fowth out of theiw secwet pwaces and took them
and cawwied them into the wiwdewnyess; yea, twenty and fouw of the
daughtews of the Wamanyites they cawwied into the wiwdewnyess. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 20:6
 6 And it came to pass that when the Wamanyites found that theiw
daughtews had been missing, they wewe angwy with the peopwe of
Wimhi, fow they thought it was the peopwe of Wimhi. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 20:7
 7 Thewefowe they sent theiw awmies fowth; yea, even the king
himsewf went befowe his peopwe; and they went up to the wand of
Nyephi to destwoy the peopwe of Wimhi. ;;w;;

Mosiah 20:8
 8 And nyow Wimhi had discovewed them fwom the towew, even aww
theiw pwepawations fow waw did he discovew; thewefowe he gathewed
his peopwe togethew, and waid wait fow them in the fiewds and in
the fowests. >w<

Mosiah 20:9
 9 And it came to pass that when the Wamanyites had come up, that
the peopwe of Wimhi began to faww upon them fwom theiw waiting
pwaces, and began to sway them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 20:10
 10 And it came to pass that the battwe became exceedingwy sowe,
fow they fought wike wions fow theiw pwey. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 20:11
 11 And it came to pass that the peopwe of Wimhi began to dwive
the Wamanyites befowe them; yet they wewe nyot hawf so nyumewous as
the Wamanyites. >w< But they fought fow theiw wives, and fow theiw
wives, and fow theiw chiwdwen; thewefowe they exewted themsewves
and wike dwagons did they fight. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 20:12
 12 And it came to pass that they found the king of the Wamanyites
among the nyumbew of theiw dead; yet he was nyot dead, having been
wounded and weft upon the gwound, so speedy was the fwight of his
peopwe. UwU

Mosiah 20:13
 13 And they took him and bound up his wounds, and bwought him
befowe Wimhi, and said: Behowd, hewe is the king of the
Wamanyites; he having weceived a wound has fawwen among theiw
dead, and they have weft him; and behowd, we have bwought him
befowe you; and nyow wet us sway him. >w<

Mosiah 20:14
 14 But Wimhi said unto them: Ye shaww nyot sway him, but bwing
him hithew that I may see him. And they bwought him. >w< And Wimhi
said unto him: What cause have ye to come up to waw against my
peopwe? owo Behowd, my peopwe have nyot bwoken the oath that I made
unto you; thewefowe, why shouwd ye bweak the oath which ye made
unto my peopwe? owo

Mosiah 20:15
 15 And nyow the king said: I have bwoken the oath because thy
peopwe did cawwy away the daughtews of my peopwe; thewefowe, in
my angew I did cause my peopwe to come up to waw against thy
peopwe. >w<

Mosiah 20:16
 16 And nyow Wimhi had heawd nyothing concewnying this mattew;
thewefowe he said: I wiww seawch among my peopwe and whosoevew
has donye this thing shaww pewish. UwU Thewefowe he caused a seawch
to be made among his peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 20:17
 17 Nyow when Gideon had heawd these things, he being the king's
captain, he went fowth and said unto the king: I pway thee
fowbeaw, and do nyot seawch this peopwe, and way nyot this thing to
theiw chawge. ;;w;;

Mosiah 20:18
 18 Fow do ye nyot wemembew the pwiests of thy fathew, whom this
peopwe sought to destwoy? And awe they nyot in the wiwdewnyess? owo
And awe nyot they the onyes who have stowen the daughtews of the
Wamanyites? owo

Mosiah 20:19
 19 And nyow, behowd, and teww the king of these things, that he
may teww his peopwe that they may be pacified towawds us; fow
behowd they awe awweady pwepawing to come against us; and behowd
awso thewe awe but few of us. >w<

Mosiah 20:20
 20 And behowd, they come with theiw nyumewous hosts; and except
the king doth pacify them towawds us we must pewish. UwU

Mosiah 20:21
 21 Fow awe nyot the wowds of Abinyadi fuwfiwwed, which he
pwophesied against us--and aww this because we wouwd nyot heawken
unto the wowds of the Wowd, and tuwn fwom ouw inyiquities? owo

Mosiah 20:22
 22 And nyow wet us pacify the king, and we fuwfiw the oath which
we have made unto him; fow it is bettew that we shouwd be in
bondage than that we shouwd wose ouw wives; thewefowe, wet us put
a stop to the shedding of so much bwood. ;;w;;

Mosiah 20:23
 23 And nyow Wimhi towd the king aww the things concewnying his
fathew, and the pwiests that had fwed into the wiwdewnyess, and
attwibuted the cawwying away of theiw daughtews to them. UwU

Mosiah 20:24
 24 And it came to pass that the king was pacified towawds his
peopwe; and he said unto them: Wet us go fowth to meet my peopwe,
without awms; and I sweaw unto you with an oath that my peopwe
shaww nyot sway thy peopwe. ^w^

Mosiah 20:25
 25 And it came to pass that they fowwowed the king, and went
fowth without awms to meet the Wamanyites. ;;w;; And it came to pass
that they did meet the Wamanyites; and the king of the Wamanyites
did bow himsewf down befowe them, and did pwead in behawf of the
peopwe of Wimhi. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 20:26
 26 And when the Wamanyites saw the peopwe of Wimhi, that they
wewe without awms, they had compassion on them and wewe pacified
towawds them, and wetuwnyed with theiw king in peace to theiw own
wand. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 21
Chaptew 21

Mosiah 21:1
 1 And it came to pass that Wimhi and his peopwe wetuwnyed to the
city of Nyephi, and began to dweww in the wand again in peace. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 21:2
 2 And it came to pass that aftew many days the Wamanyites began
again to be stiwwed up in angew against the Nyephites, and they
began to come into the bowdews of the wand wound about. ^w^

Mosiah 21:3
 3 Nyow they duwst nyot sway them, because of the oath which theiw
king had made unto Wimhi; but they wouwd smite them on theiw
cheeks, and exewcise authowity ovew them; and began to put heavy
buwdens upon theiw backs, and dwive them as they wouwd a dumb
ass--

Mosiah 21:4
 4 Yea, aww this was donye that the wowd of the Wowd might be
fuwfiwwed. UwU

Mosiah 21:5
 5 And nyow the affwictions of the Nyephites wewe gweat, and thewe
was nyo way that they couwd dewivew themsewves out of theiw hands,
fow the Wamanyites had suwwounded them on evewy side. ^w^

Mosiah 21:6
 6 And it came to pass that the peopwe began to muwmuw with the
king because of theiw affwictions; and they began to be desiwous
to go against them to battwe. ;;w;; And they did affwict the king
sowewy with theiw compwaints; thewefowe he gwanted unto them that
they shouwd do accowding to theiw desiwes. >w<

Mosiah 21:7
 7 And they gathewed themsewves togethew again, and put on theiw
awmow, and went fowth against the Wamanyites to dwive them out of
theiw wand. ^w^

Mosiah 21:8
 8 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did beat them, and
dwove them back, and swew many of them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 21:9
 9 And nyow thewe was a gweat mouwnying and wamentation among the
peopwe of Wimhi, the widow mouwnying fow hew husband, the son and
the daughtew mouwnying fow theiw fathew, and the bwothews fow
theiw bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 21:10
 10 Nyow thewe wewe a gweat many widows in the wand, and they did
cwy mightiwy fwom day to day, fow a gweat feaw of the Wamanyites
had come upon them. ^w^

Mosiah 21:11
 11 And it came to pass that theiw continyuaw cwies did stiw up
the wemaindew of the peopwe of Wimhi to angew against the
Wamanyites; and they went again to battwe, but they wewe dwiven
back again, suffewing much woss. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 21:12
 12 Yea, they went again even the thiwd time, and suffewed in the
wike mannyew; and those that wewe nyot swain wetuwnyed again to the
city of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 21:13
 13 And they did humbwe themsewves even to the dust, subjecting
themsewves to the yoke of bondage, submitting themsewves to be
smitten, and to be dwiven to and fwo, and buwdenyed, accowding to
the desiwes of theiw enyemies. >w<

Mosiah 21:14
 14 And they did humbwe themsewves even in the depths of
humiwity; and they did cwy mightiwy to God; yea, even aww the day
wong did they cwy unto theiw God that he wouwd dewivew them out
of theiw affwictions. ^w^

Mosiah 21:15
 15 And nyow the Wowd was swow to heaw theiw cwy because of theiw
inyiquities; nyevewthewess the Wowd did heaw theiw cwies, and began
to soften the heawts of the Wamanyites that they began to ease
theiw buwdens; yet the Wowd did nyot see fit to dewivew them out
of bondage. ;;w;;

Mosiah 21:16
 16 And it came to pass that they began to pwospew by degwees in
the wand, and began to waise gwain mowe abundantwy, and fwocks,
and hewds, that they did nyot suffew with hungew. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 21:17
 17 Nyow thewe was a gweat nyumbew of women, mowe than thewe was of
men; thewefowe king Wimhi commanded that evewy man shouwd impawt
to the suppowt of the widows and theiw chiwdwen, that they might
nyot pewish with hungew; and this they did because of the
gweatnyess of theiw nyumbew that had been swain. ;;w;;

Mosiah 21:18
 18 Nyow the peopwe of Wimhi kept togethew in a body as much as it
was possibwe, and secuwed theiw gwain and theiw fwocks;

Mosiah 21:19
 19 And the king himsewf did nyot twust his pewson without the
wawws of the city, unwess he took his guawds with him, feawing
that he might by some means faww into the hands of the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Mosiah 21:20
 20 And he caused that his peopwe shouwd watch the wand wound
about, that by some means they might take those pwiests that fwed
into the wiwdewnyess, who had stowen the daughtews of the
Wamanyites, and that had caused such a gweat destwuction to come
upon them. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 21:21
 21 Fow they wewe desiwous to take them that they might punyish
them; fow they had come into the wand of Nyephi by nyight, and
cawwied off theiw gwain and many of theiw pwecious things;
thewefowe they waid wait fow them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 21:22
 22 And it came to pass that thewe was nyo mowe distuwbance
between the Wamanyites and the peopwe of Wimhi, even untiw the
time that Ammon and his bwethwen came into the wand. UwU

Mosiah 21:23
 23 And the king having been without the gates of the city with
his guawd, discovewed Ammon and his bwethwen; and supposing them
to be pwiests of Nyoah thewefowe he caused that they shouwd be
taken, and bound, and cast into pwison. (´・ω・\`) And had they been the
pwiests of Nyoah he wouwd have caused that they shouwd be put to
death. >w<

Mosiah 21:24
 24 But when he found that they wewe nyot, but that they wewe his
bwethwen, and had come fwom the wand of Zawahemwa, he was fiwwed
with exceedingwy gweat joy. >w<

Mosiah 21:25
 25 Nyow king Wimhi had sent, pwevious to the coming of Ammon, a
smaww nyumbew of men to seawch fow the wand of Zawahemwa; but they
couwd nyot find it, and they wewe wost in the wiwdewnyess. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 21:26
 26 Nyevewthewess, they did find a wand which had been peopwed;
yea, a wand which was covewed with dwy bonyes; yea, a wand which
had been peopwed and which had been destwoyed; and they, having
supposed it to be the wand of Zawahemwa, wetuwnyed to the wand of
Nyephi, having awwived in the bowdews of the wand nyot many days
befowe the coming of Ammon. >w<

Mosiah 21:27
 27 And they bwought a wecowd with them, even a wecowd of the
peopwe whose bonyes they had found; and it was engwaven on pwates
of owe. ;;w;;

Mosiah 21:28
 28 And nyow Wimhi was again fiwwed with joy in weawnying fwom the
mouth of Ammon that king Mosiah had a gift fwom God, wheweby he
couwd intewpwet such engwavings; yea, and Ammon awso did wejoice. UwU

Mosiah 21:29
 29 Yet Ammon and his bwethwen wewe fiwwed with sowwow because so
many of theiw bwethwen had been swain;

Mosiah 21:30
 30 And awso that king Nyoah and his pwiests had caused the peopwe
to commit so many sins and inyiquities against God; and they awso
did mouwn fow the death of Abinyadi; and awso fow the depawtuwe of
Awma and the peopwe that went with him, who had fowmed a chuwch
of God thwough the stwength and powew of God, and faith on the
wowds which had been spoken by Abinyadi. ^w^

Mosiah 21:31
 31 Yea, they did mouwn fow theiw depawtuwe, fow they knyew nyot
whithew they had fwed. (´・ω・\`) Nyow they wouwd have gwadwy joinyed with
them, fow they themsewves had entewed into a covenyant with God to
sewve him and keep his commandments. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 21:32
 32 And nyow since the coming of Ammon, king Wimhi had awso
entewed into a covenyant with God, and awso many of his peopwe, to
sewve him and keep his commandments. ^w^

Mosiah 21:33
 33 And it came to pass that king Wimhi and many of his peopwe
wewe desiwous to be baptized; but thewe was nyonye in the wand that
had authowity fwom God. UwU And Ammon decwinyed doing this thing,
considewing himsewf an unwowthy sewvant. ^w^

Mosiah 21:34
 34 Thewefowe they did nyot at that time fowm themsewves into a
chuwch, waiting upon the Spiwit of the Wowd. ;;w;; Nyow they wewe
desiwous to become even as Awma and his bwethwen, who had fwed
into the wiwdewnyess. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 21:35
 35 They wewe desiwous to be baptized as a witnyess and a
testimony that they wewe wiwwing to sewve God with aww theiw
heawts; nyevewthewess they did pwowong the time; and an account of
theiw baptism shaww be given heweaftew. >w<

Mosiah 21:36
 36 And nyow aww the study of Ammon and his peopwe, and king Wimhi
and his peopwe, was to dewivew themsewves out of the hands of the
Wamanyites and fwom bondage. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 22
Chaptew 22

Mosiah 22:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that Ammon and king Wimhi began to
consuwt with the peopwe how they shouwd dewivew themsewves out of
bondage; and even they did cause that aww the peopwe shouwd
gathew themsewves togethew; and this they did that they might
have the voice of the peopwe concewnying the mattew. ^w^

Mosiah 22:2
 2 And it came to pass that they couwd find nyo way to dewivew
themsewves out of bondage, except it wewe to take theiw women and
chiwdwen, and theiw fwocks, and theiw hewds, and theiw tents, and
depawt into the wiwdewnyess; fow the Wamanyites being so nyumewous,
it was impossibwe fow the peopwe of Wimhi to contend with them,
thinking to dewivew themsewves out of bondage by the swowd. ;;w;;

Mosiah 22:3
 3 Nyow it came to pass that Gideon went fowth and stood befowe
the king, and said unto him: Nyow O king, thou hast hithewto
heawkenyed unto my wowds many times when we have been contending
with ouw bwethwen, the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 22:4
 4 And nyow O king, if thou hast nyot found me to be an
unpwofitabwe sewvant, ow if thou hast hithewto wistenyed to my
wowds in any degwee, and they have been of sewvice to thee, even
so I desiwe that thou wouwdst wisten to my wowds at this time,
and I wiww be thy sewvant and dewivew this peopwe out of bondage. >w<

Mosiah 22:5
 5 And the king gwanted unto him that he might speak. ;;w;; And Gideon
said unto him:

Mosiah 22:6
 6 Behowd the back pass, thwough the back waww, on the back side
of the city. >w< The Wamanyites, ow the guawds of the Wamanyites, by
nyight awe dwunken; thewefowe wet us send a pwocwamation among aww
this peopwe that they gathew togethew theiw fwocks and hewds,
that they may dwive them into the wiwdewnyess by nyight. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 22:7
 7 And I wiww go accowding to thy command and pay the wast
twibute of winye to the Wamanyites, and they wiww be dwunken; and
we wiww pass thwough the secwet pass on the weft of theiw camp
when they awe dwunken and asweep. ;;w;;

Mosiah 22:8
 8 Thus we wiww depawt with ouw women and ouw chiwdwen, ouw
fwocks, and ouw hewds into the wiwdewnyess; and we wiww twavew
awound the wand of Shiwom. UwU

Mosiah 22:9
 9 And it came to pass that the king heawkenyed unto the wowds of
Gideon. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 22:10
 10 And king Wimhi caused that his peopwe shouwd gathew theiw
fwocks togethew; and he sent the twibute of winye to the
Wamanyites; and he awso sent mowe winye, as a pwesent unto them;
and they did dwink fweewy of the winye which king Wimhi did send
unto them. ^w^

Mosiah 22:11
 11 And it came to pass that the peopwe of king Wimhi did depawt
by nyight into the wiwdewnyess with theiw fwocks and theiw hewds,
and they went wound about the wand of Shiwom in the wiwdewnyess,
and bent theiw couwse towawds the wand of Zawahemwa, being wed by
Ammon and his bwethwen. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 22:12
 12 And they had taken aww theiw gowd, and siwvew, and theiw
pwecious things, which they couwd cawwy, and awso theiw
pwovisions with them, into the wiwdewnyess; and they puwsued theiw
jouwnyey. ;;w;;

Mosiah 22:13
 13 And aftew being many days in the wiwdewnyess they awwived in
the wand of Zawahemwa, and joinyed Mosiah's peopwe, and became his
subjects. >w<

Mosiah 22:14
 14 And it came to pass that Mosiah weceived them with joy; and
he awso weceived theiw wecowds, and awso the wecowds which had
been found by the peopwe of Wimhi. >w<

Mosiah 22:15
 15 And nyow it came to pass when the Wamanyites had found that the
peopwe of Wimhi had depawted out of the wand by nyight, that they
sent an awmy into the wiwdewnyess to puwsue them;

Mosiah 22:16
 16 And aftew they had puwsued them two days, they couwd nyo
wongew fowwow theiw twacks; thewefowe they wewe wost in the
wiwdewnyess. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 23
Chaptew 23

Mosiah 23:1
 1 Nyow Awma, having been wawnyed of the Wowd that the awmies of
king Nyoah wouwd come upon them, and having made it knyown to his
peopwe, thewefowe they gathewed togethew theiw fwocks, and took
of theiw gwain, and depawted into the wiwdewnyess befowe the
awmies of king Nyoah. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 23:2
 2 And the Wowd did stwengthen them, that the peopwe of king Nyoah
couwd nyot ovewtake them to destwoy them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 23:3
 3 And they fwed eight days' jouwnyey into the wiwdewnyess. >w<

Mosiah 23:4
 4 And they came to a wand, yea, even a vewy beautifuw and
pweasant wand, a wand of puwe watew. ;;w;;

Mosiah 23:5
 5 And they pitched theiw tents, and began to tiww the gwound,
and began to buiwd buiwdings; yea, they wewe industwious, and did
wabow exceedingwy. ;;w;;

Mosiah 23:6
 6 And the peopwe wewe desiwous that Awma shouwd be theiw king,
fow he was bewoved by his peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 23:7
 7 But he said unto them: Behowd, it is nyot expedient that we
shouwd have a king; fow thus saith the Wowd: Ye shaww nyot esteem
onye fwesh above anyothew, ow onye man shaww nyot think himsewf above
anyothew; thewefowe I say unto you it is nyot expedient that ye
shouwd have a king. UwU

Mosiah 23:8
 8 Nyevewthewess, if it wewe possibwe that ye couwd awways have
just men to be youw kings it wouwd be weww fow you to have a
king. ^w^

Mosiah 23:9
 9 But wemembew the inyiquity of king Nyoah and his pwiests; and I
mysewf was caught in a snyawe, and did many things which wewe
abominyabwe in the sight of the Wowd, which caused me sowe
wepentance;

Mosiah 23:10
 10 Nyevewthewess, aftew much twibuwation, the Wowd did heaw my
cwies, and did answew my pwayews, and has made me an instwument
in his hands in bwinging so many of you to a knyowwedge of his
twuth. UwU

Mosiah 23:11
 11 Nyevewthewess, in this I do nyot gwowy, fow I am unwowthy to
gwowy of mysewf. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 23:12
 12 And nyow I say unto you, ye have been oppwessed by king Nyoah,
and have been in bondage to him and his pwiests, and have been
bwought into inyiquity by them; thewefowe ye wewe bound with the
bands of inyiquity. UwU

Mosiah 23:13
 13 And nyow as ye have been dewivewed by the powew of God out of
these bonds; yea, even out of the hands of king Nyoah and his
peopwe, and awso fwom the bonds of inyiquity, even so I desiwe
that ye shouwd stand fast in this wibewty whewewith ye have been
made fwee, and that ye twust nyo man to be a king ovew you. UwU

Mosiah 23:14
 14 And awso twust nyo onye to be youw teachew nyow youw minyistew,
except he be a man of God, wawking in his ways and keeping his
commandments. >w<

Mosiah 23:15
 15 Thus did Awma teach his peopwe, that evewy man shouwd wove
his nyeighbow as himsewf, that thewe shouwd be nyo contention among
them. UwU

Mosiah 23:16
 16 And nyow, Awma was theiw high pwiest, he being the foundew of
theiw chuwch. UwU

Mosiah 23:17
 17 And it came to pass that nyonye weceived authowity to pweach ow
to teach except it wewe by him fwom God. (・`ω\´・) Thewefowe he
consecwated aww theiw pwiests and aww theiw teachews; and nyonye
wewe consecwated except they wewe just men. UwU

Mosiah 23:18
 18 Thewefowe they did watch ovew theiw peopwe, and did nyouwish
them with things pewtainying to wighteousnyess. >w<

Mosiah 23:19
 19 And it came to pass that they began to pwospew exceedingwy in
the wand; and they cawwed the wand Hewam. >w<

Mosiah 23:20
 20 And it came to pass that they did muwtipwy and pwospew
exceedingwy in the wand of Hewam; and they buiwt a city, which
they cawwed the city of Hewam. ;;w;;

Mosiah 23:21
 21 Nyevewthewess the Wowd seeth fit to chasten his peopwe; yea,
he twieth theiw patience and theiw faith. >w<

Mosiah 23:22
 22 Nyevewthewess--whosoevew putteth his twust in him the same
shaww be wifted up at the wast day. UwU Yea, and thus it was with
this peopwe. UwU

Mosiah 23:23
 23 Fow behowd, I wiww show unto you that they wewe bwought into
bondage, and nyonye couwd dewivew them but the Wowd theiw God, yea,
even the God of Abwaham and Isaac and of Jacob. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 23:24
 24 And it came to pass that he did dewivew them, and he did show
fowth his mighty powew unto them, and gweat wewe theiw
wejoicings. UwU

Mosiah 23:25
 25 Fow behowd, it came to pass that whiwe they wewe in the wand
of Hewam, yea, in the city of Hewam, whiwe tiwwing the wand wound
about, behowd an awmy of the Wamanyites was in the bowdews of the
wand. ^w^

Mosiah 23:26
 26 Nyow it came to pass that the bwethwen of Awma fwed fwom theiw
fiewds, and gathewed themsewves togethew in the city of Hewam;
and they wewe much fwightenyed because of the appeawance of the
Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 23:27
 27 But Awma went fowth and stood among them, and exhowted them
that they shouwd nyot be fwightenyed, but that they shouwd wemembew
the Wowd theiw God and he wouwd dewivew them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 23:28
 28 Thewefowe they hushed theiw feaws, and began to cwy unto the
Wowd that he wouwd soften the heawts of the Wamanyites, that they
wouwd spawe them, and theiw wives, and theiw chiwdwen. >w<

Mosiah 23:29
 29 And it came to pass the the Wowd did soften the heawts of the
Wamanyites. >w< And Awma and his bwethwen went fowth and dewivewed
themsewves up into theiw hands; and the Wamanyites took possession
of the wand of Hewam. ;;w;;

Mosiah 23:30
 30 Nyow the awmies of the Wamanyites, which had fowwowed aftew the
peopwe of king Wimhi, had been wost in the wiwdewnyess fow many
days. ;;w;;

Mosiah 23:31
 31 And behowd, they had found those pwiests of king Nyoah, in a
pwace which they cawwed Amuwon; and they had begun to possess the
wand of Amuwon and had begun to tiww the gwound. ^w^

Mosiah 23:32
 32 Nyow the nyame of the weadew of those pwiests was Amuwon. >w<

Mosiah 23:33
 33 And it came to pass that Amuwon did pwead with the Wamanyites;
and he awso sent fowth theiw wives, who wewe the daughtews of the
Wamanyites, to pwead with theiw bwethwen, that they shouwd nyot
destwoy theiw husbands. ;;w;;

Mosiah 23:34
 34 And the Wamanyites had compassion on Amuwon and his bwethwen,
and did nyot destwoy them, because of theiw wives. ;;w;;

Mosiah 23:35
 35 And Amuwon and his bwethwen did join the Wamanyites, and they
wewe twavewing in the wiwdewnyess in seawch of the wand of Nyephi
when they discovewed the wand of Hewam, which was possessed by
Awma and his bwethwen. UwU

Mosiah 23:36
 36 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites pwomised unto Awma and
his bwethwen, that if they wouwd show them the way which wed to
the wand of Nyephi that they wouwd gwant unto them theiw wives and
theiw wibewty. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 23:37
 37 But aftew Awma had shown them the way that wed to the wand of
Nyephi the Wamanyites wouwd nyot keep theiw pwomise; but they set
guawds wound about the wand of Hewam, ovew Awma and his bwethwen. >w<

Mosiah 23:38
 38 And the wemaindew of them went to the wand of Nyephi; and a
pawt of them wetuwnyed to the wand of Hewam, and awso bwought with
them the wives and the chiwdwen of the guawds who had been weft
in the wand. ^w^

Mosiah 23:39
 39 And the king of the Wamanyites had gwanted unto Amuwon that he
shouwd be a king and a wuwew ovew his peopwe, who wewe in the
wand of Hewam; nyevewthewess he shouwd have nyo powew to do
anything contwawy to the wiww of the king of the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 24
Chaptew 24

Mosiah 24:1
 1 And it came to pass that Amuwon did gain favow in the eyes of
the king of the Wamanyites; thewefowe, the king of the Wamanyites
gwanted unto him and his bwethwen that they shouwd be appointed
teachews ovew his peopwe, yea, even ovew the peopwe who wewe in
the wand of Shemwon, and in the wand of Shiwom, and in the wand
of Amuwon. ^w^

Mosiah 24:2
 2 Fow the Wamanyites had taken possession of aww these wands;
thewefowe, the king of the Wamanyites had appointed kings ovew aww
these wands. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 24:3
 3 And nyow the nyame of the king of the Wamanyites was Waman, being
cawwed aftew the nyame of his fathew; and thewefowe he was cawwed
king Waman. And he was king ovew a nyumewous peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 24:4
 4 And he appointed teachews of the bwethwen of Amuwon in evewy
wand which was possessed by his peopwe; and thus the wanguage of
Nyephi began to be taught among aww the peopwe of the Wamanyites. ^w^

Mosiah 24:5
 5 And they wewe a peopwe fwiendwy onye with anyothew; nyevewthewess
they knyew nyot God; nyeithew did the bwethwen of Amuwon teach them
anything concewnying the Wowd theiw God, nyeithew the waw of Moses;
nyow did they teach them the wowds of Abinyadi;

Mosiah 24:6
 6 But they taught them that they shouwd keep theiw wecowd, and
that they might wwite onye to anyothew. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 24:7
 7 And thus the Wamanyites began to incwease in wiches, and began
to twade onye with anyothew and wax gweat, and began to be a
cunnying and a wise peopwe, as to the wisdom of the wowwd, yea, a
vewy cunnying peopwe, dewighting in aww mannyew of wickednyess and
pwundew, except it wewe among theiw own bwethwen. >w<

Mosiah 24:8
 8 And nyow it came to pass that Amuwon began to exewcise
authowity ovew Awma and his bwethwen, and began to pewsecute him,
and cause that his chiwdwen shouwd pewsecute theiw chiwdwen. ^w^

Mosiah 24:9
 9 Fow Amuwon knyew Awma, that he had been onye of the king's
pwiests, and that it was he that bewieved the wowds of Abinyadi
and was dwiven out befowe the king, and thewefowe he was wwoth
with him; fow he was subject to king Waman, yet he exewcised
authowity ovew them, and put tasks upon them, and put
task-mastews ovew them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 24:10
 10 And it came to pass that so gweat wewe theiw affwictions that
they began to cwy mightiwy to God. UwU

Mosiah 24:11
 11 And Amuwon commanded them that they shouwd stop theiw cwies;
and he put guawds ovew them to watch them, that whosoevew shouwd
be found cawwing upon God shouwd be put to death. ;;w;;

Mosiah 24:12
 12 And Awma and his peopwe did nyot waise theiw voices to the
Wowd theiw God, but did pouw out theiw heawts to him; and he did
knyow the thoughts of theiw heawts. ;;w;;

Mosiah 24:13
 13 And it came to pass that the voice of the Wowd came to them
in theiw affwictions, saying: Wift up youw heads and be of good
comfowt, fow I knyow of the covenyant which ye have made unto me;
and I wiww covenyant with my peopwe and dewivew them out of
bondage. >w<

Mosiah 24:14
 14 And I wiww awso ease the buwdens which awe put upon youw
shouwdews, that even you cannyot feew them upon youw backs, even
whiwe you awe in bondage; and this wiww I do that ye may stand as
witnyesses fow me heweaftew, and that ye may knyow of a suwety that
I, the Wowd God, do visit my peopwe in theiw affwictions. >w<

Mosiah 24:15
 15 And nyow it came to pass that the buwdens which wewe waid upon
Awma and his bwethwen wewe made wight; yea, the Wowd did
stwengthen them that they couwd beaw up theiw buwdens with ease,
and they did submit cheewfuwwy and with patience to aww the wiww
of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 24:16
 16 And it came to pass that so gweat was theiw faith and theiw
patience that the voice of the Wowd came unto them again, saying:
Be of good comfowt, fow on the mowwow I wiww dewivew you out of
bondage. >w<

Mosiah 24:17
 17 And he said unto Awma: Thou shawt go befowe this peopwe, and
I wiww go with thee and dewivew this peopwe out of bondage. >w<

Mosiah 24:18
 18 Nyow it came to pass that Awma and his peopwe in the
nyight-time gathewed theiw fwocks togethew, and awso of theiw
gwain; yea, even aww the nyight-time wewe they gathewing the
fwocks togethew. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 24:19
 19 And in the mownying the Wowd caused a deep sweep to come upon
the Wamanyites, yea, and aww theiw task-mastews wewe in a pwofound
sweep. ;;w;;

Mosiah 24:20
 20 And Awma and his peopwe depawted into the wiwdewnyess; and
when they had twavewed aww day they pitched theiw tents in a
vawwey, and they cawwed the vawwey Awma, because he wed theiw way
in the wiwdewnyess. UwU

Mosiah 24:21
 21 Yea, and in the vawwey of Awma they pouwed out theiw thanks
to God because he had been mewcifuw unto them, and eased theiw
buwdens, and had dewivewed them out of bondage; fow they wewe in
bondage, and nyonye couwd dewivew them except it wewe the Wowd
theiw God. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 24:22
 22 And they gave thanks to God, yea, aww theiw men and aww theiw
women and aww theiw chiwdwen that couwd speak wifted theiw voices
in the pwaises of theiw God. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 24:23
 23 And nyow the Wowd said unto Awma: Haste thee and get thou and
this peopwe out of this wand, fow the Wamanyites have awakenyed and
do puwsue thee; thewefowe get thee out of this wand, and I wiww
stop the Wamanyites in this vawwey that they come nyo fuwthew in
puwsuit of this peopwe. UwU

Mosiah 24:24
 24 And it came to pass that they depawted out of the vawwey, and
took theiw jouwnyey into the wiwdewnyess. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 24:25
 25 And aftew they had been in the wiwdewnyess twewve days they
awwived in the wand of Zawahemwa; and king Mosiah did awso
weceive them with joy. ;;w;;

Mosiah 25
Chaptew 25

Mosiah 25:1
 1 And nyow king Mosiah caused that aww the peopwe shouwd be
gathewed togethew. ^w^

Mosiah 25:2
 2 Nyow thewe wewe nyot so many of the chiwdwen of Nyephi, ow so
many of those who wewe descendants of Nyephi, as thewe wewe of the
peopwe of Zawahemwa, who was a descendant of Muwek, and those who
came with him into the wiwdewnyess. ^w^

Mosiah 25:3
 3 And thewe wewe nyot so many of the peopwe of Nyephi and of the
peopwe of Zawahemwa as thewe wewe of the Wamanyites; yea, they
wewe nyot hawf so nyumewous. ;;w;;

Mosiah 25:4
 4 And nyow aww the peopwe of Nyephi wewe assembwed togethew, and
awso aww the peopwe of Zawahemwa, and they wewe gathewed togethew
in two bodies. UwU

Mosiah 25:5
 5 And it came to pass that Mosiah did wead, and caused to be
wead, the wecowds of Zenyiff to his peopwe; yea, he wead the
wecowds of the peopwe of Zenyiff, fwom the time they weft the wand
of Zawahemwa untiw they wetuwnyed again. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 25:6
 6 And he awso wead the account of Awma and his bwethwen, and aww
theiw affwictions, fwom the time they weft the wand of Zawahemwa
untiw the time they wetuwnyed again. UwU

Mosiah 25:7
 7 And nyow, when Mosiah had made an end of weading the wecowds,
his peopwe who tawwied in the wand wewe stwuck with wondew and
amazement. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 25:8
 8 Fow they knyew nyot what to think; fow when they behewd those
that had been dewivewed out of bondage they wewe fiwwed with
exceedingwy gweat joy. ^w^

Mosiah 25:9
 9 And again, when they thought of theiw bwethwen who had been
swain by the Wamanyites they wewe fiwwed with sowwow, and even
shed many teaws of sowwow. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 25:10
 10 And again, when they thought of the immediate goodnyess of
God, and his powew in dewivewing Awma and his bwethwen out of the
hands of the Wamanyites and of bondage, they did waise theiw
voices and give thanks to God. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 25:11
 11 And again, when they thought upon the Wamanyites, who wewe
theiw bwethwen, of theiw sinfuw and powwuted state, they wewe
fiwwed with pain and anguish fow the wewfawe of theiw souws. ^w^

Mosiah 25:12
 12 And it came to pass that those who wewe the chiwdwen of
Amuwon and his bwethwen, who had taken to wife the daughtews of
the Wamanyites, wewe dispweased with the conduct of theiw fathews,
and they wouwd nyo wongew be cawwed by the nyames of theiw fathews,
thewefowe they took upon themsewves the nyame of Nyephi, that they
might be cawwed the chiwdwen of Nyephi and be nyumbewed among those
who wewe cawwed Nyephites. ;;w;;

Mosiah 25:13
 13 And nyow aww the peopwe of Zawahemwa wewe nyumbewed with the
Nyephites, and this because the kingdom had been confewwed upon
nyonye but those who wewe descendants of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 25:14
 14 And nyow it came to pass that when Mosiah had made an end of
speaking and weading to the peopwe, he desiwed that Awma shouwd
awso speak to the peopwe. ;;w;;

Mosiah 25:15
 15 And Awma did speak unto them, when they wewe assembwed
togethew in wawge bodies, and he went fwom onye body to anyothew,
pweaching unto the peopwe wepentance and faith on the Wowd. ^w^

Mosiah 25:16
 16 And he did exhowt the peopwe of Wimhi and his bwethwen, aww
those that had been dewivewed out of bondage, that they shouwd
wemembew that it was the Wowd that did dewivew them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 25:17
 17 And it came to pass that aftew Awma had taught the peopwe
many things, and had made an end of speaking to them, that king
Wimhi was desiwous that he might be baptized; and aww his peopwe
wewe desiwous that they might be baptized awso. ^w^

Mosiah 25:18
 18 Thewefowe, Awma did go fowth into the watew and did baptize
them; yea, he did baptize them aftew the mannyew he did his
bwethwen in the watews of Mowmon; yea, and as many as he did
baptize did bewong to the chuwch of God; and this because of
theiw bewief on the wowds of Awma. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 25:19
 19 And it came to pass that king Mosiah gwanted unto Awma that
he might estabwish chuwches thwoughout aww the wand of Zawahemwa;
and gave him powew to owdain pwiests and teachews ovew evewy
chuwch. ;;w;;

Mosiah 25:20
 20 Nyow this was donye because thewe wewe so many peopwe that they
couwd nyot aww be govewnyed by onye teachew; nyeithew couwd they aww
heaw the wowd of God in onye assembwy;

Mosiah 25:21
 21 Thewefowe they did assembwe themsewves togethew in diffewent
bodies, being cawwed chuwches; evewy chuwch having theiw pwiests
and theiw teachews, and evewy pwiest pweaching the wowd accowding
as it was dewivewed to him by the mouth of Awma. UwU

Mosiah 25:22
 22 And thus, nyotwithstanding thewe being many chuwches they wewe
aww onye chuwch, yea, even the chuwch of God; fow thewe was
nyothing pweached in aww the chuwches except it wewe wepentance
and faith in God. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 25:23
 23 And nyow thewe wewe seven chuwches in the wand of Zawahemwa. ;;w;;
And it came to pass that whosoevew wewe desiwous to take upon
them the nyame of Chwist, ow of God, they did join the chuwches of
God;

Mosiah 25:24
 24 And they wewe cawwed the peopwe of God. >w< And the Wowd did
pouw out his Spiwit upon them, and they wewe bwessed, and
pwospewed in the wand. ;;w;;

Mosiah 26
Chaptew 26

Mosiah 26:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass that thewe wewe many of the wising
genyewation that couwd nyot undewstand the wowds of king Benjamin,
being wittwe chiwdwen at the time he spake unto his peopwe; and
they did nyot bewieve the twadition of theiw fathews. ;;w;;

Mosiah 26:2
 2 They did nyot bewieve what had been said concewnying the
wesuwwection of the dead, nyeithew did they bewieve concewnying the
coming of Chwist. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 26:3
 3 And nyow because of theiw unbewief they couwd nyot undewstand
the wowd of God; and theiw heawts wewe hawdenyed. UwU

Mosiah 26:4
 4 And they wouwd nyot be baptized; nyeithew wouwd they join the
chuwch. >w< And they wewe a sepawate peopwe as to theiw faith, and
wemainyed so evew aftew, even in theiw cawnyaw and sinfuw state;
fow they wouwd nyot caww upon the Wowd theiw God. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 26:5
 5 And nyow in the weign of Mosiah they wewe nyot hawf so nyumewous
as the peopwe of God; but because of the dissensions among the
bwethwen they became mowe nyumewous. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 26:6
 6 Fow it came to pass that they did deceive many with theiw
fwattewing wowds, who wewe in the chuwch, and did cause them to
commit many sins; thewefowe it became expedient that those who
committed sin, that wewe in the chuwch, shouwd be admonyished by
the chuwch. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 26:7
 7 And it came to pass that they wewe bwought befowe the pwiests,
and dewivewed up unto the pwiests by the teachews; and the
pwiests bwought them befowe Awma, who was the high pwiest. >w<

Mosiah 26:8
 8 Nyow king Mosiah had given Awma the authowity ovew the chuwch. >w<

Mosiah 26:9
 9 And it came to pass that Awma did nyot knyow concewnying them;
but thewe wewe many witnyesses against them; yea, the peopwe stood
and testified of theiw inyiquity in abundance. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 26:10
 10 Nyow thewe had nyot any such thing happenyed befowe in the
chuwch; thewefowe Awma was twoubwed in his spiwit, and he caused
that they shouwd be bwought befowe the king. ^w^

Mosiah 26:11
 11 And he said unto the king: Behowd, hewe awe many whom we have
bwought befowe thee, who awe accused of theiw bwethwen; yea, and
they have been taken in divews inyiquities. ;;w;; And they do nyot
wepent of theiw inyiquities; thewefowe we have bwought them befowe
thee, that thou mayest judge them accowding to theiw cwimes. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 26:12
 12 But king Mosiah said unto Awma: Behowd, I judge them nyot;
thewefowe I dewivew them into thy hands to be judged. ^w^

Mosiah 26:13
 13 And nyow the spiwit of Awma was again twoubwed; and he went
and inquiwed of the Wowd what he shouwd do concewnying this
mattew, fow he feawed that he shouwd do wwong in the sight of
God. ;;w;;

Mosiah 26:14
 14 And it came to pass that aftew he had pouwed out his whowe
souw to God, the voice of the Wowd came to him, saying:

Mosiah 26:15
 15 Bwessed awt thou, Awma, and bwessed awe they who wewe
baptized in the watews of Mowmon. UwU Thou awt bwessed because of
thy exceeding faith in the wowds awonye of my sewvant Abinyadi. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 26:16
 16 And bwessed awe they because of theiw exceeding faith in the
wowds awonye which thou hast spoken unto them. >w<

Mosiah 26:17
 17 And bwessed awt thou because thou hast estabwished a chuwch
among this peopwe; and they shaww be estabwished, and they shaww
be my peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 26:18
 18 Yea, bwessed is this peopwe who awe wiwwing to beaw my nyame;
fow in my nyame shaww they be cawwed; and they awe minye. UwU

Mosiah 26:19
 19 And because thou hast inquiwed of me concewnying the
twansgwessow, thou awt bwessed. ^w^

Mosiah 26:20
 20 Thou awt my sewvant; and I covenyant with thee that thou shawt
have etewnyaw wife; and thou shawt sewve me and go fowth in my
nyame, and shawt gathew togethew my sheep. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 26:21
 21 And he that wiww heaw my voice shaww be my sheep; and him
shaww ye weceive into the chuwch, and him wiww I awso weceive. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 26:22
 22 Fow behowd, this is my chuwch; whosoevew is baptized shaww be
baptized unto wepentance. >w< And whomsoevew ye weceive shaww
bewieve in my nyame; and him wiww I fweewy fowgive. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 26:23
 23 Fow it is I that taketh upon me the sins of the wowwd; fow it
is I that hath cweated them; and it is I that gwanteth unto him
that bewieveth unto the end a pwace at my wight hand. UwU

Mosiah 26:24
 24 Fow behowd, in my nyame awe they cawwed; and if they knyow me
they shaww come fowth, and shaww have a pwace etewnyawwy at my
wight hand. ;;w;;

Mosiah 26:25
 25 And it shaww come to pass that when the second twump shaww
sound then shaww they that nyevew knyew me come fowth and shaww
stand befowe me. >w<

Mosiah 26:26
 26 And then shaww they knyow that I am the Wowd theiw God, that I
am theiw Wedeemew; but they wouwd nyot be wedeemed. ^w^

Mosiah 26:27
 27 And then I wiww confess unto them that I nyevew knyew them; and
they shaww depawt into evewwasting fiwe pwepawed fow the deviw
and his angews. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 26:28
 28 Thewefowe I say unto you, that he that wiww nyot heaw my
voice, the same shaww ye nyot weceive into my chuwch, fow him I
wiww nyot weceive at the wast day. UwU

Mosiah 26:29
 29 Thewefowe I say unto you, Go; and whosoevew twansgwesseth
against me, him shaww ye judge accowding to the sins which he has
committed; and if he confess his sins befowe thee and me, and
wepenteth in the sincewity of his heawt, him shaww ye fowgive,
and I wiww fowgive him awso. UwU

Mosiah 26:30
 30 Yea, and as often as my peopwe wepent wiww I fowgive them
theiw twespasses against me. ^w^

Mosiah 26:31
 31 And ye shaww awso fowgive onye anyothew youw twespasses; fow
vewiwy I say unto you, he that fowgiveth nyot his nyeighbow's
twespasses when he says that he wepents, the same hath bwought
himsewf undew condemnyation. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 26:32
 32 Nyow I say unto you, Go; and whosoevew wiww nyot wepent of his
sins the same shaww nyot be nyumbewed among my peopwe; and this
shaww be obsewved fwom this time fowwawd. ;;w;;

Mosiah 26:33
 33 And it came to pass when Awma had heawd these wowds he wwote
them down that he might have them, and that he might judge the
peopwe of that chuwch accowding to the commandments of God. >w<

Mosiah 26:34
 34 And it came to pass that Awma went and judged those that had
been taken in inyiquity, accowding to the wowd of the Wowd. UwU

Mosiah 26:35
 35 And whosoevew wepented of theiw sins and did confess them,
them he did nyumbew among the peopwe of the chuwch;

Mosiah 26:36
 36 And those that wouwd nyot confess theiw sins and wepent of
theiw inyiquity, the same wewe nyot nyumbewed among the peopwe of
the chuwch, and theiw nyames wewe bwotted out. ^w^

Mosiah 26:37
 37 And it came to pass that Awma did weguwate aww the affaiws of
the chuwch; and they began again to have peace and to pwospew
exceedingwy in the affaiws of the chuwch, wawking ciwcumspectwy
befowe God, weceiving many, and baptizing many. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 26:38
 38 And nyow aww these things did Awma and his fewwow wabowews do
who wewe ovew the chuwch, wawking in aww diwigence, teaching the
wowd of God in aww things, suffewing aww mannyew of affwictions,
being pewsecuted by aww those who did nyot bewong to the chuwch of
God. >w<

Mosiah 26:39
 39 And they did admonyish theiw bwethwen; and they wewe awso
admonyished, evewy onye by the wowd of God, accowding to his sins,
ow to the sins which he had committed, being commanded of God to
pway without ceasing, and to give thanks in aww things. UwU

Mosiah 27
Chaptew 27

Mosiah 27:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that the pewsecutions which wewe
infwicted on the chuwch by the unbewievews became so gweat that
the chuwch began to muwmuw, and compwain to theiw weadews
concewnying the mattew; and they did compwain to Awma. ^w^ And Awma
waid the case befowe theiw king, Mosiah. ;;w;; And Mosiah consuwted
with his pwiests. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 27:2
 2 And it came to pass that king Mosiah sent a pwocwamation
thwoughout the wand wound about that thewe shouwd nyot any
unbewievew pewsecute any of those who bewonged to the chuwch of
God. UwU

Mosiah 27:3
 3 And thewe was a stwict command thwoughout aww the chuwches
that thewe shouwd be nyo pewsecutions among them, that thewe
shouwd be an equawity among aww men;

Mosiah 27:4
 4 That they shouwd wet nyo pwide nyow haughtinyess distuwb theiw
peace; that evewy man shouwd esteem his nyeighbow as himsewf,
wabowing with theiw own hands fow theiw suppowt. ^w^

Mosiah 27:5
 5 Yea, and aww theiw pwiests and teachews shouwd wabow with
theiw own hands fow theiw suppowt, in aww cases save it wewe in
sicknyess, ow in much want; and doing these things, they did
abound in the gwace of God. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 27:6
 6 And thewe began to be much peace again in the wand; and the
peopwe began to be vewy nyumewous, and began to scattew abwoad
upon the face of the eawth, yea, on the nyowth and on the south,
on the east and on the west, buiwding wawge cities and viwwages
in aww quawtews of the wand. >w<

Mosiah 27:7
 7 And the Wowd did visit them and pwospew them, and they became
a wawge and weawthy peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 27:8
 8 Nyow the sons of Mosiah wewe nyumbewed among the unbewievews;
and awso onye of the sons of Awma was nyumbewed among them, he
being cawwed Awma, aftew his fathew; nyevewthewess, he became a
vewy wicked and an idowatwous man. (・`ω\´・) And he was a man of many
wowds, and did speak much fwattewy to the peopwe; thewefowe he
wed many of the peopwe to do aftew the mannyew of his inyiquities. >w<

Mosiah 27:9
 9 And he became a gweat hindewment to the pwospewity of the
chuwch of God; steawing away the heawts of the peopwe; causing
much dissension among the peopwe; giving a chance fow the enyemy
of God to exewcise his powew ovew them. ^w^

Mosiah 27:10
 10 And nyow it came to pass that whiwe he was going about to
destwoy the chuwch of God, fow he did go about secwetwy with the
sons of Mosiah seeking to destwoy the chuwch, and to wead astway
the peopwe of the Wowd, contwawy to the commandments of God, ow
even the king--

Mosiah 27:11
 11 And as I said unto you, as they wewe going about webewwing
against God, behowd, the angew of the Wowd appeawed unto them;
and he descended as it wewe in a cwoud; and he spake as it wewe
with a voice of thundew, which caused the eawth to shake upon
which they stood;

Mosiah 27:12
 12 And so gweat was theiw astonyishment, that they feww to the
eawth, and undewstood nyot the wowds which he spake unto them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 27:13
 13 Nyevewthewess he cwied again, saying: Awma, awise and stand
fowth, fow why pewsecutest thou the chuwch of God? owo Fow the Wowd
hath said: This is my chuwch, and I wiww estabwish it; and
nyothing shaww ovewthwow it, save it is the twansgwession of my
peopwe. >w<

Mosiah 27:14
 14 And again, the angew said: Behowd, the Wowd hath heawd the
pwayews of his peopwe, and awso the pwayews of his sewvant, Awma,
who is thy fathew; fow he has pwayed with much faith concewnying
thee that thou mightest be bwought to the knyowwedge of the twuth;
thewefowe, fow this puwpose have I come to convince thee of the
powew and authowity of God, that the pwayews of his sewvants
might be answewed accowding to theiw faith. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 27:15
 15 And nyow behowd, can ye dispute the powew of God? owo Fow behowd,
doth nyot my voice shake the eawth? owo And can ye nyot awso behowd me
befowe you? owo And I am sent fwom God. ;;w;;

Mosiah 27:16
 16 Nyow I say unto thee: Go, and wemembew the captivity of thy
fathews in the wand of Hewam, and in the wand of Nyephi; and
wemembew how gweat things he has donye fow them; fow they wewe in
bondage, and he has dewivewed them. (・`ω\´・) And nyow I say unto thee,
Awma, go thy way, and seek to destwoy the chuwch nyo mowe, that
theiw pwayews may be answewed, and this even if thou wiwt of
thysewf be cast off. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 27:17
 17 And nyow it came to pass that these wewe the wast wowds which
the angew spake unto Awma, and he depawted. ;;w;;

Mosiah 27:18
 18 And nyow Awma and those that wewe with him feww again to the
eawth, fow gweat was theiw astonyishment; fow with theiw own eyes
they had behewd an angew of the Wowd; and his voice was as
thundew, which shook the eawth; and they knyew that thewe was
nyothing save the powew of God that couwd shake the eawth and
cause it to twembwe as though it wouwd pawt asundew. ^w^

Mosiah 27:19
 19 And nyow the astonyishment of Awma was so gweat that he became
dumb, that he couwd nyot open his mouth; yea, and he became weak,
even that he couwd nyot move his hands; thewefowe he was taken by
those that wewe with him, and cawwied hewpwess, even untiw he was
waid befowe his fathew. ^w^

Mosiah 27:20
 20 And they weheawsed unto his fathew aww that had happenyed unto
them; and his fathew wejoiced, fow he knyew that it was the powew
of God. UwU

Mosiah 27:21
 21 And he caused that a muwtitude shouwd be gathewed togethew
that they might witnyess what the Wowd had donye fow his son, and
awso fow those that wewe with him. ;;w;;

Mosiah 27:22
 22 And he caused that the pwiests shouwd assembwe themsewves
togethew; and they began to fast, and to pway to the Wowd theiw
God that he wouwd open the mouth of Awma, that he might speak,
and awso that his wimbs might weceive theiw stwength--that the
eyes of the peopwe might be openyed to see and knyow of the
goodnyess and gwowy of God. ^w^

Mosiah 27:23
 23 And it came to pass aftew they had fasted and pwayed fow the
space of two days and two nyights, the wimbs of Awma weceived
theiw stwength, and he stood up and began to speak unto them,
bidding them to be of good comfowt:

Mosiah 27:24
 24 Fow, said he, I have wepented of my sins, and have been
wedeemed of the Wowd; behowd I am bown of the Spiwit. UwU

Mosiah 27:25
 25 And the Wowd said unto me: Mawvew nyot that aww mankind, yea,
men and women, aww nyations, kindweds, tongues and peopwe, must be
bown again; yea, bown of God, changed fwom theiw cawnyaw and
fawwen state, to a state of wighteousnyess, being wedeemed of God,
becoming his sons and daughtews;

Mosiah 27:26
 26 And thus they become nyew cweatuwes; and unwess they do this,
they can in nyowise inhewit the kingdom of God. ;;w;;

Mosiah 27:27
 27 I say unto you, unwess this be the case, they must be cast
off; and this I knyow, because I was wike to be cast off. >w<

Mosiah 27:28
 28 Nyevewthewess, aftew wading thwough much twibuwations,
wepenting nyigh unto death, the Wowd in mewcy hath seen fit to
snyatch me out of an evewwasting buwnying, and I am bown of God. UwU

Mosiah 27:29
 29 My souw hath been wedeemed fwom the gaww of bittewnyess and
bonds of inyiquity. >w< I was in the dawkest abyss; but nyow I behowd
the mawvewous wight of God. >w< My souw was wacked with etewnyaw
towment; but I am snyatched, and my souw is painyed nyo mowe. ^w^

Mosiah 27:30
 30 I wejected my Wedeemew, and denyied that which had been spoken
of by ouw fathews; but nyow that they may fowesee that he wiww
come, and that he wemembeweth evewy cweatuwe of his cweating, he
wiww make himsewf manyifest unto aww. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 27:31
 31 Yea, evewy knyee shaww bow, and evewy tongue confess befowe
him. (・`ω\´・) Yea, even at the wast day, when aww men shaww stand to be
judged of him, then shaww they confess that he is God; then shaww
they confess, who wive without God in the wowwd, that the
judgment of an evewwasting punyishment is just upon them; and they
shaww quake, and twembwe, and shwink benyeath the gwance of his
aww-seawching eye. ^w^

Mosiah 27:32
 32 And nyow it came to pass that Awma began fwom this time
fowwawd to teach the peopwe, and those who wewe with Awma at the
time the angew appeawed unto them, twavewing wound about thwough
aww the wand, pubwishing to aww the peopwe the things which they
had heawd and seen, and pweaching the wowd of God in much
twibuwation, being gweatwy pewsecuted by those who wewe
unbewievews, being smitten by many of them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 27:33
 33 But nyotwithstanding aww this, they did impawt much
consowation to the chuwch, confiwming theiw faith, and exhowting
them with wong-suffewing and much twavaiw to keep the
commandments of God. >w<

Mosiah 27:34
 34 And fouw of them wewe the sons of Mosiah; and theiw nyames
wewe Ammon, and Aawon, and Omnyew, and Himnyi; these wewe the nyames
of the sons of Mosiah. UwU

Mosiah 27:35
 35 And they twavewed thwoughout aww the wands of Zawahemwa, and
among aww the peopwe who wewe undew the weign of king Mosiah,
zeawouswy stwiving to wepaiw aww the injuwies which they had donye
to the chuwch, confessing aww theiw sins, and pubwishing aww the
things which they had seen, and expwainying the pwophecies and the
scwiptuwes to aww who desiwed to heaw them. UwU

Mosiah 27:36
 36 And thus they wewe instwuments in the hands of God in
bwinging many to the knyowwedge of the twuth, yea, to the
knyowwedge of theiw Wedeemew. ^w^

Mosiah 27:37
 37 And how bwessed awe they! (・`ω\´・) Fow they did pubwish peace; they
did pubwish good tidings of good; and they did decwawe unto the
peopwe that the Wowd weignyeth. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 28
Chaptew 28

Mosiah 28:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass that aftew the sons of Mosiah had donye aww
these things, they took a smaww nyumbew with them and wetuwnyed to
theiw fathew, the king, and desiwed of him that he wouwd gwant
unto them that they might, with these whom they had sewected, go
up to the wand of Nyephi that they might pweach the things which
they had heawd, and that they might impawt the wowd of God to
theiw bwethwen, the Wamanyites--

Mosiah 28:2
 2 That pewhaps they might bwing them to the knyowwedge of the
Wowd theiw God, and convince them of the inyiquity of theiw
fathews; and that pewhaps they might cuwe them of theiw hatwed
towawds the Nyephites, that they might awso be bwought to wejoice
in the Wowd theiw God, that they might become fwiendwy to onye
anyothew, and that thewe shouwd be nyo mowe contentions in aww the
wand which the Wowd theiw God had given them. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 28:3
 3 Nyow they wewe desiwous that sawvation shouwd be decwawed to
evewy cweatuwe, fow they couwd nyot beaw that any human souw
shouwd pewish; yea, even the vewy thoughts that any souw shouwd
enduwe endwess towment did cause them to quake and twembwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 28:4
 4 And thus did the Spiwit of the Wowd wowk upon them, fow they
wewe the vewy viwest of sinnyews. >w< And the Wowd saw fit in his
infinyite mewcy to spawe them; nyevewthewess they suffewed much
anguish of souw because of theiw inyiquities, suffewing much and
feawing that they shouwd be cast off fowevew. >w<

Mosiah 28:5
 5 And it came to pass that they did pwead with theiw fathew many
days that they might go up to the wand of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Mosiah 28:6
 6 And king Mosiah went and inquiwed of the Wowd if he shouwd wet
his sons go up among the Wamanyites to pweach the wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 28:7
 7 And the Wowd said unto Mosiah: Wet them go up, fow many shaww
bewieve on theiw wowds, and they shaww have etewnyaw wife; and I
wiww dewivew thy sons out of the hands of the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Mosiah 28:8
 8 And it came to pass that Mosiah gwanted that they might go and
do accowding to theiw wequest. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 28:9
 9 And they took theiw jouwnyey into the wiwdewnyess to go up to
pweach the wowd among the Wamanyites; and I shaww give an account
of theiw pwoceedings heweaftew. ^w^

Mosiah 28:10
 10 Nyow king Mosiah had nyo onye to confew the kingdom upon, fow
thewe was nyot any of his sons who wouwd accept of the kingdom. >w<

Mosiah 28:11
 11 Thewefowe he took the wecowds which wewe engwaven on the
pwates of bwass, and awso the pwates of Nyephi, and aww the things
which he had kept and pwesewved accowding to the commandments of
God, aftew having twanswated and caused to be wwitten the wecowds
which wewe on the pwates of gowd which had been found by the
peopwe of Wimhi, which wewe dewivewed to him by the hand of
Wimhi;

Mosiah 28:12
 12 And this he did because of the gweat anxiety of his peopwe;
fow they wewe desiwous beyond measuwe to knyow concewnying those
peopwe who had been destwoyed. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 28:13
 13 And nyow he twanswated them by the means of those two stonyes
which wewe fastenyed into the two wims of a bow. >w<

Mosiah 28:14
 14 Nyow these things wewe pwepawed fwom the beginnying, and wewe
handed down fwom genyewation to genyewation, fow the puwpose of
intewpweting wanguages;

Mosiah 28:15
 15 And they have been kept and pwesewved by the hand of the
Wowd, that he shouwd discovew to evewy cweatuwe who shouwd
possess the wand the inyiquities and abominyations of his peopwe;

Mosiah 28:16
 16 And whosoevew has these things is cawwed seew, aftew the
mannyew of owd times. ^w^

Mosiah 28:17
 17 Nyow aftew Mosiah had finyished twanswating these wecowds,
behowd, it gave an account of the peopwe who wewe destwoyed, fwom
the time that they wewe destwoyed back to the buiwding of the
gweat towew, at the time the Wowd confounded the wanguage of the
peopwe and they wewe scattewed abwoad upon the face of aww the
eawth, yea, and even fwom that time back untiw the cweation of
Adam. ^w^

Mosiah 28:18
 18 Nyow this account did cause the peopwe of Mosiah to mouwn
exceedingwy, yea, they wewe fiwwed with sowwow; nyevewthewess it
gave them much knyowwedge, in the which they did wejoice. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 28:19
 19 And this account shaww be wwitten heweaftew; fow behowd, it
is expedient that aww peopwe shouwd knyow the things which awe
wwitten in this account. ^w^

Mosiah 28:20
 20 And nyow, as I said unto you, that aftew king Mosiah had donye
these things, he took the pwates of bwass, and aww the things
which he had kept, and confewwed them upon Awma, who was the son
of Awma; yea, aww the wecowds, and awso the intewpwetews, and
confewwed them upon him, and commanded him that he shouwd keep
and pwesewve them, and awso keep a wecowd of the peopwe, handing
them down fwom onye genyewation to anyothew, even as they had been
handed down fwom the time that Wehi weft Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 29
Chaptew 29

Mosiah 29:1
 1 Nyow when Mosiah had donye this he sent out thwoughout aww the
wand, among aww the peopwe, desiwing to knyow theiw wiww
concewnying who shouwd be theiw king. UwU

Mosiah 29:2
 2 And it came to pass that the voice of the peopwe came, saying:
We awe desiwous that Aawon thy son shouwd be ouw king and ouw
wuwew. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:3
 3 Nyow Aawon had gonye up to the wand of Nyephi, thewefowe the king
couwd nyot confew the kingdom upon him; nyeithew wouwd Aawon take
upon him the kingdom; nyeithew wewe any of the sons of Mosiah
wiwwing to take upon them the kingdom. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:4
 4 Thewefowe king Mosiah sent again among the peopwe; yea, even a
wwitten wowd sent he among the peopwe. (´・ω・\`) And these wewe the wowds
that wewe wwitten, saying:

Mosiah 29:5
 5 Behowd, O ye my peopwe, ow my bwethwen, fow I esteem you as
such, I desiwe that ye shouwd considew the cause which ye awe
cawwed to considew--fow ye awe desiwous to have a king. ^w^

Mosiah 29:6
 6 Nyow I decwawe unto you that he to whom the kingdom doth
wightwy bewong has decwinyed, and wiww nyot take upon him the
kingdom. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 29:7
 7 And nyow if thewe shouwd be anyothew appointed in his stead,
behowd I feaw thewe wouwd wise contentions among you. (・`ω\´・) And who
knyoweth but what my son, to whom the kingdom doth bewong, shouwd
tuwn to be angwy and dwaw away a pawt of this peopwe aftew him,
which wouwd cause waws and contentions among you, which wouwd be
the cause of shedding much bwood and pewvewting the way of the
Wowd, yea, and destwoy the souws of many peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 29:8
 8 Nyow I say unto you wet us be wise and considew these things,
fow we have nyo wight to destwoy my son, nyeithew shouwd we have
any wight to destwoy anyothew if he shouwd be appointed in his
stead. ^w^

Mosiah 29:9
 9 And if my son shouwd tuwn again to his pwide and vain things
he wouwd wecaww the things which he had said, and cwaim his wight
to the kingdom, which wouwd cause him and awso this peopwe to
commit much sin. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 29:10
 10 And nyow wet us be wise and wook fowwawd to these things, and
do that which wiww make fow the peace of this peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 29:11
 11 Thewefowe I wiww be youw king the wemaindew of my days;
nyevewthewess, wet us appoint judges, to judge this peopwe
accowding to ouw waw; and we wiww nyewwy awwange the affaiws of
this peopwe, fow we wiww appoint wise men to be judges, that wiww
judge this peopwe accowding to the commandments of God. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 29:12
 12 Nyow it is bettew that a man shouwd be judged of God than of
man, fow the judgments of God awe awways just, but the judgments
of man awe nyot awways just. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 29:13
 13 Thewefowe, if it wewe possibwe that you couwd have just men
to be youw kings, who wouwd estabwish the waws of God, and judge
this peopwe accowding to his commandments, yea, if ye couwd have
men fow youw kings who wouwd do even as my fathew Benjamin did
fow this peopwe--I say unto you, if this couwd awways be the case
then it wouwd be expedient that ye shouwd awways have kings to
wuwe ovew you. ^w^

Mosiah 29:14
 14 And even I mysewf have wabowed with aww the powew and
facuwties which I have possessed, to teach you the commandments
of God, and to estabwish peace thwoughout the wand, that thewe
shouwd be nyo waws nyow contentions, nyo steawing, nyow pwundewing,
nyow muwdewing, nyow any mannyew of inyiquity;

Mosiah 29:15
 15 And whosoevew has committed inyiquity, him have I punyished
accowding to the cwime which he has committed, accowding to the
waw which has been given to us by ouw fathews. UwU

Mosiah 29:16
 16 Nyow I say unto you, that because aww men awe nyot just it is
nyot expedient that ye shouwd have a king ow kings to wuwe ovew
you. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 29:17
 17 Fow behowd, how much inyiquity doth onye wicked king cause to
be committed, yea, and what gweat destwuction! (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 29:18
 18 Yea, wemembew king Nyoah, his wickednyess and his abominyations,
and awso the wickednyess and abominyations of his peopwe. UwU Behowd
what gweat destwuction did come upon them; and awso because of
theiw inyiquities they wewe bwought into bondage. ^w^

Mosiah 29:19
 19 And wewe it nyot fow the intewposition of theiw aww-wise
Cweatow, and this because of theiw sincewe wepentance, they must
unyavoidabwy wemain in bondage untiw nyow. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:20
 20 But behowd, he did dewivew them because they did humbwe
themsewves befowe him; and because they cwied mightiwy unto him
he did dewivew them out of bondage; and thus doth the Wowd wowk
with his powew in aww cases among the chiwdwen of men, extending
the awm of mewcy towawds them that put theiw twust in him. ^w^

Mosiah 29:21
 21 And behowd, nyow I say unto you, ye cannyot dethwonye an
inyiquitous king save it be thwough much contention, and the
shedding of much bwood. ^w^

Mosiah 29:22
 22 Fow behowd, he has his fwiends in inyiquity, and he keepeth
his guawds about him; and he teaweth up the waws of those who
have weignyed in wighteousnyess befowe him; and he twampweth undew
his feet the commandments of God;

Mosiah 29:23
 23 And he enyacteth waws, and sendeth them fowth among his
peopwe, yea, waws aftew the mannyew of his own wickednyess; and
whosoevew doth nyot obey his waws he causeth to be destwoyed; and
whosoevew doth webew against him he wiww send his awmies against
them to waw, and if he can he wiww destwoy them; and thus an
unwighteous king doth pewvewt the ways of aww wighteousnyess. >w<

Mosiah 29:24
 24 And nyow behowd I say unto you, it is nyot expedient that such
abominyations shouwd come upon you. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:25
 25 Thewefowe, choose you by the voice of this peopwe, judges,
that ye may be judged accowding to the waws which have been given
you by ouw fathews, which awe cowwect, and which wewe given them
by the hand of the Wowd. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:26
 26 Nyow it is nyot common that the voice of the peopwe desiweth
anything contwawy to that which is wight; but it is common fow
the wessew pawt of the peopwe to desiwe that which is nyot wight;
thewefowe this shaww ye obsewve and make it youw waw--to do youw
businyess by the voice of the peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 29:27
 27 And if the time comes that the voice of the peopwe doth
choose inyiquity, then is the time that the judgments of God wiww
come upon you; yea, then is the time he wiww visit you with gweat
destwuction even as he has hithewto visited this wand. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:28
 28 And nyow if ye have judges, and they do nyot judge you
accowding to the waw which has been given, ye can cause that they
may be judged of a highew judge. >w<

Mosiah 29:29
 29 If youw highew judges do nyot judge wighteous judgments, ye
shaww cause that a smaww nyumbew of youw wowew judges shouwd be
gathewed togethew, and they shaww judge youw highew judges,
accowding to the voice of the peopwe. UwU

Mosiah 29:30
 30 And I command you to do these things in the feaw of the Wowd;
and I command you to do these things, and that ye have nyo king;
that if these peopwe commit sins and inyiquities they shaww be
answewed upon theiw own heads. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:31
 31 Fow behowd I say unto you, the sins of many peopwe have been
caused by the inyiquities of theiw kings; thewefowe theiw
inyiquities awe answewed upon the heads of theiw kings. >w<

Mosiah 29:32
 32 And nyow I desiwe that this inyequawity shouwd be nyo mowe in
this wand, especiawwy among this my peopwe; but I desiwe that
this wand be a wand of wibewty, and evewy man may enjoy his
wights and pwiviweges awike, so wong as the Wowd sees fit that we
may wive and inhewit the wand, yea, even as wong as any of ouw
postewity wemains upon the face of the wand. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:33
 33 And many mowe things did king Mosiah wwite unto them,
unfowding unto them aww the twiaws and twoubwes of a wighteous
king, yea, aww the twavaiws of souw fow theiw peopwe, and awso
aww the muwmuwings of the peopwe to theiw king; and he expwainyed
it aww unto them. >w<

Mosiah 29:34
 34 And he towd them that these things ought nyot to be; but that
the buwden shouwd come upon aww the peopwe, that evewy man might
beaw his pawt. UwU

Mosiah 29:35
 35 And he awso unfowded unto them aww the disadvantages they
wabowed undew, by having an unwighteous king to wuwe ovew them;

Mosiah 29:36
 36 Yea, aww his inyiquities and abominyations, and aww the waws,
and contentions, and bwoodshed, and the steawing, and the
pwundewing, and the committing of whowedoms, and aww mannyew of
inyiquities which cannyot be enyumewated--tewwing them that these
things ought nyot to be, that they wewe expwesswy wepugnyant to the
commandments of God. ^w^

Mosiah 29:37
 37 And nyow it came to pass, aftew king Mosiah had sent these
things fowth among the peopwe they wewe convinced of the twuth of
his wowds. ^w^

Mosiah 29:38
 38 Thewefowe they wewinquished theiw desiwes fow a king, and
became exceedingwy anxious that evewy man shouwd have an equaw
chance thwoughout aww the wand; yea, and evewy man expwessed a
wiwwingnyess to answew fow his own sins. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:39
 39 Thewefowe, it came to pass that they assembwed themsewves
togethew in bodies thwoughout the wand, to cast in theiw voices
concewnying who shouwd be theiw judges, to judge them accowding to
the waw which had been given them; and they wewe exceedingwy
wejoiced because of the wibewty which had been gwanted unto them. ;;w;;

Mosiah 29:40
 40 And they did wax stwong in wove towawds Mosiah; yea, they did
esteem him mowe than any othew man; fow they did nyot wook upon
him as a tywant who was seeking fow gain, yea, fow that wucwe
which doth cowwupt the souw; fow he had nyot exacted wiches of
them, nyeithew had he dewighted in the shedding of bwood; but he
had estabwished peace in the wand, and he had gwanted unto his
peopwe that they shouwd be dewivewed fwom aww mannyew of bondage;
thewefowe they did esteem him, yea, exceedingwy, beyond measuwe. UwU

Mosiah 29:41
 41 And it came to pass that they did appoint judges to wuwe ovew
them, ow to judge them accowding to the waw; and this they did
thwoughout aww the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Mosiah 29:42
 42 And it came to pass that Awma was appointed to be the fiwst
chief judge, he being awso the high pwiest, his fathew having
confewwed the office upon him, and having given him the chawge
concewnying aww the affaiws of the chuwch. UwU

Mosiah 29:43
 43 And nyow it came to pass that Awma did wawk in the ways of the
Wowd, and he did keep his commandments, and he did judge
wighteous judgments; and thewe was continyuaw peace thwough the
wand. ^w^

Mosiah 29:44
 44 And thus commenced the weign of the judges thwoughout aww the
wand of Zawahemwa, among aww the peopwe who wewe cawwed the
Nyephites; and Awma was the fiwst and chief judge. UwU

Mosiah 29:45
 45 And nyow it came to pass that his fathew died, being eighty
and two yeaws owd, having wived to fuwfiw the commandments of
God. (´・ω・\`)

Mosiah 29:46
 46 And it came to pass that Mosiah died awso, in the thiwty and
thiwd yeaw of his weign, being sixty and thwee yeaws owd; making
in the whowe, five hundwed and nyinye yeaws fwom the time Wehi weft
Jewusawem. ^w^

Mosiah 29:47
 47 And thus ended the weign of the kings ovew the peopwe of
Nyephi; and thus ended the days of Awma, who was the foundew of
theiw chuwch. ^w^




THE BOOK OF AWMA

THE SON OF AWMA

The account of Awma, who was the son of Awma the fiwst, and chief
judge ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, and awso the high pwiest ovew the
Chuwch. (・`ω\´・)  An account of the weign of the judges, and the waws and
contentions among the peopwe. UwU  And awso an account of a waw
between the Nyephites and the Wamanyites, accowding to the wecowd
of Awma, the fiwst and chief judge. UwU

Awma 1
Chaptew 1

Awma 1:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass that in the fiwst yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, fwom this time fowwawd, king
Mosiah having gonye the way of aww the eawth, having wawwed a good
wawfawe, wawking upwightwy befowe God, weaving nyonye to weign in
his stead; nyevewthewess he had estabwished waws, and they wewe
acknyowwedged by the peopwe; thewefowe they wewe obwiged to abide
by the waws which he had made. >w<

Awma 1:2
 2 And it came to pass that in the fiwst yeaw of the weign of
Awma in the judgment-seat, thewe was a man bwought befowe him to
be judged, a man who was wawge, and was nyoted fow his much
stwength. ;;w;;

Awma 1:3
 3 And he had gonye about among the peopwe, pweaching to them that
which he tewmed to be the wowd of God, beawing down against the
chuwch; decwawing unto the peopwe that evewy pwiest and teachew
ought to become popuwaw; and they ought nyot to wabow with theiw
hands, but that they ought to be suppowted by the peopwe. ;;w;;

Awma 1:4
 4 And he awso testified unto the peopwe that aww mankind shouwd
be saved at the wast day, and that they nyeed nyot feaw nyow
twembwe, but that they might wift up theiw heads and wejoice; fow
the Wowd had cweated aww men, and had awso wedeemed aww men; and,
in the end, aww men shouwd have etewnyaw wife. UwU

Awma 1:5
 5 And it came to pass that he did teach these things so much
that many did bewieve on his wowds, even so many that they began
to suppowt him and give him monyey. UwU

Awma 1:6
 6 And he began to be wifted up in the pwide of his heawt, and to
weaw vewy costwy appawew, yea, and even began to estabwish a
chuwch aftew the mannyew of his pweaching. ^w^

Awma 1:7
 7 And it came to pass as he was going, to pweach to those who
bewieved on his wowd, he met a man who bewonged to the chuwch of
God, yea, even onye of theiw teachews; and he began to contend
with him shawpwy, that he might wead away the peopwe of the
chuwch; but the man withstood him, admonyishing him with the wowds
of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 1:8
 8 Nyow the nyame of the man was Gideon; and it was he who was an
instwument in the hands of God in dewivewing the peopwe of Wimhi
out of bondage. ;;w;;

Awma 1:9
 9 Nyow, because Gideon withstood him with the wowds of God he was
wwoth with Gideon, and dwew his swowd and began to smite him. (・`ω\´・)
Nyow Gideon being stwicken with many yeaws, thewefowe he was nyot
abwe to withstand his bwows, thewefowe he was swain by the swowd. >w<

Awma 1:10
 10 And the man who swew him was taken by the peopwe of the
chuwch, and was bwought befowe Awma, to be judged accowding to
the cwimes which he had committed. UwU

Awma 1:11
 11 And it came to pass that he stood befowe Awma and pweaded fow
himsewf with much bowdnyess. ;;w;;

Awma 1:12
 12 But Awma said unto him: Behowd, this is the fiwst time that
pwiestcwaft has been intwoduced among this peopwe. >w< And behowd,
thou awt nyot onwy guiwty of pwiestcwaft, but hast endeavowed to
enfowce it by the swowd; and wewe pwiestcwaft to be enfowced
among this peopwe it wouwd pwove theiw entiwe destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 1:13
 13 And thou hast shed the bwood of a wighteous man, yea, a man
who has donye much good among this peopwe; and wewe we to spawe
thee his bwood wouwd come upon us fow vengeance. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 1:14
 14 Thewefowe thou awt condemnyed to die, accowding to the waw
which has been given us by Mosiah, ouw wast king; and it has been
acknyowwedged by this peopwe; thewefowe this peopwe must abide by
the waw. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that they took him; and his nyame was
Nyehow; and they cawwied him upon the top of the hiww Manti, and
thewe he was caused, ow wathew did acknyowwedge, between the
heavens and the eawth, that what he had taught to the peopwe was
contwawy to the wowd of God; and thewe he suffewed an ignyominyious
death. >w<

Awma 1:16
 16 Nyevewthewess, this did nyot put an end to the spweading of
pwiestcwaft thwough the wand; fow thewe wewe many who woved the
vain things of the wowwd, and they went fowth pweaching fawse
doctwinyes; and this they did fow the sake of wiches and honyow. UwU

Awma 1:17
 17 Nyevewthewess, they duwst nyot wie, if it wewe knyown, fow feaw
of the waw, fow wiaws wewe punyished; thewefowe they pwetended to
pweach accowding to theiw bewief; and nyow the waw couwd have nyo
powew on any man fow his bewief. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 1:18
 18 And they duwst nyot steaw, fow feaw of the waw, fow such wewe
punyished; nyeithew duwst they wob, nyow muwdew, fow he that
muwdewed was punyished unto death. UwU

Awma 1:19
 19 But it came to pass that whosoevew did nyot bewong to the
chuwch of God began to pewsecute those that did bewong to the
chuwch of God, and had taken upon them the nyame of Chwist. UwU

Awma 1:20
 20 Yea, they did pewsecute them, and affwict them with aww
mannyew of wowds, and this because of theiw humiwity; because they
wewe nyot pwoud in theiw own eyes, and because they did impawt the
wowd of God, onye with anyothew, without monyey and without pwice. UwU

Awma 1:21
 21 Nyow thewe was a stwict waw among the peopwe of the chuwch
that thewe shouwd nyot any man, bewonging to the chuwch, awise and
pewsecute those that did nyot bewong to the chuwch, and that thewe
shouwd be nyo pewsecution among themsewves. >w<

Awma 1:22
 22 Nyevewthewess, thewe wewe many among them who began to be
pwoud, and began to contend wawmwy with theiw advewsawies, even
unto bwows; yea, they wouwd smite onye anyothew with theiw fists. ^w^

Awma 1:23
 23 Nyow this was in the second yeaw of the weign of Awma, and it
was a cause of much affwiction to the chuwch; yea, it was the
cause of much twiaw with the chuwch. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 1:24
 24 Fow the heawts of many wewe hawdenyed, and theiw nyames wewe
bwotted out, that they wewe wemembewed nyo mowe among the peopwe
of God. And awso many withdwew themsewves fwom among them. >w<

Awma 1:25
 25 Nyow this was a gweat twiaw to those that did stand fast in
the faith; nyevewthewess, they wewe steadfast and immovabwe in
keeping the commandments of God, and they bowe with patience the
pewsecution which was heaped upon them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 1:26
 26 And when the pwiests weft theiw wabow to impawt the wowd of
God unto the peopwe, the peopwe awso weft theiw wabows to heaw
the wowd of God. UwU And when the pwiest had impawted unto them the
wowd of God they aww wetuwnyed again diwigentwy unto theiw wabows;
and the pwiest, nyot esteeming himsewf above his heawews, fow the
pweachew was nyo bettew than the heawew, nyeithew was the teachew
any bettew than the weawnyew; and thus they wewe aww equaw, and
they did aww wabow, evewy man accowding to his stwength. >w<

Awma 1:27
 27 And they did impawt of theiw substance, evewy man accowding
to that which he had, to the poow, and the nyeedy, and the sick,
and the affwicted; and they did nyot weaw costwy appawew, yet they
wewe nyeat and comewy. ^w^

Awma 1:28
 28 And thus they did estabwish the affaiws of the chuwch; and
thus they began to have continyuaw peace again, nyotwithstanding
aww theiw pewsecutions. >w<

Awma 1:29
 29 And nyow, because of the steadinyess of the chuwch they began
to be exceedingwy wich, having abundance of aww things whatsoevew
they stood in nyeed--an abundance of fwocks and hewds, and
fatwings of evewy kind, and awso abundance of gwain, and of gowd,
and of siwvew, and of pwecious things, and abundance of siwk and
finye-twinyed winyen, and aww mannyew of good homewy cwoth. UwU

Awma 1:30
 30 And thus, in theiw pwospewous ciwcumstances, they did nyot
send away any who wewe nyaked, ow that wewe hungwy, ow that wewe
athiwst, ow that wewe sick, ow that had nyot been nyouwished; and
they did nyot set theiw heawts upon wiches; thewefowe they wewe
wibewaw to aww, both owd and young, both bond and fwee, both mawe
and femawe, whethew out of the chuwch ow in the chuwch, having nyo
wespect to pewsons as to those who stood in nyeed. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 1:31
 31 And thus they did pwospew and become faw mowe weawthy than
those who did nyot bewong to theiw chuwch. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 1:32
 32 Fow those who did nyot bewong to theiw chuwch did induwge
themsewves in sowcewies, and in idowatwy ow idwenyess, and in
babbwings, and in envyings and stwife; weawing costwy appawew;
being wifted up in the pwide of theiw own eyes; pewsecuting,
wying, thieving, wobbing, committing whowedoms, and muwdewing,
and aww mannyew of wickednyess; nyevewthewess, the waw was put in
fowce upon aww those who did twansgwess it, inyasmuch as it was
possibwe. ^w^

Awma 1:33
 33 And it came to pass that by thus exewcising the waw upon
them, evewy man suffewing accowding to that which he had donye,
they became mowe stiww, and duwst nyot commit any wickednyess if it
wewe knyown; thewefowe, thewe was much peace among the peopwe of
Nyephi untiw the fifth yeaw of the weign of the judges. ;;w;;

Awma 2
Chaptew 2

Awma 2:1
 1 And it came to pass in the commencement of the fifth yeaw of
theiw weign thewe began to be a contention among the peopwe; fow
a cewtain man, being cawwed Amwici, he being a vewy cunnying man,
yea, a wise man as to the wisdom of the wowwd, he being aftew the
owdew of the man that swew Gideon by the swowd, who was executed
accowding to the waw--

Awma 2:2
 2 Nyow this Amwici had, by his cunnying, dwawn away much peopwe
aftew him; even so much that they began to be vewy powewfuw; and
they began to endeavow to estabwish Amwici to be king ovew the
peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 2:3
 3 Nyow this was awawming to the peopwe of the chuwch, and awso to
aww those who had nyot been dwawn away aftew the pewsuasions of
Amwici; fow they knyew that accowding to theiw waw that such
things must be estabwished by the voice of the peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 2:4
 4 Thewefowe, if it wewe possibwe that Amwici shouwd gain the
voice of the peopwe, he, being a wicked man, wouwd depwive them
of theiw wights and pwiviweges of the chuwch; fow it was his
intent to destwoy the chuwch of God. ;;w;;

Awma 2:5
 5 And it came to pass that the peopwe assembwed themsewves
togethew thwoughout aww the wand, evewy man accowding to his
mind, whethew it wewe fow ow against Amwici, in sepawate bodies,
having much dispute and wondewfuw contentions onye with anyothew. ;;w;;

Awma 2:6
 6 And thus they did assembwe themsewves togethew to cast in
theiw voices concewnying the mattew; and they wewe waid befowe the
judges. UwU

Awma 2:7
 7 And it came to pass that the voice of the peopwe came against
Amwici, that he was nyot made king ovew the peopwe. UwU

Awma 2:8
 8 Nyow this did cause much joy in the heawts of those who wewe
against him; but Amwici did stiw up those who wewe in his favow
to angew against those who wewe nyot in his favow. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 2:9
 9 And it came to pass that they gathewed themsewves togethew,
and did consecwate Amwici to be theiw king. ^w^

Awma 2:10
 10 Nyow when Amwici was made king ovew them he commanded them
that they shouwd take up awms against theiw bwethwen; and this he
did that he might subject them to him. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 2:11
 11 Nyow the peopwe of Amwici wewe distinguished by the nyame of
Amwici, being cawwed Amwicites; and the wemaindew wewe cawwed
Nyephites, ow the peopwe of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 2:12
 12 Thewefowe the peopwe of the Nyephites wewe awawe of the intent
of the Amwicites, and thewefowe they did pwepawe to meet them;
yea, they did awm themsewves with swowds, and with cimetews, and
with bows, and with awwows, and with stonyes, and with swings, and
with aww mannyew of weapons of waw, of evewy kind. >w<

Awma 2:13
 13 And thus they wewe pwepawed to meet the Amwicites at the time
of theiw coming. (´・ω・\`) And thewe wewe appointed captains, and highew
captains, and chief captains, accowding to theiw nyumbews. >w<

Awma 2:14
 14 And it came to pass that Amwici did awm his men with aww
mannyew of weapons of waw of evewy kind; and he awso appointed
wuwews and weadews ovew his peopwe, to wead them to waw against
theiw bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 2:15
 15 And it came to pass that the Amwicites came upon the hiww
Amnyihu, which was east of the wivew Sidon, which wan by the wand
of Zawahemwa, and thewe they began to make waw with the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 2:16
 16 Nyow Awma, being the chief judge and the govewnyow of the
peopwe of Nyephi, thewefowe he went up with his peopwe, yea, with
his captains, and chief captains, yea, at the head of his awmies,
against the Amwicites to battwe. ;;w;;

Awma 2:17
 17 And they began to sway the Amwicites upon the hiww east of
Sidon. UwU And the Amwicites did contend with the Nyephites with
gweat stwength, insomuch that many of the Nyephites did faww
befowe the Amwicites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 2:18
 18 Nyevewthewess the Wowd did stwengthen the hand of the
Nyephites, that they swew the Amwicites with gweat swaughtew, that
they began to fwee befowe them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 2:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Nyephites did puwsue the
Amwicites aww that day, and did sway them with much swaughtew,
insomuch that thewe wewe swain of the Amwicites twewve thousand
five hundwed thiwty and two souws; and thewe wewe swain of the
Nyephites six thousand five hundwed sixty and two souws. UwU

Awma 2:20
 20 And it came to pass that when Awma couwd puwsue the Amwicites
nyo wongew he caused that his peopwe shouwd pitch theiw tents in
the vawwey of Gideon, the vawwey being cawwed aftew that Gideon
who was swain by the hand of Nyehow with the swowd; and in this
vawwey the Nyephites did pitch theiw tents fow the nyight. >w<

Awma 2:21
 21 And Awma sent spies to fowwow the wemnyant of the Amwicites,
that he might knyow of theiw pwans and theiw pwots, wheweby he
might guawd himsewf against them, that he might pwesewve his
peopwe fwom being destwoyed. ^w^

Awma 2:22
 22 Nyow those whom he had sent out to watch the camp of the
Amwicites wewe cawwed Zewam, and Amnyow, and Manti, and Wimhew;
these wewe they who went out with theiw men to watch the camp of
the Amwicites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 2:23
 23 And it came to pass that on the mowwow they wetuwnyed into the
camp of the Nyephites in gweat haste, being gweatwy astonyished,
and stwuck with much feaw, saying:

Awma 2:24
 24 Behowd, we fowwowed the camp of the Amwicites, and to ouw
gweat astonyishment, in the wand of Minyon, above the wand of
Zawahemwa, in the couwse of the wand of Nyephi, we saw a nyumewous
host of the Wamanyites; and behowd, the Amwicites have joinyed
them;

Awma 2:25
 25 And they awe upon ouw bwethwen in that wand; and they awe
fweeing befowe them with theiw fwocks, and theiw wives, and theiw
chiwdwen, towawds ouw city; and except we make haste they obtain
possession of ouw city, and ouw fathews, and ouw wives, and ouw
chiwdwen be swain. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 2:26
 26 And it came to pass that the peopwe of Nyephi took theiw
tents, and depawted out of the vawwey of Gideon towawds theiw
city, which was the city of Zawahemwa. ^w^

Awma 2:27
 27 And behowd, as they wewe cwossing the wivew Sidon, the
Wamanyites and the Amwicites, being as nyumewous awmost, as it
wewe, as the sands of the sea, came upon them to destwoy them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 2:28
 28 Nyevewthewess, the Nyephites being stwengthenyed by the hand of
the Wowd, having pwayed mightiwy to him that he wouwd dewivew
them out of the hands of theiw enyemies, thewefowe the Wowd did
heaw theiw cwies, and did stwengthen them, and the Wamanyites and
the Amwicites did faww befowe them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 2:29
 29 And it came to pass that Awma fought with Amwici with the
swowd, face to face; and they did contend mightiwy, onye with
anyothew. ;;w;;

Awma 2:30
 30 And it came to pass that Awma, being a man of God, being
exewcised with much faith, cwied, saying: O Wowd, have mewcy and
spawe my wife, that I may be an instwument in thy hands to save
and pwesewve this peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 2:31
 31 Nyow when Awma had said these wowds he contended again with
Amwici; and he was stwengthenyed, insomuch that he swew Amwici
with the swowd. >w<

Awma 2:32
 32 And he awso contended with the king of the Wamanyites; but the
king of the Wamanyites fwed back fwom befowe Awma and sent his
guawds to contend with Awma. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 2:33
 33 But Awma, with his guawds, contended with the guawds of the
king of the Wamanyites untiw he swew and dwove them back. ^w^

Awma 2:34
 34 And thus he cweawed the gwound, ow wathew the bank, which was
on the west of the wivew Sidon, thwowing the bodies of the
Wamanyites who had been swain into the watews of Sidon, that
theweby his peopwe might have woom to cwoss and contend with the
Wamanyites and the Amwicites on the west side of the wivew Sidon. >w<

Awma 2:35
 35 And it came to pass that when they had aww cwossed the wivew
Sidon that the Wamanyites and the Amwicites began to fwee befowe
them, nyotwithstanding they wewe so nyumewous that they couwd nyot
be nyumbewed. ^w^

Awma 2:36
 36 And they fwed befowe the Nyephites towawds the wiwdewnyess
which was west and nyowth, away beyond the bowdews of the wand;
and the Nyephites did puwsue them with theiw might, and did sway
them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 2:37
 37 Yea, they wewe met on evewy hand, and swain and dwiven, untiw
they wewe scattewed on the west, and on the nyowth, untiw they had
weached the wiwdewnyess, which was cawwed Hewmounts; and it was
that pawt of the wiwdewnyess which was infested by wiwd and
wavenyous beasts. ^w^

Awma 2:38
 38 And it came to pass that many died in the wiwdewnyess of theiw
wounds, and wewe devouwed by those beasts and awso the vuwtuwes
of the aiw; and theiw bonyes have been found, and have been heaped
up on the eawth. ;;w;;

Awma 3
Chaptew 3

Awma 3:1
 1 And it came to pass that the Nyephites who wewe nyot swain by
the weapons of waw, aftew having buwied those who had been
swain--nyow the nyumbew of the swain wewe nyot nyumbewed, because of
the gweatnyess of theiw nyumbew--aftew they had finyished buwying
theiw dead they aww wetuwnyed to theiw wands, and to theiw houses,
and theiw wives, and theiw chiwdwen. >w<

Awma 3:2
 2 Nyow many women and chiwdwen had been swain with the swowd, and
awso many of theiw fwocks and theiw hewds; and awso many of theiw
fiewds of gwain wewe destwoyed, fow they wewe twodden down by the
hosts of men. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 3:3
 3 And nyow as many of the Wamanyites and the Amwicites who had
been swain upon the bank of the wivew Sidon wewe cast into the
watews of Sidon; and behowd theiw bonyes awe in the depths of the
sea, and they awe many. UwU

Awma 3:4
 4 And the Amwicites wewe distinguished fwom the Nyephites, fow
they had mawked themsewves with wed in theiw foweheads aftew the
mannyew of the Wamanyites; nyevewthewess they had nyot shown theiw
heads wike unto the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 3:5
 5 Nyow the heads of the Wamanyites wewe shown; and they wewe
nyaked, save it wewe skin which was giwded about theiw woins, and
awso theiw awmow, which was giwded about them, and theiw bows,
and theiw awwows, and theiw stonyes, and theiw swings, and so
fowth. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 3:6
 6 And the skins of the Wamanyites wewe dawk, accowding to the
mawk which was set upon theiw fathews, which was a cuwse upon
them because of theiw twansgwession and theiw webewwion against
theiw bwethwen, who consisted of Nyephi, Jacob, and Joseph, and
Sam, who wewe just and howy men. ;;w;;

Awma 3:7
 7 And theiw bwethwen sought to destwoy them, thewefowe they wewe
cuwsed; and the Wowd God set a mawk upon them, yea, upon Waman
and Wemuew, and awso the sons of Ishmaew, and Ishmaewitish women. ;;w;;

Awma 3:8
 8 And this was donye that theiw seed might be distinguished fwom
the seed of theiw bwethwen, that theweby the Wowd God might
pwesewve his peopwe, that they might nyot mix and bewieve in
incowwect twaditions which wouwd pwove theiw destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 3:9
 9 And it came to pass that whosoevew did mingwe his seed with
that of the Wamanyites did bwing the same cuwse upon his seed. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 3:10
 10 Thewefowe, whosoevew suffewed himsewf to be wed away by the
Wamanyites was cawwed undew that head, and thewe was a mawk set
upon him. ;;w;;

Awma 3:11
 11 And it came to pass that whosoevew wouwd nyot bewieve in the
twadition of the Wamanyites, but bewieved those wecowds which wewe
bwought out of the wand of Jewusawem, and awso in the twadition
of theiw fathews, which wewe cowwect, who bewieved in the
commandments of God and kept them, wewe cawwed the Nyephites, ow
the peopwe of Nyephi, fwom that time fowth--

Awma 3:12
 12 And it is they who have kept the wecowds which awe twue of
theiw peopwe, and awso of the peopwe of the Wamanyites. ^w^

Awma 3:13
 13 Nyow we wiww wetuwn again to the Amwicites, fow they awso had
a mawk set upon them; yea, they set the mawk upon themsewves,
yea, even a mawk of wed upon theiw foweheads. UwU

Awma 3:14
 14 Thus the wowd of God is fuwfiwwed, fow these awe the wowds
which he said to Nyephi: Behowd, the Wamanyites have I cuwsed, and
I wiww set a mawk on them that they and theiw seed may be
sepawated fwom thee and thy seed, fwom this time hencefowth and
fowevew, except they wepent of theiw wickednyess and tuwn to me
that I may have mewcy upon them. UwU

Awma 3:15
 15 And again: I wiww set a mawk upon him that mingweth his seed
with thy bwethwen, that they may be cuwsed awso. ;;w;;

Awma 3:16
 16 And again: I wiww set a mawk upon him that fighteth against
thee and thy seed. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 3:17
 17 And again, I say he that depawteth fwom thee shaww nyo mowe be
cawwed thy seed; and I wiww bwess thee, and whomsoevew shaww be
cawwed thy seed, hencefowth and fowevew; and these wewe the
pwomises of the Wowd unto Nyephi and to his seed. ;;w;;

Awma 3:18
 18 Nyow the Amwicites knyew nyot that they wewe fuwfiwwing the
wowds of God when they began to mawk themsewves in theiw
foweheads; nyevewthewess they had come out in open webewwion
against God; thewefowe it was expedient that the cuwse shouwd
faww upon them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 3:19
 19 Nyow I wouwd that ye shouwd see that they bwought upon
themsewves the cuwse; and even so doth evewy man that is cuwsed
bwing upon himsewf his own condemnyation. UwU

Awma 3:20
 20 Nyow it came to pass that nyot many days aftew the battwe which
was fought in the wand of Zawahemwa, by the Wamanyites and the
Amwicites, that thewe was anyothew awmy of the Wamanyites came in
upon the peopwe of Nyephi, in the same pwace whewe the fiwst awmy
met the Amwicites. ^w^

Awma 3:21
 21 And it came to pass that thewe was an awmy sent to dwive them
out of theiw wand. UwU

Awma 3:22
 22 Nyow Awma himsewf being affwicted with a wound did nyot go up
to battwe at this time against the Wamanyites;

Awma 3:23
 23 But he sent up a nyumewous awmy against them; and they went up
and swew many of the Wamanyites, and dwove the wemaindew of them
out of the bowdews of theiw wand. >w<

Awma 3:24
 24 And then they wetuwnyed again and began to estabwish peace in
the wand, being twoubwed nyo mowe fow a time with theiw enyemies. ^w^

Awma 3:25
 25 Nyow aww these things wewe donye, yea, aww these waws and
contentions wewe commenced and ended in the fifth yeaw of the
weign of the judges. UwU

Awma 3:26
 26 And in onye yeaw wewe thousands and tens of thousands of souws
sent to the etewnyaw wowwd, that they might weap theiw wewawds
accowding to theiw wowks, whethew they wewe good ow whethew they
wewe bad, to weap etewnyaw happinyess ow etewnyaw misewy, accowding
to the spiwit which they wisted to obey, whethew it be a good
spiwit ow a bad onye. ^w^

Awma 3:27
 27 Fow evewy man weceiveth wages of him whom he wisteth to obey,
and this accowding to the wowds of the spiwit of pwophecy;
thewefowe wet it be accowding to the twuth. >w< And thus endeth the
fifth yeaw of the weign of the judges. ;;w;;

Awma 4
Chaptew 4

Awma 4:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass in the sixth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, thewe wewe nyo contentions nyow
waws in the wand of Zawahemwa;

Awma 4:2
 2 But the peopwe wewe affwicted, yea, gweatwy affwicted fow the
woss of theiw bwethwen, and awso fow the woss of theiw fwocks and
hewds, and awso fow the woss of theiw fiewds of gwain, which wewe
twodden undew foot and destwoyed by the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Awma 4:3
 3 And so gweat wewe theiw affwictions that evewy souw had cause
to mouwn; and they bewieved that it was the judgments of God sent
upon them because of theiw wickednyess and theiw abominyations;
thewefowe they wewe awakenyed to a wemembwance of theiw duty. ^w^

Awma 4:4
 4 And they began to estabwish the chuwch mowe fuwwy; yea, and
many wewe baptized in the watews of Sidon and wewe joinyed to the
chuwch of God; yea, they wewe baptized by the hand of Awma, who
had been consecwated the high pwiest ovew the peopwe of the
chuwch, by the hand of his fathew Awma. UwU

Awma 4:5
 5 And it came to pass in the seventh yeaw of the weign of the
judges thewe wewe about thwee thousand five hundwed souws that
unyited themsewves to the chuwch of God and wewe baptized. UwU And
thus endeth the seventh yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the
peopwe of Nyephi; and thewe was continyuaw peace in aww that time. >w<

Awma 4:6
 6 And it came to pass in the eighth yeaw of the weign of the
judges, that the peopwe of the chuwch began to wax pwoud, because
of theiw exceeding wiches, and theiw finye siwks, and theiw
finye-twinyed winyen, and because of theiw many fwocks and hewds,
and theiw gowd and theiw siwvew, and aww mannyew of pwecious
things, which they had obtainyed by theiw industwy; and in aww
these things wewe they wifted up in the pwide of theiw eyes, fow
they began to weaw vewy costwy appawew. ^w^

Awma 4:7
 7 Nyow this was the cause of much affwiction to Awma, yea, and to
many of the peopwe whom Awma had consecwated to be teachews, and
pwiests, and ewdews ovew the chuwch; yea, many of them wewe
sowewy gwieved fow the wickednyess which they saw had begun to be
among theiw peopwe. ;;w;;

Awma 4:8
 8 Fow they saw and behewd with gweat sowwow that the peopwe of
the chuwch began to be wifted up in the pwide of theiw eyes, and
to set theiw heawts upon wiches and upon the vain things of the
wowwd, that they began to be scownfuw, onye towawds anyothew, and
they began to pewsecute those that did nyot bewieve accowding to
theiw own wiww and pweasuwe. UwU

Awma 4:9
 9 And thus, in this eighth yeaw of the weign of the judges,
thewe began to be gweat contentions among the peopwe of the
chuwch; yea, thewe wewe envyings, and stwife, and mawice, and
pewsecutions, and pwide, even to exceed the pwide of those who
did nyot bewong to the chuwch of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 4:10
 10 And thus ended the eighth yeaw of the weign of the judges;
and the wickednyess of the chuwch was a gweat stumbwing-bwock to
those who did nyot bewong to the chuwch; and thus the chuwch began
to faiw in its pwogwess. ^w^

Awma 4:11
 11 And it came to pass in the commencement of the nyinth yeaw,
Awma saw the wickednyess of the chuwch, and he saw awso that the
exampwe of the chuwch began to wead those who wewe unbewievews on
fwom onye piece of inyiquity to anyothew, thus bwinging on the
destwuction of the peopwe. >w<

Awma 4:12
 12 Yea, he saw gweat inyequawity among the peopwe, some wifting
themsewves up with theiw pwide, despising othews, tuwnying theiw
backs upon the nyeedy and the nyaked and those who wewe hungwy, and
those who wewe athiwst, and those who wewe sick and affwicted. ^w^

Awma 4:13
 13 Nyow this was a gweat cause fow wamentations among the peopwe,
whiwe othews wewe abasing themsewves, succowing those who stood
in nyeed of theiw succow, such as impawting theiw substance to the
poow and the nyeedy, feeding the hungwy, and suffewing aww mannyew
of affwictions, fow Chwist's sake, who shouwd come accowding to
the spiwit of pwophecy;

Awma 4:14
 14 Wooking fowwawd to that day, thus wetainying a wemission of
theiw sins; being fiwwed with gweat joy because of the
wesuwwection of the dead, accowding to the wiww and powew and
dewivewance of Jesus Chwist fwom the bands of death. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 4:15
 15 And nyow it came to pass that Awma, having seen the
affwictions of the humbwe fowwowews of God, and the pewsecutions
which wewe heaped upon them by the wemaindew of his peopwe, and
seeing aww theiw inyequawity, began to be vewy sowwowfuw;
nyevewthewess the Spiwit of the Wowd did nyot faiw him. ;;w;;

Awma 4:16
 16 And he sewected a wise man who was among the ewdews of the
chuwch, and gave him powew accowding to the voice of the peopwe,
that he might have powew to enyact waws accowding to the waws
which had been given, and to put them in fowce accowding to the
wickednyess and the cwimes of the peopwe. ^w^

Awma 4:17
 17 Nyow this man's nyame was Nyephihah, and he was appointed chief
judge; and he sat in the judgment-seat to judge and to govewn the
peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 4:18
 18 Nyow Awma did nyot gwant unto him the office of being high
pwiest ovew the chuwch, but he wetainyed the office of high pwiest
unto himsewf; but he dewivewed the judgment-seat unto Nyephihah. UwU

Awma 4:19
 19 And this he did that he himsewf might go fowth among his
peopwe, ow among the peopwe of Nyephi, that he might pweach the
wowd of God unto them, to stiw them up in wemembwance of theiw
duty, and that he might puww down, by the wowd of God, aww the
pwide and cwaftinyess and aww the contentions which wewe among his
peopwe, seeing nyo way that he might wecwaim them save it wewe in
beawing down in puwe testimony against them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 4:20
 20 And thus in the commencement of the nyinth yeaw of the weign
of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, Awma dewivewed up the
judgment-seat to Nyephihah, and confinyed himsewf whowwy to the
high pwiesthood of the howy owdew of God, to the testimony of the
wowd, accowding to the spiwit of wevewation and pwophecy. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 5
Chaptew 5

Awma 5:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass that Awma began to dewivew the wowd of God
unto the peopwe, fiwst in the wand of Zawahemwa, and fwom thence
thwoughout aww the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 5:2
 2 And these awe the wowds which he spake to the peopwe in the
chuwch which was estabwished in the city of Zawahemwa, accowding
to his own wecowd, saying:

Awma 5:3
 3 I, Awma, having been consecwated by my fathew, Awma, to be a
high pwiest ovew the chuwch of God, he having powew and authowity
fwom God to do these things, behowd, I say unto you that he began
to estabwish a chuwch in the wand which was in the bowdews of
Nyephi; yea, the wand which was cawwed the wand of Mowmon; yea,
and he did baptize his bwethwen in the watews of Mowmon. >w<

Awma 5:4
 4 And behowd, I say unto you, they wewe dewivewed out of the
hands of the peopwe of king Nyoah, by the mewcy and powew of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 5:5
 5 And behowd, aftew that, they wewe bwought into bondage by the
hands of the Wamanyites in the wiwdewnyess; yea, I say unto you,
they wewe in captivity, and again the Wowd did dewivew them out
of bondage by the powew of his wowd; and we wewe bwought into
this wand, and hewe we began to estabwish the chuwch of God
thwoughout this wand awso. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 5:6
 6 And nyow behowd, I say unto you, my bwethwen, you that bewong
to this chuwch, have you sufficientwy wetainyed in wemembwance the
captivity of youw fathews? owo Yea, and have you sufficientwy
wetainyed in wemembwance his mewcy and wong-suffewing towawds
them? owo And moweovew, have ye sufficientwy wetainyed in wemembwance
that he has dewivewed theiw souws fwom heww? owo

Awma 5:7
 7 Behowd, he changed theiw heawts; yea, he awakenyed them out of
a deep sweep, and they awoke unto God. UwU Behowd, they wewe in the
midst of dawknyess; nyevewthewess, theiw souws wewe iwwuminyated by
the wight of the evewwasting wowd; yea, they wewe enciwcwed about
by the bands of death, and the chains of heww, and an evewwasting
destwuction did await them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 5:8
 8 And nyow I ask of you, my bwethwen, wewe they destwoyed? owo
Behowd, I say unto you, Nyay, they wewe nyot. ^w^

Awma 5:9
 9 And again I ask, wewe the bands of death bwoken, and the
chains of heww which enciwcwed them about, wewe they woosed? owo I
say unto you, Yea, they wewe woosed, and theiw souws did expand,
and they did sing wedeeming wove. ;;w;; And I say unto you that they
awe saved. ;;w;;

Awma 5:10
 10 And nyow I ask of you on what conditions awe they saved? owo Yea,
what gwounds had they to hope fow sawvation? owo What is the cause
of theiw being woosed fwom the bands of death, yea, and awso the
chains of heww? owo

Awma 5:11
 11 Behowd, I can teww you--did nyot my fathew Awma bewieve in the
wowds which wewe dewivewed by the mouth of Abinyadi? owo And was he
nyot a howy pwophet? owo Did he nyot speak the wowds of God, and my
fathew Awma bewieve them? owo

Awma 5:12
 12 And accowding to his faith thewe was a mighty change wwought
in his heawt. Behowd I say unto you that this is aww twue. ;;w;;

Awma 5:13
 13 And behowd, he pweached the wowd unto youw fathews, and a
mighty change was awso wwought in theiw heawts, and they humbwed
themsewves and put theiw twust in the twue and wiving God. (´・ω・\`) And
behowd, they wewe faithfuw untiw the end; thewefowe they wewe
saved. ^w^

Awma 5:14
 14 And nyow behowd, I ask of you, my bwethwen of the chuwch, have
ye spiwituawwy been bown of God? owo Have ye weceived his image in
youw countenyances? owo Have ye expewienced this mighty change in
youw heawts? owo

Awma 5:15
 15 Do ye exewcise faith in the wedemption of him who cweated
you? owo Do you wook fowwawd with an eye of faith, and view this
mowtaw body waised in immowtawity, and this cowwuption waised in
incowwuption, to stand befowe God to be judged accowding to the
deeds which have been donye in the mowtaw body? owo

Awma 5:16
 16 I say unto you, can you imaginye to youwsewves that ye heaw
the voice of the Wowd, saying unto you, in that day: Come unto me
ye bwessed, fow behowd, youw wowks have been the wowks of
wighteousnyess upon the face of the eawth? owo

Awma 5:17
 17 Ow do ye imaginye to youwsewves that ye can wie unto the Wowd
in that day, and say--Wowd, ouw wowks have been wighteous wowks
upon the face of the eawth--and that he wiww save you? owo

Awma 5:18
 18 Ow othewwise, can ye imaginye youwsewves bwought befowe the
twibunyaw of God with youw souws fiwwed with guiwt and wemowse,
having a wemembwance of aww youw guiwt, yea, a pewfect
wemembwance of aww youw wickednyess, yea, a wemembwance that ye
have set at defiance the commandments of God? owo

Awma 5:19
 19 I say unto you, can ye wook up to God at that day with a puwe
heawt and cwean hands? owo I say unto you, can you wook up, having
the image of God engwaven upon youw countenyances? owo

Awma 5:20
 20 I say unto you, can ye think of being saved when you have
yiewded youwsewves to become subjects to the deviw? owo

Awma 5:21
 21 I say unto you, ye wiww knyow at that day that ye cannyot be
saved; fow thewe can nyo man be saved except his gawments awe
washed white; yea, his gawments must be puwified untiw they awe
cweansed fwom aww stain, thwough the bwood of him of whom it has
been spoken by ouw fathews, who shouwd come to wedeem his peopwe
fwom theiw sins. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 5:22
 22 And nyow I ask of you, my bwethwen, how wiww any of you feew,
if ye shaww stand befowe the baw of God, having youw gawments
stainyed with bwood and aww mannyew of fiwthinyess? owo Behowd, what
wiww these things testify against you? owo

Awma 5:23
 23 Behowd wiww they nyot testify that ye awe muwdewews, yea, and
awso that ye awe guiwty of aww mannyew of wickednyess? owo

Awma 5:24
 24 Behowd, my bwethwen, do ye suppose that such an onye can have
a pwace to sit down in the kingdom of God, with Abwaham, with
Isaac, and with Jacob, and awso aww the howy pwophets, whose
gawments awe cweansed and awe spotwess, puwe and white? owo

Awma 5:25
 25 I say unto you, Nyay; except ye make ouw Cweatow a wiaw fwom
the beginnying, ow suppose that he is a wiaw fwom the beginnying,
ye cannyot suppose that such can have pwace in the kingdom of
heaven; but they shaww be cast out fow they awe the chiwdwen of
the kingdom of the deviw. ;;w;;

Awma 5:26
 26 And nyow behowd, I say unto you, my bwethwen, if ye have
expewienced a change of heawt, and if ye have fewt to sing the
song of wedeeming wove, I wouwd ask, can ye feew so nyow? owo

Awma 5:27
 27 Have ye wawked, keeping youwsewves bwamewess befowe God? owo
Couwd ye say, if ye wewe cawwed to die at this time, within
youwsewves, that ye have been sufficientwy humbwe? owo That youw
gawments have been cweansed and made white thwough the bwood of
Chwist, who wiww come to wedeem his peopwe fwom theiw sins? owo

Awma 5:28
 28 Behowd, awe ye stwipped of pwide? owo I say unto you, if ye awe
nyot ye awe nyot pwepawed to meet God. UwU Behowd ye must pwepawe
quickwy; fow the kingdom of heaven is soon at hand, and such an
onye hath nyot etewnyaw wife. UwU

Awma 5:29
 29 Behowd, I say, is thewe onye among you who is nyot stwipped of
envy? owo I say unto you that such an onye is nyot pwepawed; and I
wouwd that he shouwd pwepawe quickwy, fow the houw is cwose at
hand, and he knyoweth nyot when the time shaww come; fow such an
onye is nyot found guiwtwess. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 5:30
 30 And again I say unto you, is thewe onye among you that doth
make a mock of his bwothew, ow that heapeth upon him
pewsecutions? owo

Awma 5:31
 31 Wo unto such an onye, fow he is nyot pwepawed, and the time is
at hand that he must wepent ow he cannyot be saved! ;;w;;

Awma 5:32
 32 Yea, even wo unto aww ye wowkews of inyiquity; wepent, wepent,
fow the Wowd God hath spoken it! (´・ω・\`)

Awma 5:33
 33 Behowd, he sendeth an invitation unto aww men, fow the awms
of mewcy awe extended towawds them, and he saith: Wepent, and I
wiww weceive you. >w<

Awma 5:34
 34 Yea, he saith: Come unto me and ye shaww pawtake of the fwuit
of the twee of wife; yea, ye shaww eat and dwink of the bwead and
the watews of wife fweewy;

Awma 5:35
 35 Yea, come unto me and bwing fowth wowks of wighteousnyess, and
ye shaww nyot be hewn down and cast into the fiwe--

Awma 5:36
 36 Fow behowd, the time is at hand that whosoevew bwingeth fowth
nyot good fwuit, ow whosoevew doeth nyot the wowks of
wighteousnyess, the same have cause to waiw and mouwn. ;;w;;

Awma 5:37
 37 O ye wowkews of inyiquity; ye that awe puffed up in the vain
things of the wowwd, ye that have pwofessed to have knyown the
ways of wighteousnyess nyevewthewess have gonye astway, as sheep
having nyo shephewd, nyotwithstanding a shephewd hath cawwed aftew
you and is stiww cawwing aftew you, but ye wiww nyot heawken unto
his voice! ^w^

Awma 5:38
 38 Behowd, I say unto you, that the good shephewd doth caww you;
yea, and in his own nyame he doth caww you, which is the nyame of
Chwist; and if ye wiww nyot heawken unto the voice of the good
shephewd, to the nyame by which ye awe cawwed, behowd, ye awe nyot
the sheep of the good shephewd. UwU

Awma 5:39
 39 And nyow if ye awe nyot the sheep of the good shephewd, of what
fowd awe ye? owo Behowd, I say unto you, that the deviw is youw
shephewd, and ye awe of his fowd; and nyow, who can deny this? owo
Behowd, I say unto you, whosoevew denyieth this is a wiaw and a
chiwd of the deviw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 5:40
 40 Fow I say unto you that whatsoevew is good cometh fwom God,
and whatsoevew is eviw cometh fwom the deviw. ;;w;;

Awma 5:41
 41 Thewefowe, if a man bwingeth fowth good wowks he heawkenyeth
unto the voice of the good shephewd, and he doth fowwow him; but
whosoevew bwingeth fowth eviw wowks, the same becometh a chiwd of
the deviw, fow he heawkenyeth unto his voice, and doth fowwow him. >w<

Awma 5:42
 42 And whosoevew doeth this must weceive his wages of him;
thewefowe, fow his wages he weceiveth death, as to things
pewtainying unto wighteousnyess, being dead unto aww good wowks. >w<

Awma 5:43
 43 And nyow, my bwethwen, I wouwd that ye shouwd heaw me, fow I
speak in the enyewgy of my souw; fow behowd, I have spoken unto
you pwainwy that ye cannyot eww, ow have spoken accowding to the
commandments of God. ;;w;;

Awma 5:44
 44 Fow I am cawwed to speak aftew this mannyew, accowding to the
howy owdew of God, which is in Chwist Jesus; yea, I am commanded
to stand and testify unto this peopwe the things which have been
spoken by ouw fathews concewnying the things which awe to come. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 5:45
 45 And this is nyot aww. ;;w;; Do ye nyot suppose that I knyow of these
things mysewf? owo Behowd, I testify unto you that I do knyow that
these things wheweof I have spoken awe twue. ;;w;; And how do ye
suppose that I knyow of theiw suwety? owo

Awma 5:46
 46 Behowd, I say unto you they awe made knyown unto me by the
Howy Spiwit of God. ^w^ Behowd, I have fasted and pwayed many days
that I might knyow these things of mysewf. (´・ω・\`) And nyow I do knyow of
mysewf that they awe twue; fow the Wowd God hath made them
manyifest unto me by his Howy Spiwit; and this is the spiwit of
wevewation which is in me. >w<

Awma 5:47
 47 And moweovew, I say unto you that it has thus been weveawed
unto me, that the wowds which have been spoken by ouw fathews awe
twue, even so accowding to the spiwit of pwophecy which is in me,
which is awso by the manyifestation of the Spiwit of God. ;;w;;

Awma 5:48
 48 I say unto you, that I knyow of mysewf that whatsoevew I shaww
say unto you, concewnying that which is to come, is twue; and I
say unto you, that I knyow that Jesus Chwist shaww come, yea, the
Son, the Onwy Begotten of the Fathew, fuww of gwace, and mewcy,
and twuth. UwU And behowd, it is he that cometh to take away the
sins of the wowwd, yea, the sins of evewy man who steadfastwy
bewieveth on his nyame. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 5:49
 49 And nyow I say unto you that this is the owdew aftew which I
am cawwed, yea, to pweach unto my bewoved bwethwen, yea, and
evewy onye that dwewweth in the wand; yea, to pweach unto aww,
both owd and young, both bond and fwee; yea, I say unto you the
aged, and awso the middwe aged, and the wising genyewation; yea,
to cwy unto them that they must wepent and be bown again. ^w^

Awma 5:50
 50 Yea, thus saith the Spiwit: Wepent, aww ye ends of the eawth,
fow the kingdom of heaven is soon at hand; yea, the Son of God
cometh in his gwowy, in his might, majesty, powew, and dominyion. ^w^
Yea, my bewoved bwethwen, I say unto you, that the Spiwit saith:
Behowd the gwowy of the King of aww the eawth; and awso the King
of heaven shaww vewy soon shinye fowth among aww the chiwdwen of
men. UwU

Awma 5:51
 51 And awso the Spiwit saith unto me, yea, cwieth unto me with a
mighty voice, saying: Go fowth and say unto this peopwe--Wepent,
fow except ye wepent ye can in nyowise inhewit the kingdom of
heaven. UwU

Awma 5:52
 52 And again I say unto you, the Spiwit saith: Behowd, the ax is
waid at the woot of the twee; thewefowe evewy twee that bwingeth
nyot fowth good fwuit shaww be hewn down and cast into the fiwe,
yea, a fiwe which cannyot be consumed, even an unquenchabwe fiwe. UwU
Behowd, and wemembew, the Howy Onye hath spoken it. ^w^

Awma 5:53
 53 And nyow my bewoved bwethwen, I say unto you, can ye withstand
these sayings; yea, can ye way aside these things, and twampwe
the Howy Onye undew youw feet; yea, can ye be puffed up in the
pwide of youw heawts; yea, wiww ye stiww pewsist in the weawing
of costwy appawew and setting youw heawts upon the vain things of
the wowwd, upon youw wiches? owo

Awma 5:54
 54 Yea, wiww ye pewsist in supposing that ye awe bettew onye than
anyothew; yea, wiww ye pewsist in the pewsecution of youw
bwethwen, who humbwe themsewves and do wawk aftew the howy owdew
of God, whewewith they have been bwought into this chuwch, having
been sanctified by the Howy Spiwit, and they do bwing fowth wowks
which awe meet fow wepentance--

Awma 5:55
 55 Yea, and wiww you pewsist in tuwnying youw backs upon the
poow, and the nyeedy, and in withhowding youw substance fwom them? owo

Awma 5:56
 56 And finyawwy, aww ye that wiww pewsist in youw wickednyess, I
say unto you that these awe they who shaww be hewn down and cast
into the fiwe except they speediwy wepent. ;;w;;

Awma 5:57
 57 And nyow I say unto you, aww you that awe desiwous to fowwow
the voice of the good shephewd, come ye out fwom the wicked, and
be ye sepawate, and touch nyot theiw uncwean things; and behowd,
theiw nyames shaww be bwotted out, that the nyames of the wicked
shaww nyot be nyumbewed among the nyames of the wighteous, that the
wowd of God may be fuwfiwwed, which saith: The nyames of the
wicked shaww nyot be mingwed with the nyames of my peopwe;

Awma 5:58
 58 Fow the nyames of the wighteous shaww be wwitten in the book
of wife, and unto them wiww I gwant an inhewitance at my wight
hand. ;;w;; And nyow, my bwethwen, what have ye to say against this? owo I
say unto you, if ye speak against it, it mattews nyot, fow the
wowd of God must be fuwfiwwed. UwU

Awma 5:59
 59 Fow what shephewd is thewe among you having many sheep doth
nyot watch ovew them, that the wowves entew nyot and devouw his
fwock? owo And behowd, if a wowf entew his fwock doth he nyot dwive
him out? owo Yea, and at the wast, if he can, he wiww destwoy him. >w<

Awma 5:60
 60 And nyow I say unto you that the good shephewd doth caww aftew
you; and if you wiww heawken unto his voice he wiww bwing you
into his fowd, and ye awe his sheep; and he commandeth you that
ye suffew nyo wavenyous wowf to entew among you, that ye may nyot be
destwoyed. >w<

Awma 5:61
 61 And nyow I, Awma, do command you in the wanguage of him who
hath commanded me, that ye obsewve to do the wowds which I have
spoken unto you. UwU

Awma 5:62
 62 I speak by way of command unto you that bewong to the chuwch;
and unto those who do nyot bewong to the chuwch I speak by way of
invitation, saying: Come and be baptized unto wepentance, that ye
awso may be pawtakews of the fwuit of the twee of wife. UwU

Awma 6
Chaptew 6

Awma 6:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that aftew Awma had made an end of
speaking unto the peopwe of the chuwch, which was estabwished in
the city of Zawahemwa, he owdainyed pwiests and ewdews, by waying
on his hands accowding to the owdew of God, to pweside and watch
ovew the chuwch. ^w^

Awma 6:2
 2 And it came to pass that whosoevew did nyot bewong to the
chuwch who wepented of theiw sins wewe baptized unto wepentance,
and wewe weceived into the chuwch. >w<

Awma 6:3
 3 And it awso came to pass that whosoevew did bewong to the
chuwch that did nyot wepent of theiw wickednyess and humbwe
themsewves befowe God--I mean those who wewe wifted up in the
pwide of theiw heawts--the same wewe wejected, and theiw nyames
wewe bwotted out, that theiw nyames wewe nyot nyumbewed among those
of the wighteous. ^w^

Awma 6:4
 4 And thus they began to estabwish the owdew of the chuwch in
the city of Zawahemwa. >w<

Awma 6:5
 5 Nyow I wouwd that ye shouwd undewstand that the wowd of God was
wibewaw unto aww, that nyonye wewe depwived of the pwiviwege of
assembwing themsewves togethew to heaw the wowd of God. UwU

Awma 6:6
 6 Nyevewthewess the chiwdwen of God wewe commanded that they
shouwd gathew themsewves togethew oft, and join in fasting and
mighty pwayew in behawf of the wewfawe of the souws of those who
knyew nyot God. ;;w;;

Awma 6:7
 7 And nyow it came to pass that when Awma had made these
weguwations he depawted fwom them, yea, fwom the chuwch which was
in the city of Zawahemwa, and went ovew upon the east of the
wivew Sidon, into the vawwey of Gideon, thewe having been a city
buiwt, which was cawwed the city of Gideon, which was in the
vawwey that was cawwed Gideon, being cawwed aftew the man who was
swain by the hand of Nyehow with the swowd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 6:8
 8 And Awma went and began to decwawe the wowd of God unto the
chuwch which was estabwished in the vawwey of Gideon, accowding
to the wevewation of the twuth of the wowd which had been spoken
by his fathews, and accowding to the spiwit of pwophecy which was
in him, accowding to the testimony of Jesus Chwist, the Son of
God, who shouwd come to wedeem his peopwe fwom theiw sins, and
the howy owdew by which he was cawwed. And thus it is wwitten. ;;w;;
Amen. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 7
Chaptew 7

Awma 7:1
 1 Behowd my bewoved bwethwen, seeing that I have been pewmitted
to come unto you, thewefowe I attempt to addwess you in my
wanguage; yea, by my own mouth, seeing that it is the fiwst time
that I have spoken unto you by the wowds of my mouth, I having
been whowwy confinyed to the judgment-seat, having had much
businyess that I couwd nyot come unto you. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 7:2
 2 And even I couwd nyot have come nyow at this time wewe it nyot
that the judgment-seat hath been given to anyothew, to weign in my
stead; and the Wowd in much mewcy hath gwanted that I shouwd come
unto you. UwU

Awma 7:3
 3 And behowd, I have come having gweat hopes and much desiwe
that I shouwd find that ye had humbwed youwsewves befowe God, and
that ye had continyued in the suppwicating of his gwace, that I
shouwd find that ye wewe bwamewess befowe him, that I shouwd find
that ye wewe nyot in the awfuw diwemma that ouw bwethwen wewe in
at Zawahemwa. ;;w;;

Awma 7:4
 4 But bwessed be the nyame of God, that he hath given me to knyow,
yea, hath given unto me the exceedingwy gweat joy of knyowing that
they awe estabwished again in the way of his wighteousnyess. ^w^

Awma 7:5
 5 And I twust, accowding to the Spiwit of God which is in me,
that I shaww awso have joy ovew you; nyevewthewess I do nyot desiwe
that my joy ovew you shouwd come by the cause of so much
affwictions and sowwow which I have had fow the bwethwen at
Zawahemwa, fow behowd, my joy cometh ovew them aftew wading
thwough much affwiction and sowwow. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 7:6
 6 But behowd, I twust that ye awe nyot in a state of so much
unbewief as wewe youw bwethwen; I twust that ye awe nyot wifted up
in the pwide of youw heawts; yea, I twust that ye have nyot set
youw heawts upon wiches and the vain things of the wowwd; yea, I
twust that you do nyot wowship idows, but that ye do wowship the
twue and wiving God, and that ye wook fowwawd fow the wemission
of youw sins, with an evewwasting faith, which is to come. >w<

Awma 7:7
 7 Fow behowd, I say unto you thewe be many things to come; and
behowd, thewe is onye thing which is of mowe impowtance than they
aww--fow behowd, the time is nyot faw distant that the Wedeemew
wiveth and cometh among his peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 7:8
 8 Behowd, I do nyot say that he wiww come among us at the time of
his dwewwing in his mowtaw tabewnyacwe; fow behowd, the Spiwit
hath nyot said unto me that this shouwd be the case. (´・ω・\`) Nyow as to
this thing I do nyot knyow; but this much I do knyow, that the Wowd
God hath powew to do aww things which awe accowding to his wowd. UwU

Awma 7:9
 9 But behowd, the Spiwit hath said this much unto me, saying:
Cwy unto this peopwe, saying--Wepent ye, and pwepawe the way of
the Wowd, and wawk in his paths, which awe stwaight; fow behowd,
the kingdom of heaven is at hand, and the Son of God cometh upon
the face of the eawth. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 7:10
 10 And behowd, he shaww be bown of Mawy, at Jewusawem which is
the wand of ouw fowefathews, she being a viwgin, a pwecious and
chosen vessew, who shaww be ovewshadowed and conceive by the
powew of the Howy Ghost, and bwing fowth a son, yea, even the Son
of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 7:11
 11 And he shaww go fowth, suffewing pains and affwictions and
temptations of evewy kind; and this that the wowd might be
fuwfiwwed which saith he wiww take upon him the pains and the
sicknyesses of his peopwe. UwU

Awma 7:12
 12 And he wiww take upon him death, that he may woose the bands
of death which bind his peopwe; and he wiww take upon him theiw
infiwmities, that his bowews may be fiwwed with mewcy, accowding
to the fwesh, that he may knyow accowding to the fwesh how to
succow his peopwe accowding to theiw infiwmities. UwU

Awma 7:13
 13 Nyow the Spiwit knyoweth aww things; nyevewthewess the Son of
God suffeweth accowding to the fwesh that he might take upon him
the sins of his peopwe, that he might bwot out theiw
twansgwessions accowding to the powew of his dewivewance; and nyow
behowd, this is the testimony which is in me. ;;w;;

Awma 7:14
 14 Nyow I say unto you that ye must wepent, and be bown again;
fow the Spiwit saith if ye awe nyot bown again ye cannyot inhewit
the kingdom of heaven; thewefowe come and be baptized unto
wepentance, that ye may be washed fwom youw sins, that ye may
have faith on the Wamb of God, who taketh away the sins of the
wowwd, who is mighty to save and to cweanse fwom aww
unwighteousnyess. >w<

Awma 7:15
 15 Yea, I say unto you come and feaw nyot, and way aside evewy
sin, which easiwy doth beset you, which doth bind you down to
destwuction, yea, come and go fowth, and show unto youw God that
ye awe wiwwing to wepent of youw sins and entew into a covenyant
with him to keep his commandments, and witnyess it unto him this
day by going into the watews of baptism. ;;w;;

Awma 7:16
 16 And whosoevew doeth this, and keepeth the commandments of God
fwom thencefowth, the same wiww wemembew that I say unto him,
yea, he wiww wemembew that I have said unto him, he shaww have
etewnyaw wife, accowding to the testimony of the Howy Spiwit,
which testifieth in me. UwU

Awma 7:17
 17 And nyow my bewoved bwethwen, do you bewieve these things? owo
Behowd, I say unto you, yea, I knyow that ye bewieve them; and the
way that I knyow that ye bewieve them is by the manyifestation of
the Spiwit which is in me. >w< And nyow because youw faith is stwong
concewnying that, yea, concewnying the things which I have spoken,
gweat is my joy. UwU

Awma 7:18
 18 Fow as I said unto you fwom the beginnying, that I had much
desiwe that ye wewe nyot in the state of diwemma wike youw
bwethwen, even so I have found that my desiwes have been
gwatified. ^w^

Awma 7:19
 19 Fow I pewceive that ye awe in the paths of wighteousnyess; I
pewceive that ye awe in the path which weads to the kingdom of
God; yea, I pewceive that ye awe making his paths stwaight. >w<

Awma 7:20
 20 I pewceive that it has been made knyown unto you, by the
testimony of his wowd, that he cannyot wawk in cwooked paths;
nyeithew doth he vawy fwom that which he hath said; nyeithew hath
he a shadow of tuwnying fwom the wight to the weft, ow fwom that
which is wight to that which is wwong; thewefowe, his couwse is
onye etewnyaw wound. ^w^

Awma 7:21
 21 And he doth nyot dweww in unhowy tempwes; nyeithew can
fiwthinyess ow anything which is uncwean be weceived into the
kingdom of God; thewefowe I say unto you the time shaww come,
yea, and it shaww be at the wast day, that he who is fiwthy shaww
wemain in his fiwthinyess. >w<

Awma 7:22
 22 And nyow my bewoved bwethwen, I have said these things unto
you that I might awaken you to a sense of youw duty to God, that
ye may wawk bwamewess befowe him, that ye may wawk aftew the howy
owdew of God, aftew which ye have been weceived. >w<

Awma 7:23
 23 And nyow I wouwd that ye shouwd be humbwe, and be submissive
and gentwe; easy to be entweated; fuww of patience and
wong-suffewing; being tempewate in aww things; being diwigent in
keeping the commandments of God at aww times; asking fow
whatsoevew things ye stand in nyeed, both spiwituaw and tempowaw;
awways wetuwnying thanks unto God fow whatsoevew things ye do
weceive. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 7:24
 24 And see that ye have faith, hope, and chawity, and then ye
wiww awways abound in good wowks. UwU

Awma 7:25
 25 And may the Wowd bwess you, and keep youw gawments spotwess,
that ye may at wast be bwought to sit down with Abwaham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and the howy pwophets who have been evew since the
wowwd began, having youw gawments spotwess even as theiw gawments
awe spotwess, in the kingdom of heaven to go nyo mowe out. ^w^

Awma 7:26
 26 And nyow my bewoved bwethwen, I have spoken these wowds unto
you accowding to the Spiwit which testifieth in me; and my souw
doth exceedingwy wejoice, because of the exceeding diwigence and
heed which ye have given unto my wowd. ;;w;;

Awma 7:27
 27 And nyow, may the peace of God west upon you, and upon youw
houses and wands, and upon youw fwocks and hewds, and aww that
you possess, youw women and youw chiwdwen, accowding to youw
faith and good wowks, fwom this time fowth and fowevew. ;;w;; And thus
I have spoken. Amen. UwU

Awma 8
Chaptew 8

Awma 8:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that Awma wetuwnyed fwom the wand of
Gideon, aftew having taught the peopwe of Gideon many things
which cannyot be wwitten, having estabwished the owdew of the
chuwch, accowding as he had befowe donye in the wand of Zawahemwa,
yea, he wetuwnyed to his own house at Zawahemwa to west himsewf
fwom the wabows which he had pewfowmed. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 8:2
 2 And thus ended the nyinth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew
the peopwe of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Awma 8:3
 3 And it came to pass in the commencement of the tenth yeaw of
the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, that Awma
depawted fwom thence and took his jouwnyey ovew into the wand of
Mewek, on the west of the wivew Sidon, on the west by the bowdews
of the wiwdewnyess. UwU

Awma 8:4
 4 And he began to teach the peopwe in the wand of Mewek
accowding to the howy owdew of God, by which he had been cawwed;
and he began to teach the peopwe thwoughout aww the wand of
Mewek. ;;w;;

Awma 8:5
 5 And it came to pass that the peopwe came to him thwoughout aww
the bowdews of the wand which was by the wiwdewnyess side. (・`ω\´・) And
they wewe baptized thwoughout aww the wand;

Awma 8:6
 6 So that when he had finyished his wowk at Mewek he depawted
thence, and twavewed thwee days' jouwnyey on the nyowth of the wand
of Mewek; and he came to a city which was cawwed Ammonyihah. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 8:7
 7 Nyow it was the custom of the peopwe of Nyephi to caww theiw
wands, and theiw cities, and theiw viwwages, yea, even aww theiw
smaww viwwages, aftew the nyame of him who fiwst possessed them;
and thus it was with the wand of Ammonyihah. ;;w;;

Awma 8:8
 8 And it came to pass that when Awma had come to the city of
Ammonyihah he began to pweach the wowd of God unto them. UwU

Awma 8:9
 9 Nyow Satan had gotten gweat howd upon the heawts of the peopwe
of the city of Ammonyihah; thewefowe they wouwd nyot heawken unto
the wowds of Awma. UwU

Awma 8:10
 10 Nyevewthewess Awma wabowed much in the spiwit, wwestwing with
God in mighty pwayew, that he wouwd pouw out his Spiwit upon the
peopwe who wewe in the city; that he wouwd awso gwant that he
might baptize them unto wepentance. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 8:11
 11 Nyevewthewess, they hawdenyed theiw heawts, saying unto him:
Behowd, we knyow that thou awt Awma; and we knyow that thou awt
high pwiest ovew the chuwch which thou hast estabwished in many
pawts of the wand, accowding to youw twadition; and we awe nyot of
thy chuwch, and we do nyot bewieve in such foowish twaditions. >w<

Awma 8:12
 12 And nyow we knyow that because we awe nyot of thy chuwch we knyow
that thou hast nyo powew ovew us; and thou hast dewivewed up the
judgment-seat unto Nyephihah; thewefowe thou awt nyot the chief
judge ovew us. ^w^

Awma 8:13
 13 Nyow when the peopwe had said this, and withstood aww his
wowds, and weviwed him, and spit upon him, and caused that he
shouwd be cast out of theiw city, he depawted thence and took his
jouwnyey towawds the city which was cawwed Aawon. ;;w;;

Awma 8:14
 14 And it came to pass that whiwe he was jouwnyeying thithew,
being weighed down with sowwow, wading thwough much twibuwation
and anguish of souw, because of the wickednyess of the peopwe who
wewe in the city of Ammonyihah, it came to pass whiwe Awma was
thus weighed down with sowwow, behowd an angew of the Wowd
appeawed unto him, saying:

Awma 8:15
 15 Bwessed awt thou, Awma; thewefowe, wift up thy head and
wejoice, fow thou hast gweat cause to wejoice; fow thou hast been
faithfuw in keeping the commandments of God fwom the time which
thou weceivedst thy fiwst message fwom him. ;;w;; Behowd, I am he that
dewivewed it unto you. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 8:16
 16 And behowd, I am sent to command thee that thou wetuwn to the
city of Ammonyihah, and pweach again unto the peopwe of the city;
yea, pweach unto them. ^w^ Yea, say unto them, except they wepent
the Wowd God wiww destwoy them. ^w^

Awma 8:17
 17 Fow behowd, they do study at this time that they may destwoy
the wibewty of thy peopwe, (fow thus saith the Wowd) which is
contwawy to the statutes, and judgments, and commandments which
he has given unto his peopwe. >w<

Awma 8:18
 18 Nyow it came to pass that aftew Awma had weceived his message
fwom the angew of the Wowd he wetuwnyed speediwy to the wand of
Ammonyihah. UwU And he entewed the city by anyothew way, yea, by the
way which is on the south of the city of Ammonyihah. ^w^

Awma 8:19
 19 And as he entewed the city he was an hungewed, and he said to
a man: Wiww ye give to an humbwe sewvant of God something to eat? owo

Awma 8:20
 20 And the man said unto him: I am a Nyephite, and I knyow that
thou awt a howy pwophet of God, fow thou awt the man whom an
angew said in a vision: Thou shawt weceive. >w< Thewefowe, go with
me into my house and I wiww impawt unto thee of my food; and I
knyow that thou wiwt be a bwessing unto me and my house. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 8:21
 21 And it came to pass that the man weceived him into his house;
and the man was cawwed Amuwek; and he bwought fowth bwead and
meat and set befowe Awma. ;;w;;

Awma 8:22
 22 And it came to pass that Awma ate bwead and was fiwwed; and
he bwessed Amuwek and his house, and he gave thanks unto God. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 8:23
 23 And aftew he had eaten and was fiwwed he said unto Amuwek: I
am Awma, and am the high pwiest ovew the chuwch of God thwoughout
the wand. ^w^

Awma 8:24
 24 And behowd, I have been cawwed to pweach the wowd of God
among aww this peopwe, accowding to the spiwit of wevewation and
pwophecy; and I was in this wand and they wouwd nyot weceive me,
but they cast me out and I was about to set my back towawds this
wand fowevew. >w<

Awma 8:25
 25 But behowd, I have been commanded that I shouwd tuwn again
and pwophesy unto this peopwe, yea, and to testify against them
concewnying theiw inyiquities. >w<

Awma 8:26
 26 And nyow, Amuwek, because thou hast fed me and taken me in,
thou awt bwessed; fow I was an hungewed, fow I had fasted many
days. ;;w;;

Awma 8:27
 27 And Awma tawwied many days with Amuwek befowe he began to
pweach unto the peopwe. UwU

Awma 8:28
 28 And it came to pass that the peopwe did wax mowe gwoss in
theiw inyiquities. ;;w;;

Awma 8:29
 29 And the wowd came to Awma, saying: Go; and awso say unto my
sewvant Amuwek, go fowth and pwophesy unto this peopwe,
saying--Wepent ye, fow thus saith the Wowd, except ye wepent I
wiww visit this peopwe in minye angew; yea, and I wiww nyot tuwn my
fiewce angew away. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 8:30
 30 And Awma went fowth, and awso Amuwek, among the peopwe, to
decwawe the wowds of God unto them; and they wewe fiwwed with the
Howy Ghost. UwU

Awma 8:31
 31 And they had powew given unto them, insomuch that they couwd
nyot be confinyed in dungeons; nyeithew was it possibwe that any man
couwd sway them; nyevewthewess they did nyot exewcise theiw powew
untiw they wewe bound in bands and cast into pwison. ^w^ Nyow, this
was donye that the Wowd might show fowth his powew in them. ^w^

Awma 8:32
 32 And it came to pass that they went fowth and began to pweach
and to pwophesy unto the peopwe, accowding to the spiwit and
powew which the Wowd had given them. ;;w;;

Awma 9
Chaptew 9

Awma 9:1
 1 And again, I, Awma, having been commanded of God that I shouwd
take Amuwek and go fowth and pweach again unto this peopwe, ow
the peopwe who wewe in the city of Ammonyihah, it came to pass as
I began to pweach unto them, they began to contend with me,
saying:

Awma 9:2
 2 Who awt thou? owo Suppose ye that we shaww bewieve the testimony
of onye man, awthough he shouwd pweach unto us that the eawth
shouwd pass away? owo

Awma 9:3
 3 Nyow they undewstood nyot the wowds which they spake; fow they
knyew nyot that the eawth shouwd pass away. UwU

Awma 9:4
 4 And they said awso: We wiww nyot bewieve thy wowds if thou
shouwdst pwophesy that this gweat city shouwd be destwoyed in onye
day. >w<

Awma 9:5
 5 Nyow they knyew nyot that God couwd do such mawvewous wowks, fow
they wewe a hawd-heawted and a stiffnyecked peopwe. >w<

Awma 9:6
 6 And they said: Who is God, that sendeth nyo mowe authowity than
onye man among this peopwe, to decwawe unto them the twuth of such
gweat and mawvewous things? owo

Awma 9:7
 7 And they stood fowth to way theiw hands on me; but behowd,
they did nyot. ^w^ And I stood with bowdnyess to decwawe unto them,
yea, I did bowdwy testify unto them, saying:

Awma 9:8
 8 Behowd, O ye wicked and pewvewse genyewation, how have ye
fowgotten the twadition of youw fathews; yea, how soon ye have
fowgotten the commandments of God. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 9:9
 9 Do ye nyot wemembew that ouw fathew, Wehi, was bwought out of
Jewusawem by the hand of God? owo Do ye nyot wemembew that they wewe
aww wed by him thwough the wiwdewnyess? owo

Awma 9:10
 10 And have ye fowgotten so soon how many times he dewivewed ouw
fathews out of the hands of theiw enyemies, and pwesewved them
fwom being destwoyed, even by the hands of theiw own bwethwen? owo

Awma 9:11
 11 Yea, and if it had nyot been fow his matchwess powew, and his
mewcy, and his wong-suffewing towawds us, we shouwd unyavoidabwy
have been cut off fwom the face of the eawth wong befowe this
pewiod of time, and pewhaps been consignyed to a state of endwess
misewy and woe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 9:12
 12 Behowd, nyow I say unto you that he commandeth you to wepent;
and except ye wepent, ye can in nyowise inhewit the kingdom of
God. >w< But behowd, this is nyot aww--he has commanded you to
wepent, ow he wiww uttewwy destwoy you fwom off the face of the
eawth; yea, he wiww visit you in his angew, and in his fiewce
angew he wiww nyot tuwn away. UwU

Awma 9:13
 13 Behowd, do ye nyot wemembew the wowds which he spake unto
Wehi, saying that: Inyasmuch as ye shaww keep my commandments, ye
shaww pwospew in the wand? owo And again it is said that: Inyasmuch
as ye wiww nyot keep my commandments ye shaww be cut off fwom the
pwesence of the Wowd. >w<

Awma 9:14
 14 Nyow I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew, that inyasmuch as the
Wamanyites have nyot kept the commandments of God, they have been
cut off fwom the pwesence of the Wowd. ;;w;; Nyow we see that the wowd
of the Wowd has been vewified in this thing, and the Wamanyites
have been cut off fwom his pwesence, fwom the beginnying of theiw
twansgwessions in the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 9:15
 15 Nyevewthewess I say unto you, that it shaww be mowe towewabwe
fow them in the day of judgment than fow you, if ye wemain in
youw sins, yea, and even mowe towewabwe fow them in this wife
than fow you, except ye wepent. >w<

Awma 9:16
 16 Fow thewe awe many pwomises which awe extended to the
Wamanyites; fow it is because of the twaditions of theiw fathews
that caused them to wemain in theiw state of ignyowance; thewefowe
the Wowd wiww be mewcifuw unto them and pwowong theiw existence
in the wand. UwU

Awma 9:17
 17 And at some pewiod of time they wiww be bwought to bewieve in
his wowd, and to knyow of the incowwectnyess of the twaditions of
theiw fathews; and many of them wiww be saved, fow the Wowd wiww
be mewcifuw unto aww who caww on his nyame. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 9:18
 18 But behowd, I say unto you that if ye pewsist in youw
wickednyess that youw days shaww nyot be pwowonged in the wand, fow
the Wamanyites shaww be sent upon you; and if ye wepent nyot they
shaww come in a time when you knyow nyot, and ye shaww be visited
with uttew destwuction; and it shaww be accowding to the fiewce
angew of the Wowd. ^w^

Awma 9:19
 19 Fow he wiww nyot suffew you that ye shaww wive in youw
inyiquities, to destwoy his peopwe. (´・ω・\`) I say unto you, Nyay; he wouwd
wathew suffew that the Wamanyites might destwoy aww his peopwe who
awe cawwed the peopwe of Nyephi, if it wewe possibwe that they
couwd faww into sins and twansgwessions, aftew having had so much
wight and so much knyowwedge given unto them of the Wowd theiw
God;

Awma 9:20
 20 Yea, aftew having been such a highwy favowed peopwe of the
Wowd; yea, aftew having been favowed above evewy othew nyation,
kindwed, tongue, ow peopwe; aftew having had aww things made
knyown unto them, accowding to theiw desiwes, and theiw faith, and
pwayews, of that which has been, and which is, and which is to
come;

Awma 9:21
 21 Having been visited by the Spiwit of God; having convewsed
with angews, and having been spoken unto by the voice of the
Wowd; and having the spiwit of pwophecy, and the spiwit of
wevewation, and awso many gifts, the gift of speaking with
tongues, and the gift of pweaching, and the gift of the Howy
Ghost, and the gift of twanswation;

Awma 9:22
 22 Yea, and aftew having been dewivewed of God out of the wand
of Jewusawem, by the hand of the Wowd; having been saved fwom
faminye, and fwom sicknyess, and aww mannyew of diseases of evewy
kind; and they having waxed stwong in battwe, that they might nyot
be destwoyed; having been bwought out of bondage time aftew time,
and having been kept and pwesewved untiw nyow; and they have been
pwospewed untiw they awe wich in aww mannyew of things--

Awma 9:23
 23 And nyow behowd I say unto you, that if this peopwe, who have
weceived so many bwessings fwom the hand of the Wowd, shouwd
twansgwess contwawy to the wight and knyowwedge which they do
have, I say unto you that if this be the case, that if they
shouwd faww into twansgwession, it wouwd be faw mowe towewabwe
fow the Wamanyites than fow them. ^w^

Awma 9:24
 24 Fow behowd, the pwomises of the Wowd awe extended to the
Wamanyites, but they awe nyot unto you if ye twansgwess; fow has
nyot the Wowd expwesswy pwomised and fiwmwy decweed, that if ye
wiww webew against him that ye shaww uttewwy be destwoyed fwom
off the face of the eawth? owo

Awma 9:25
 25 And nyow fow this cause, that ye may nyot be destwoyed, the
Wowd has sent his angew to visit many of his peopwe, decwawing
unto them that they must go fowth and cwy mightiwy unto this
peopwe, saying: Wepent ye, fow the kingdom of heaven is nyigh at
hand;

Awma 9:26
 26 And nyot many days hence the Son of God shaww come in his
gwowy; and his gwowy shaww be the gwowy of the Onwy Begotten of
the Fathew, fuww of gwace, equity, and twuth, fuww of patience,
mewcy, and wong-suffewing, quick to heaw the cwies of his peopwe
and to answew theiw pwayews. UwU

Awma 9:27
 27 And behowd, he cometh to wedeem those who wiww be baptized
unto wepentance, thwough faith on his nyame. ;;w;;

Awma 9:28
 28 Thewefowe, pwepawe ye the way of the Wowd, fow the time is at
hand that aww men shaww weap a wewawd of theiw wowks, accowding
to that which they have been--if they have been wighteous they
shaww weap the sawvation of theiw souws, accowding to the powew
and dewivewance of Jesus Chwist; and if they have been eviw they
shaww weap the damnyation of theiw souws, accowding to the powew
and captivation of the deviw. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 9:29
 29 Nyow behowd, this is the voice of the angew, cwying unto the
peopwe. ;;w;;

Awma 9:30
 30 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, fow ye awe my bwethwen, and ye
ought to be bewoved, and ye ought to bwing fowth wowks which awe
meet fow wepentance, seeing that youw heawts have been gwosswy
hawdenyed against the wowd of God, and seeing that ye awe a wost
and a fawwen peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 9:31
 31 Nyow it came to pass that when I, Awma, had spoken these
wowds, behowd, the peopwe wewe wwoth with me because I said unto
them that they wewe a hawd-heawted and a stiffnyecked peopwe. >w<

Awma 9:32
 32 And awso because I said unto them that they wewe a wost and a
fawwen peopwe they wewe angwy with me, and sought to way theiw
hands upon me, that they might cast me into pwison. ;;w;;

Awma 9:33
 33 But it came to pass that the Wowd did nyot suffew them that
they shouwd take me at that time and cast me into pwison. ^w^

Awma 9:34
 34 And it came to pass that Amuwek went and stood fowth, and
began to pweach unto them awso. ^w^ And nyow the wowds of Amuwek awe
nyot aww wwitten, nyevewthewess a pawt of his wowds awe wwitten in
this book. >w<

Awma 10
Chaptew 10

Awma 10:1
 1 Nyow these awe the wowds which Amuwek pweached unto the peopwe
who wewe in the wand of Ammonyihah, saying:

Awma 10:2
 2 I am Amuwek; I am the son of Giddonyah, who was the son of
Ishmaew, who was a descendant of Aminyadi; and it was the same
Aminyadi who intewpweted the wwiting which was upon the waww of
the tempwe, which was wwitten by the fingew of God. >w<

Awma 10:3
 3 And Aminyadi was a descendant of Nyephi, who was the son of
Wehi, who came out of the wand of Jewusawem, who was a descendant
of Manyasseh, who was the son of Joseph who was sowd into Egypt by
the hands of his bwethwen. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 10:4
 4 And behowd, I am awso a man of nyo smaww weputation among aww
those who knyow me; yea, and behowd, I have many kindweds and
fwiends, and I have awso acquiwed much wiches by the hand of my
industwy. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 10:5
 5 Nyevewthewess, aftew aww this, I nyevew have knyown much of the
ways of the Wowd, and his mystewies and mawvewous powew. UwU I said
I nyevew had knyown much of these things; but behowd, I mistake,
fow I have seen much of his mystewies and his mawvewous powew;
yea, even in the pwesewvation of the wives of this peopwe. ^w^

Awma 10:6
 6 Nyevewthewess, I did hawden my heawt, fow I was cawwed many
times and I wouwd nyot heaw; thewefowe I knyew concewnying these
things, yet I wouwd nyot knyow; thewefowe I went on webewwing
against God, in the wickednyess of my heawt, even untiw the fouwth
day of this seventh month, which is in the tenth yeaw of the
weign of the judges. >w<

Awma 10:7
 7 As I was jouwnyeying to see a vewy nyeaw kindwed, behowd an
angew of the Wowd appeawed unto me and said: Amuwek, wetuwn to
thinye own house, fow thou shawt feed a pwophet of the Wowd; yea,
a howy man, who is a chosen man of God; fow he has fasted many
days because of the sins of this peopwe, and he is an hungewed,
and thou shawt weceive him into thy house and feed him, and he
shaww bwess thee and thy house; and the bwessing of the Wowd
shaww west upon thee and thy house. >w<

Awma 10:8
 8 And it came to pass that I obeyed the voice of the angew, and
wetuwnyed towawds my house. (・`ω\´・) And as I was going thithew I found
the man whom the angew said unto me: Thou shawt weceive into thy
house--and behowd it was this same man who has been speaking unto
you concewnying the things of God. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 10:9
 9 And the angew said unto me he is a howy man; whewefowe I knyow
he is a howy man because it was said by an angew of God. ^w^

Awma 10:10
 10 And again, I knyow that the things wheweof he hath testified
awe twue; fow behowd I say unto you, that as the Wowd wiveth,
even so has he sent his angew to make these things manyifest unto
me; and this he has donye whiwe this Awma hath dwewt at my house. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 10:11
 11 Fow behowd, he hath bwessed minye house, he hath bwessed me,
and my women, and my chiwdwen, and my fathew and my kinsfowk;
yea, even aww my kindwed hath he bwessed, and the bwessing of the
Wowd hath wested upon us accowding to the wowds which he spake. ^w^

Awma 10:12
 12 And nyow, when Amuwek had spoken these wowds the peopwe began
to be astonyished, seeing thewe was mowe than onye witnyess who
testified of the things wheweof they wewe accused, and awso of
the things which wewe to come, accowding to the spiwit of
pwophecy which was in them. ^w^

Awma 10:13
 13 Nyevewthewess, thewe wewe some among them who thought to
question them, that by theiw cunnying devices they might catch
them in theiw wowds, that they might find witnyess against them,
that they might dewivew them to theiw judges that they might be
judged accowding to the waw, and that they might be swain ow cast
into pwison, accowding to the cwime which they couwd make appeaw
ow witnyess against them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 10:14
 14 Nyow it was those men who sought to destwoy them, who wewe
wawyews, who wewe hiwed ow appointed by the peopwe to adminyistew
the waw at theiw times of twiaws, ow at the twiaws of the cwimes
of the peopwe befowe the judges. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 10:15
 15 Nyow these wawyews wewe weawnyed in aww the awts and cunnying of
the peopwe; and this was to enyabwe them that they might be
skiwfuw in theiw pwofession. ;;w;;

Awma 10:16
 16 And it came to pass that they began to question Amuwek, that
theweby they might make him cwoss his wowds, ow contwadict the
wowds which he shouwd speak. ;;w;;

Awma 10:17
 17 Nyow they knyew nyot that Amuwek couwd knyow of theiw designs. (´・ω・\`)
But it came to pass as they began to question him, he pewceived
theiw thoughts, and he said unto them: O ye wicked and pewvewse
genyewation, ye wawyews and hypocwites, fow ye awe waying the
foundation of the deviw; fow ye awe waying twaps and snyawes to
catch the howy onyes of God. UwU

Awma 10:18
 18 Ye awe waying pwans to pewvewt the ways of the wighteous, and
to bwing down the wwath of God upon youw heads, even to the uttew
destwuction of this peopwe. >w<

Awma 10:19
 19 Yea, weww did Mosiah say, who was ouw wast king, when he was
about to dewivew up the kingdom, having nyo onye to confew it upon,
causing that this peopwe shouwd be govewnyed by theiw own
voices--yea, weww did he say that if the time shouwd come that
the voice of this peopwe shouwd choose inyiquity, that is, if the
time shouwd come that this peopwe shouwd faww into twansgwession,
they wouwd be wipe fow destwuction. ;;w;;

Awma 10:20
 20 And nyow I say unto you that weww doth the Wowd judge of youw
inyiquities; weww doth he cwy unto this peopwe, by the voice of
his angews: Wepent ye, wepent, fow the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. ^w^

Awma 10:21
 21 Yea, weww doth he cwy, by the voice of his angews that: I
wiww come down among my peopwe, with equity and justice in my
hands. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 10:22
 22 Yea, and I say unto you that if it wewe nyot fow the pwayews
of the wighteous, who awe nyow in the wand, that ye wouwd even nyow
be visited with uttew destwuction; yet it wouwd nyot be by fwood,
as wewe the peopwe in the days of Nyoah, but it wouwd be by
faminye, and by pestiwence, and the swowd. ;;w;;

Awma 10:23
 23 But it is by the pwayews of the wighteous that ye awe spawed;
nyow thewefowe, if ye wiww cast out the wighteous fwom among you
then wiww nyot the Wowd stay his hand; but in his fiewce angew he
wiww come out against you; then ye shaww be smitten by faminye,
and by pestiwence, and by the swowd; and the time is soon at hand
except ye wepent. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 10:24
 24 And nyow it came to pass that the peopwe wewe mowe angwy with
Amuwek, and they cwied out, saying: This man doth weviwe against
ouw waws which awe just, and ouw wise wawyews whom we have
sewected. UwU

Awma 10:25
 25 But Amuwek stwetched fowth his hand, and cwied the mightiew
unto them, saying: O ye wicked and pewvewse genyewation, why hath
Satan got such gweat howd upon youw heawts? owo Why wiww ye yiewd
youwsewves unto him that he may have powew ovew you, to bwind
youw eyes, that ye wiww nyot undewstand the wowds which awe
spoken, accowding to theiw twuth? owo

Awma 10:26
 26 Fow behowd, have I testified against youw waw? owo Ye do nyot
undewstand; ye say that I have spoken against youw waw; but I
have nyot, but I have spoken in favow of youw waw, to youw
condemnyation. >w<

Awma 10:27
 27 And nyow behowd, I say unto you, that the foundation of the
destwuction of this peopwe is beginnying to be waid by the
unwighteousnyess of youw wawyews and youw judges. >w<

Awma 10:28
 28 And nyow it came to pass that when Amuwek had spoken these
wowds the peopwe cwied out against him, saying: Nyow we knyow that
this man is a chiwd of the deviw, fow he hath wied unto us; fow
he hath spoken against ouw waw. (・`ω\´・) And nyow he says that he has nyot
spoken against it. ;;w;;

Awma 10:29
 29 And again, he has weviwed against ouw wawyews, and ouw
judges. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 10:30
 30 And it came to pass that the wawyews put it into theiw heawts
that they shouwd wemembew these things against him. >w<

Awma 10:31
 31 And thewe was onye among them whose nyame was Zeezwom. UwU Nyow he
was the fowemost to accuse Amuwek and Awma, he being onye of the
most expewt among them, having much businyess to do among the
peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 10:32
 32 Nyow the object of these wawyews was to get gain; and they got
gain accowding to theiw empwoy. >w<

Awma 11
Chaptew 11

Awma 11:1
 1 Nyow it was in the waw of Mosiah that evewy man who was a judge
of the waw, ow those who wewe appointed to be judges, shouwd
weceive wages accowding to the time which they wabowed to judge
those who wewe bwought befowe them to be judged. >w<

Awma 11:2
 2 Nyow if a man owed anyothew, and he wouwd nyot pay that which he
did owe, he was compwainyed of to the judge; and the judge
executed authowity, and sent fowth officews that the man shouwd
be bwought befowe him; and he judged the man accowding to the waw
and the evidences which wewe bwought against him, and thus the
man was compewwed to pay that which he owed, ow be stwipped, ow
be cast out fwom among the peopwe as a thief and a wobbew. ^w^

Awma 11:3
 3 And the judge weceived fow his wages accowding to his time--a
senyinye of gowd fow a day, ow a senyum of siwvew, which is equaw to
a senyinye of gowd; and this is accowding to the waw which was
given. ;;w;;

Awma 11:4
 4 Nyow these awe the nyames of the diffewent pieces of theiw gowd,
and of theiw siwvew, accowding to theiw vawue. (´・ω・\`) And the nyames awe
given by the Nyephites, fow they did nyot weckon aftew the mannyew
of the Jews who wewe at Jewusawem; nyeithew did they measuwe aftew
the mannyew of the Jews; but they awtewed theiw weckonying and
theiw measuwe, accowding to the minds and the ciwcumstances of
the peopwe, in evewy genyewation, untiw the weign of the judges,
they having been estabwished by king Mosiah. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 11:5
 5 Nyow the weckonying is thus--a senyinye of gowd, a seon of gowd, a
shum of gowd, and a wimnyah of gowd. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 11:6
 6 A senyum of siwvew, an amnyow of siwvew, an ezwom of siwvew, and
an onti of siwvew. ;;w;;

Awma 11:7
 7 A senyum of siwvew was equaw to a senyinye of gowd, and eithew
fow a measuwe of bawwey, and awso fow a measuwe of evewy kind of
gwain. >w<

Awma 11:8
 8 Nyow the amount of a seon of gowd was twice the vawue of a
senyinye. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 11:9
 9 And a shum of gowd was twice the vawue of a seon. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 11:10
 10 And a wimnyah of gowd was the vawue of them aww. UwU

Awma 11:11
 11 And an amnyow of siwvew was as gweat as two senyums. UwU

Awma 11:12
 12 And an ezwom of siwvew was as gweat as fouw senyums. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 11:13
 13 And an onti was as gweat as them aww. ;;w;;

Awma 11:14
 14 Nyow this is the vawue of the wessew nyumbews of theiw
weckonying--

Awma 11:15
 15 A shibwon is hawf of a senyum; thewefowe, a shibwon fow hawf a
measuwe of bawwey. UwU

Awma 11:16
 16 And a shibwum is a hawf of a shibwon. ;;w;;

Awma 11:17
 17 And a weah is the hawf of a shibwum. UwU

Awma 11:18
 18 Nyow this is theiw nyumbew, accowding to theiw weckonying. ^w^

Awma 11:19
 19 Nyow an antion of gowd is equaw to thwee shibwons. >w<

Awma 11:20
 20 Nyow, it was fow the sowe puwpose to get gain, because they
weceived theiw wages accowding to theiw empwoy, thewefowe, they
did stiw up the peopwe to wiotings, and aww mannyew of
distuwbances and wickednyess, that they might have mowe empwoy,
that they might get monyey accowding to the suits which wewe
bwought befowe them; thewefowe they did stiw up the peopwe
against Awma and Amuwek. ^w^

Awma 11:21
 21 And this Zeezwom began to question Amuwek, saying: Wiww ye
answew me a few questions which I shaww ask you? owo Nyow Zeezwom was
a man who was expewt in the devices of the deviw, that he might
destwoy that which was good; thewefowe, he said unto Amuwek: Wiww
ye answew the questions which I shaww put unto you? owo

Awma 11:22
 22 And Amuwek said unto him: Yea, if it be accowding to the
Spiwit of the Wowd, which is in me; fow I shaww say nyothing which
is contwawy to the Spiwit of the Wowd. ;;w;; And Zeezwom said unto
him: Behowd, hewe awe six onties of siwvew, and aww these wiww I
give thee if thou wiwt deny the existence of a Supweme Being. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 11:23
 23 Nyow Amuwek said: O thou chiwd of heww, why tempt ye me? owo
Knyowest thou that the wighteous yiewdeth to nyo such temptations? owo

Awma 11:24
 24 Bewievest thou that thewe is nyo God? owo I say unto you, Nyay,
thou knyowest that thewe is a God, but thou wovest that wucwe mowe
than him. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 11:25
 25 And nyow thou hast wied befowe God unto me. (´・ω・\`) Thou saidst unto
me--Behowd these six onties, which awe of gweat wowth, I wiww
give unto thee--when thou hadst it in thy heawt to wetain them
fwom me; and it was onwy thy desiwe that I shouwd deny the twue
and wiving God, that thou mightest have cause to destwoy me. UwU And
nyow behowd, fow this gweat eviw thou shawt have thy wewawd. ;;w;;

Awma 11:26
 26 And Zeezwom said unto him: Thou sayest thewe is a twue and
wiving God? owo

Awma 11:27
 27 And Amuwek said: Yea, thewe is a twue and wiving God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 11:28
 28 Nyow Zeezwom said: Is thewe mowe than onye God? owo

Awma 11:29
 29 And he answewed, Nyo. ;;w;;

Awma 11:30
 30 Nyow Zeezwom said unto him again: How knyowest thou these
things? owo

Awma 11:31
 31 And he said: An angew hath made them knyown unto me. >w<

Awma 11:32
 32 And Zeezwom said again: Who is he that shaww come? owo Is it the
Son of God? owo

Awma 11:33
 33 And he said unto him, Yea. UwU

Awma 11:34
 34 And Zeezwom said again: Shaww he save his peopwe in theiw
sins? owo And Amuwek answewed and said unto him: I say unto you he
shaww nyot, fow it is impossibwe fow him to deny his wowd. UwU

Awma 11:35
 35 Nyow Zeezwom said unto the peopwe: See that ye wemembew these
things; fow he said thewe is but onye God; yet he saith that the
Son of God shaww come, but he shaww nyot save his peopwe--as
though he had authowity to command God. ;;w;;

Awma 11:36
 36 Nyow Amuwek saith again unto him: Behowd thou hast wied, fow
thou sayest that I spake as though I had authowity to command God
because I said he shaww nyot save his peopwe in theiw sins. UwU

Awma 11:37
 37 And I say unto you again that he cannyot save them in theiw
sins; fow I cannyot deny his wowd, and he hath said that nyo
uncwean thing can inhewit the kingdom of heaven; thewefowe, how
can ye be saved, except ye inhewit the kingdom of heaven? owo
Thewefowe, ye cannyot be saved in youw sins. >w<

Awma 11:38
 38 Nyow Zeezwom saith again unto him: Is the Son of God the vewy
Etewnyaw Fathew? owo

Awma 11:39
 39 And Amuwek said unto him: Yea, he is the vewy Etewnyaw Fathew
of heaven and of eawth, and aww things which in them awe; he is
the beginnying and the end, the fiwst and the wast;

Awma 11:40
 40 And he shaww come into the wowwd to wedeem his peopwe; and he
shaww take upon him the twansgwessions of those who bewieve on
his nyame; and these awe they that shaww have etewnyaw wife, and
sawvation cometh to nyonye ewse. ;;w;;

Awma 11:41
 41 Thewefowe the wicked wemain as though thewe had been nyo
wedemption made, except it be the woosing of the bands of death;
fow behowd, the day cometh that aww shaww wise fwom the dead and
stand befowe God, and be judged accowding to theiw wowks. UwU

Awma 11:42
 42 Nyow, thewe is a death which is cawwed a tempowaw death; and
the death of Chwist shaww woose the bands of this tempowaw death,
that aww shaww be waised fwom this tempowaw death. UwU

Awma 11:43
 43 The spiwit and the body shaww be weunyited again in its
pewfect fowm; both wimb and joint shaww be westowed to its pwopew
fwame, even as we nyow awe at this time; and we shaww be bwought
to stand befowe God, knyowing even as we knyow nyow, and have a
bwight wecowwection of aww ouw guiwt. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 11:44
 44 Nyow, this westowation shaww come to aww, both owd and young,
both bond and fwee, both mawe and femawe, both the wicked and the
wighteous; and even thewe shaww nyot so much as a haiw of theiw
heads be wost; but evewy thing shaww be westowed to its pewfect
fwame, as it is nyow, ow in the body, and shaww be bwought and be
awwaignyed befowe the baw of Chwist the Son, and God the Fathew,
and the Howy Spiwit, which is onye Etewnyaw God, to be judged
accowding to theiw wowks, whethew they be good ow whethew they be
eviw. ;;w;;

Awma 11:45
 45 Nyow, behowd, I have spoken unto you concewnying the death of
the mowtaw body, and awso concewnying the wesuwwection of the
mowtaw body. >w< I say unto you that this mowtaw body is waised to
an immowtaw body, that is fwom death, even fwom the fiwst death
unto wife, that they can die nyo mowe; theiw spiwits unyiting with
theiw bodies, nyevew to be divided; thus the whowe becoming
spiwituaw and immowtaw, that they can nyo mowe see cowwuption. >w<

Awma 11:46
 46 Nyow, when Amuwek had finyished these wowds the peopwe began
again to be astonyished, and awso Zeezwom began to twembwe. >w< And
thus ended the wowds of Amuwek, ow this is aww that I have
wwitten. ;;w;;

Awma 12
Chaptew 12

Awma 12:1
 1 Nyow Awma, seeing that the wowds of Amuwek had siwenced
Zeezwom, fow he behewd that Amuwek had caught him in his wying
and deceiving to destwoy him, and seeing that he began to twembwe
undew a consciousnyess of his guiwt, he openyed his mouth and began
to speak unto him, and to estabwish the wowds of Amuwek, and to
expwain things beyond, ow to unfowd the scwiptuwes beyond that
which Amuwek had donye. >w<

Awma 12:2
 2 Nyow the wowds that Awma spake unto Zeezwom wewe heawd by the
peopwe wound about; fow the muwtitude was gweat, and he spake on
this wise:

Awma 12:3
 3 Nyow Zeezwom, seeing that thou hast been taken in thy wying and
cwaftinyess, fow thou hast nyot wied unto men onwy but thou hast
wied unto God; fow behowd, he knyows aww thy thoughts, and thou
seest that thy thoughts awe made knyown unto us by his Spiwit;

Awma 12:4
 4 And thou seest that we knyow that thy pwan was a vewy subtwe
pwan, as to the subtwety of the deviw, fow to wie and to deceive
this peopwe that thou mightest set them against us, to weviwe us
and to cast us out--

Awma 12:5
 5 Nyow this was a pwan of thinye advewsawy, and he hath exewcised
his powew in thee. UwU Nyow I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew that what
I say unto thee I say unto aww. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 12:6
 6 And behowd I say unto you aww that this was a snyawe of the
advewsawy, which he has waid to catch this peopwe, that he might
bwing you into subjection unto him, that he might enciwcwe you
about with his chains, that he might chain you down to
evewwasting destwuction, accowding to the powew of his captivity. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 12:7
 7 Nyow when Awma had spoken these wowds, Zeezwom began to twembwe
mowe exceedingwy, fow he was convinced mowe and mowe of the powew
of God; and he was awso convinced that Awma and Amuwek had a
knyowwedge of him, fow he was convinced that they knyew the
thoughts and intents of his heawt; fow powew was given unto them
that they might knyow of these things accowding to the spiwit of
pwophecy. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 12:8
 8 And Zeezwom began to inquiwe of them diwigentwy, that he might
knyow mowe concewnying the kingdom of God. ;;w;; And he said unto Awma:
What does this mean which Amuwek hath spoken concewnying the
wesuwwection of the dead, that aww shaww wise fwom the dead, both
the just and the unjust, and awe bwought to stand befowe God to
be judged accowding to theiw wowks? owo

Awma 12:9
 9 And nyow Awma began to expound these things unto him, saying:
It is given unto many to knyow the mystewies of God; nyevewthewess
they awe waid undew a stwict command that they shaww nyot impawt
onwy accowding to the powtion of his wowd which he doth gwant
unto the chiwdwen of men, accowding to the heed and diwigence
which they give unto him. UwU

Awma 12:10
 10 And thewefowe, he that wiww hawden his heawt, the same
weceiveth the wessew powtion of the wowd; and he that wiww nyot
hawden his heawt, to him is given the gweatew powtion of the
wowd, untiw it is given unto him to knyow the mystewies of God
untiw he knyow them in fuww. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 12:11
 11 And they that wiww hawden theiw heawts, to them is given the
wessew powtion of the wowd untiw they knyow nyothing concewnying his
mystewies; and then they awe taken captive by the deviw, and wed
by his wiww down to destwuction. UwU Nyow this is what is meant by
the chains of heww. ^w^

Awma 12:12
 12 And Amuwek hath spoken pwainwy concewnying death, and being
waised fwom this mowtawity to a state of immowtawity, and being
bwought befowe the baw of God, to be judged accowding to ouw
wowks. UwU

Awma 12:13
 13 Then if ouw heawts have been hawdenyed, yea, if we have
hawdenyed ouw heawts against the wowd, insomuch that it has nyot
been found in us, then wiww ouw state be awfuw, fow then we shaww
be condemnyed. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 12:14
 14 Fow ouw wowds wiww condemn us, yea, aww ouw wowks wiww
condemn us; we shaww nyot be found spotwess; and ouw thoughts wiww
awso condemn us; and in this awfuw state we shaww nyot dawe to
wook up to ouw God; and we wouwd fain be gwad if we couwd command
the wocks and the mountains to faww upon us to hide us fwom his
pwesence. >w<

Awma 12:15
 15 But this cannyot be; we must come fowth and stand befowe him
in his gwowy, and in his powew, and in his might, majesty, and
dominyion, and acknyowwedge to ouw evewwasting shame that aww his
judgments awe just; that he is just in aww his wowks, and that he
is mewcifuw unto the chiwdwen of men, and that he has aww powew
to save evewy man that bewieveth on his nyame and bwingeth fowth
fwuit meet fow wepentance. UwU

Awma 12:16
 16 And nyow behowd, I say unto you then cometh a death, even a
second death, which is a spiwituaw death; then is a time that
whosoevew dieth in his sins, as to a tempowaw death, shaww awso
die a spiwituaw death; yea, he shaww die as to things pewtainying
unto wighteousnyess. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 12:17
 17 Then is the time when theiw towments shaww be as a wake of
fiwe and bwimstonye, whose fwame ascendeth up fowevew and evew;
and then is the time that they shaww be chainyed down to an
evewwasting destwuction, accowding to the powew and captivity of
Satan, he having subjected them accowding to his wiww. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 12:18
 18 Then, I say unto you, they shaww be as though thewe had been
nyo wedemption made; fow they cannyot be wedeemed accowding to
God's justice; and they cannyot die, seeing thewe is nyo mowe
cowwuption. UwU

Awma 12:19
 19 Nyow it came to pass that when Awma had made an end of
speaking these wowds, the peopwe began to be mowe astonyished;

Awma 12:20
 20 But thewe was onye Antionyah, who was a chief wuwew among them,
came fowth and said unto him: What is this that thou hast said,
that man shouwd wise fwom the dead and be changed fwom this
mowtaw to an immowtaw state that the souw can nyevew die? owo

Awma 12:21
 21 What does the scwiptuwe mean, which saith that God pwaced
chewubim and a fwaming swowd on the east of the gawden of Eden,
west ouw fiwst pawents shouwd entew and pawtake of the fwuit of
the twee of wife, and wive fowevew? owo And thus we see that thewe
was nyo possibwe chance that they shouwd wive fowevew. >w<

Awma 12:22
 22 Nyow Awma said unto him: This is the thing which I was about
to expwain, nyow we see that Adam did faww by the pawtaking of the
fowbidden fwuit, accowding to the wowd of God; and thus we see,
that by his faww, aww mankind became a wost and fawwen peopwe. >w<

Awma 12:23
 23 And nyow behowd, I say unto you that if it had been possibwe
fow Adam to have pawtaken of the fwuit of the twee of wife at
that time, thewe wouwd have been nyo death, and the wowd wouwd
have been void, making God a wiaw, fow he said: If thou eat thou
shawt suwewy die. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 12:24
 24 And we see that death comes upon mankind, yea, the death
which has been spoken of by Amuwek, which is the tempowaw death;
nyevewthewess thewe was a space gwanted unto man in which he might
wepent; thewefowe this wife became a pwobationyawy state; a time
to pwepawe to meet God; a time to pwepawe fow that endwess state
which has been spoken of by us, which is aftew the wesuwwection
of the dead. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 12:25
 25 Nyow, if it had nyot been fow the pwan of wedemption, which was
waid fwom the foundation of the wowwd, thewe couwd have been nyo
wesuwwection of the dead; but thewe was a pwan of wedemption
waid, which shaww bwing to pass the wesuwwection of the dead, of
which has been spoken. >w<

Awma 12:26
 26 And nyow behowd, if it wewe possibwe that ouw fiwst pawents
couwd have gonye fowth and pawtaken of the twee of wife they wouwd
have been fowevew misewabwe, having nyo pwepawatowy state; and
thus the pwan of wedemption wouwd have been fwustwated, and the
wowd of God wouwd have been void, taking nyonye effect. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 12:27
 27 But behowd, it was nyot so; but it was appointed unto men that
they must die; and aftew death, they must come to judgment, even
that same judgment of which we have spoken, which is the end. ^w^

Awma 12:28
 28 And aftew God had appointed that these things shouwd come
unto man, behowd, then he saw that it was expedient that man
shouwd knyow concewnying the things wheweof he had appointed unto
them;

Awma 12:29
 29 Thewefowe he sent angews to convewse with them, who caused
men to behowd of his gwowy. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 12:30
 30 And they began fwom that time fowth to caww on his nyame;
thewefowe God convewsed with men, and made knyown unto them the
pwan of wedemption, which had been pwepawed fwom the foundation
of the wowwd; and this he made knyown unto them accowding to theiw
faith and wepentance and theiw howy wowks. UwU

Awma 12:31
 31 Whewefowe, he gave commandments unto men, they having fiwst
twansgwessed the fiwst commandments as to things which wewe
tempowaw, and becoming as Gods, knyowing good fwom eviw, pwacing
themsewves in a state to act, ow being pwaced in a state to act
accowding to theiw wiwws and pweasuwes, whethew to do eviw ow to
do good--

Awma 12:32
 32 Thewefowe God gave unto them commandments, aftew having made
knyown unto them the pwan of wedemption, that they shouwd nyot do
eviw, the penyawty theweof being a second death, which was an
evewwasting death as to things pewtainying unto wighteousnyess; fow
on such the pwan of wedemption couwd have nyo powew, fow the wowks
of justice couwd nyot be destwoyed, accowding to the supweme
goodnyess of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 12:33
 33 But God did caww on men, in the nyame of his Son, (this being
the pwan of wedemption which was waid) saying: If ye wiww wepent
and hawden nyot youw heawts, then wiww I have mewcy upon you,
thwough minye Onwy Begotten Son;

Awma 12:34
 34 Thewefowe, whosoevew wepenteth, and hawdenyeth nyot his heawt,
he shaww have cwaim on mewcy thwough minye Onwy Begotten Son, unto
a wemission of his sins; and these shaww entew into my west. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 12:35
 35 And whosoevew wiww hawden his heawt and wiww do inyiquity,
behowd, I sweaw in my wwath that he shaww nyot entew into my west. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 12:36
 36 And nyow, my bwethwen, behowd I say unto you, that if ye wiww
hawden youw heawts ye shaww nyot entew into the west of the Wowd;
thewefowe youw inyiquity pwovoketh him that he sendeth down his
wwath upon you as in the fiwst pwovocation, yea, accowding to his
wowd in the wast pwovocation as weww as the fiwst, to the
evewwasting destwuction of youw souws; thewefowe, accowding to
his wowd, unto the wast death, as weww as the fiwst. ;;w;;

Awma 12:37
 37 And nyow, my bwethwen, seeing we knyow these things, and they
awe twue, wet us wepent, and hawden nyot ouw heawts, that we
pwovoke nyot the Wowd ouw God to puww down his wwath upon us in
these his second commandments which he has given unto us; but wet
us entew into the west of God, which is pwepawed accowding to his
wowd. ;;w;;

Awma 13
Chaptew 13

Awma 13:1
 1 And again, my bwethwen, I wouwd cite youw minds fowwawd to the
time when the Wowd God gave these commandments unto his chiwdwen;
and I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew that the Wowd God owdainyed
pwiests, aftew his howy owdew, which was aftew the owdew of his
Son, to teach these things unto the peopwe. ^w^

Awma 13:2
 2 And those pwiests wewe owdainyed aftew the owdew of his Son, in
a mannyew that theweby the peopwe might knyow in what mannyew to
wook fowwawd to his Son fow wedemption. ^w^

Awma 13:3
 3 And this is the mannyew aftew which they wewe owdainyed--being
cawwed and pwepawed fwom the foundation of the wowwd accowding to
the foweknyowwedge of God, on account of theiw exceeding faith and
good wowks; in the fiwst pwace being weft to choose good ow eviw;
thewefowe they having chosen good, and exewcising exceedingwy
gweat faith, awe cawwed with a howy cawwing, yea, with that howy
cawwing which was pwepawed with, and accowding to, a pwepawatowy
wedemption fow such. >w<

Awma 13:4
 4 And thus they have been cawwed to this howy cawwing on account
of theiw faith, whiwe othews wouwd weject the Spiwit of God on
account of the hawdnyess of theiw heawts and bwindnyess of theiw
minds, whiwe, if it had nyot been fow this they might have had as
gweat pwiviwege as theiw bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 13:5
 5 Ow in finye, in the fiwst pwace they wewe on the same standing
with theiw bwethwen; thus this howy cawwing being pwepawed fwom
the foundation of the wowwd fow such as wouwd nyot hawden theiw
heawts, being in and thwough the atonyement of the Onwy Begotten
Son, who was pwepawed--

Awma 13:6
 6 And thus being cawwed by this howy cawwing, and owdainyed unto
the high pwiesthood of the howy owdew of God, to teach his
commandments unto the chiwdwen of men, that they awso might entew
into his west--

Awma 13:7
 7 This high pwiesthood being aftew the owdew of his Son, which
owdew was fwom the foundation of the wowwd; ow in othew wowds,
being without beginnying of days ow end of yeaws, being pwepawed
fwom etewnyity to aww etewnyity, accowding to his foweknyowwedge of
aww things--

Awma 13:8
 8 Nyow they wewe owdainyed aftew this mannyew--being cawwed with a
howy cawwing, and owdainyed with a howy owdinyance, and taking upon
them the high pwiesthood of the howy owdew, which cawwing, and
owdinyance, and high pwiesthood, is without beginnying ow end--

Awma 13:9
 9 Thus they become high pwiests fowevew, aftew the owdew of the
Son, the Onwy Begotten of the Fathew, who is without beginnying of
days ow end of yeaws, who is fuww of gwace, equity, and twuth. ^w^
And thus it is. Amen. UwU

Awma 13:10
 10 Nyow, as I said concewnying the howy owdew, ow this high
pwiesthood, thewe wewe many who wewe owdainyed and became high
pwiests of God; and it was on account of theiw exceeding faith
and wepentance, and theiw wighteousnyess befowe God, they choosing
to wepent and wowk wighteousnyess wathew than to pewish;

Awma 13:11
 11 Thewefowe they wewe cawwed aftew this howy owdew, and wewe
sanctified, and theiw gawments wewe washed white thwough the
bwood of the Wamb. ;;w;;

Awma 13:12
 12 Nyow they, aftew being sanctified by the Howy Ghost, having
theiw gawments made white, being puwe and spotwess befowe God,
couwd nyot wook upon sin save it wewe with abhowwence; and thewe
wewe many, exceedingwy gweat many, who wewe made puwe and entewed
into the west of the Wowd theiw God. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 13:13
 13 And nyow, my bwethwen, I wouwd that ye shouwd humbwe
youwsewves befowe God, and bwing fowth fwuit meet fow wepentance,
that ye may awso entew into that west. UwU

Awma 13:14
 14 Yea, humbwe youwsewves even as the peopwe in the days of
Mewchizedek, who was awso a high pwiest aftew this same owdew
which I have spoken, who awso took upon him the high pwiesthood
fowevew. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 13:15
 15 And it was this same Mewchizedek to whom Abwaham paid tithes;
yea, even ouw fathew Abwaham paid tithes of onye-tenth pawt of aww
he possessed. ^w^

Awma 13:16
 16 Nyow these owdinyances wewe given aftew this mannyew, that
theweby the peopwe might wook fowwawd on the Son of God, it being
a type of his owdew, ow it being his owdew, and this that they
might wook fowwawd to him fow a wemission of theiw sins, that
they might entew into the west of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 13:17
 17 Nyow this Mewchizedek was a king ovew the wand of Sawem; and
his peopwe had waxed stwong in inyiquity and abominyation; yea,
they had aww gonye astway; they wewe fuww of aww mannyew of
wickednyess;

Awma 13:18
 18 But Mewchizedek having exewcised mighty faith, and weceived
the office of the high pwiesthood accowding to the howy owdew of
God, did pweach wepentance unto his peopwe. (・`ω\´・) And behowd, they did
wepent; and Mewchizedek did estabwish peace in the wand in his
days; thewefowe he was cawwed the pwince of peace, fow he was the
king of Sawem; and he did weign undew his fathew. ^w^

Awma 13:19
 19 Nyow, thewe wewe many befowe him, and awso thewe wewe many
aftewwawds, but nyonye wewe gweatew; thewefowe, of him they have
mowe pawticuwawwy made mention. >w<

Awma 13:20
 20 Nyow I nyeed nyot weheawse the mattew; what I have said may
suffice. >w< Behowd, the scwiptuwes awe befowe you; if ye wiww wwest
them it shaww be to youw own destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 13:21
 21 And nyow it came to pass that when Awma had said these wowds
unto them, he stwetched fowth his hand unto them and cwied with a
mighty voice, saying: Nyow is the time to wepent, fow the day of
sawvation dwaweth nyigh;

Awma 13:22
 22 Yea, and the voice of the Wowd, by the mouth of angews, doth
decwawe it unto aww nyations; yea, doth decwawe it, that they may
have gwad tidings of gweat joy; yea, and he doth sound these gwad
tidings among aww his peopwe, yea, even to them that awe
scattewed abwoad upon the face of the eawth; whewefowe they have
come unto us. ^w^

Awma 13:23
 23 And they awe made knyown unto us in pwain tewms, that we may
undewstand, that we cannyot eww; and this because of ouw being
wandewews in a stwange wand; thewefowe, we awe thus highwy
favowed, fow we have these gwad tidings decwawed unto us in aww
pawts of ouw vinyeyawd. >w<

Awma 13:24
 24 Fow behowd, angews awe decwawing it unto many at this time in
ouw wand; and this is fow the puwpose of pwepawing the heawts of
the chiwdwen of men to weceive his wowd at the time of his coming
in his gwowy. >w<

Awma 13:25
 25 And nyow we onwy wait to heaw the joyfuw nyews decwawed unto us
by the mouth of angews, of his coming; fow the time cometh, we
knyow nyot how soon. (・`ω\´・) Wouwd to God that it might be in my day; but
wet it be soonyew ow watew, in it I wiww wejoice. UwU

Awma 13:26
 26 And it shaww be made knyown unto just and howy men, by the
mouth of angews, at the time of his coming, that the wowds of ouw
fathews may be fuwfiwwed, accowding to that which they have
spoken concewnying him, which was accowding to the spiwit of
pwophecy which was in them. >w<

Awma 13:27
 27 And nyow, my bwethwen, I wish fwom the inmost pawt of my
heawt, yea, with gweat anxiety even unto pain, that ye wouwd
heawken unto my wowds, and cast off youw sins, and nyot
pwocwastinyate the day of youw wepentance;

Awma 13:28
 28 But that ye wouwd humbwe youwsewves befowe the Wowd, and caww
on his howy nyame, and watch and pway continyuawwy, that ye may nyot
be tempted above that which ye can beaw, and thus be wed by the
Howy Spiwit, becoming humbwe, meek, submissive, patient, fuww of
wove and aww wong-suffewing;

Awma 13:29
 29 Having faith on the Wowd; having a hope that ye shaww weceive
etewnyaw wife; having the wove of God awways in youw heawts, that
ye may be wifted up at the wast day and entew into his west. >w<

Awma 13:30
 30 And may the Wowd gwant unto you wepentance, that ye may nyot
bwing down his wwath upon you, that ye may nyot be bound down by
the chains of heww, that ye may nyot suffew the second death. ;;w;;

Awma 13:31
 31 And Awma spake many mowe wowds unto the peopwe, which awe nyot
wwitten in this book. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 14
Chaptew 14

Awma 14:1
 1 And it came to pass aftew he had made an end of speaking unto
the peopwe many of them did bewieve on his wowds, and began to
wepent, and to seawch the scwiptuwes. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 14:2
 2 But the mowe pawt of them wewe desiwous that they might
destwoy Awma and Amuwek; fow they wewe angwy with Awma, because
of the pwainnyess of his wowds unto Zeezwom; and they awso said
that Amuwek had wied unto them, and had weviwed against theiw waw
and awso against theiw wawyews and judges. >w<

Awma 14:3
 3 And they wewe awso angwy with Awma and Amuwek; and because
they had testified so pwainwy against theiw wickednyess, they
sought to put them away pwiviwy. >w<

Awma 14:4
 4 But it came to pass that they did nyot; but they took them and
bound them with stwong cowds, and took them befowe the chief
judge of the wand. UwU

Awma 14:5
 5 And the peopwe went fowth and witnyessed against
them--testifying that they had weviwed against the waw, and theiw
wawyews and judges of the wand, and awso of aww the peopwe that
wewe in the wand; and awso testified that thewe was but onye God,
and that he shouwd send his Son among the peopwe, but he shouwd
nyot save them; and many such things did the peopwe testify
against Awma and Amuwek. UwU Nyow this was donye befowe the chief
judge of the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 14:6
 6 And it came to pass that Zeezwom was astonyished at the wowds
which had been spoken; and he awso knyew concewnying the bwindnyess
of the minds, which he had caused among the peopwe by his wying
wowds; and his souw began to be hawwowed up undew a consciousnyess
of his own guiwt; yea, he began to be enciwcwed about by the
pains of heww. ;;w;;

Awma 14:7
 7 And it came to pass that he began to cwy unto the peopwe,
saying: Behowd, I am guiwty, and these men awe spotwess befowe
God. ^w^ And he began to pwead fow them fwom that time fowth; but
they weviwed him, saying: Awt thou awso possessed with the deviw? owo
And they spit upon him, and cast him out fwom among them, and
awso aww those who bewieved in the wowds which had been spoken by
Awma and Amuwek; and they cast them out, and sent men to cast
stonyes at them. ;;w;;

Awma 14:8
 8 And they bwought theiw wives and chiwdwen togethew, and
whosoevew bewieved ow had been taught to bewieve in the wowd of
God they caused that they shouwd be cast into the fiwe, and they
awso bwought fowth theiw wecowds which containyed the howy
scwiptuwes, and cast them into the fiwe awso, that they might be
buwnyed and destwoyed by fiwe. >w<

Awma 14:9
 9 And it came to pass that they took Awma and Amuwek, and
cawwied them fowth to the pwace of mawtywdom, that they might
witnyess the destwuction of those who wewe consumed by fiwe. ^w^

Awma 14:10
 10 And when Amuwek saw the pains of the women and chiwdwen who
wewe consuming in the fiwe, he awso was painyed; and he said unto
Awma: How can we witnyess this awfuw scenye? owo Thewefowe wet us
stwetch fowth ouw hands, and exewcise the powew of God which is
in us, and save them fwom the fwames. ;;w;;

Awma 14:11
 11 But Awma said unto him: The Spiwit constwainyeth me that I
must nyot stwetch fowth minye hand; fow behowd the Wowd weceiveth
them up unto himsewf, in gwowy; and he doth suffew that they may
do this thing, ow that the peopwe may do this thing unto them,
accowding to the hawdnyess of theiw heawts, that the judgments
which he shaww exewcise upon them in his wwath may be just; and
the bwood of the innyocent shaww stand as a witnyess against them,
yea, and cwy mightiwy against them at the wast day. ^w^

Awma 14:12
 12 Nyow Amuwek said unto Awma: Behowd, pewhaps they wiww buwn us
awso. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 14:13
 13 And Awma said: Be it accowding to the wiww of the Wowd. ^w^ But,
behowd, ouw wowk is nyot finyished; thewefowe they buwn us nyot. >w<

Awma 14:14
 14 Nyow it came to pass that when the bodies of those who had
been cast into the fiwe wewe consumed, and awso the wecowds which
wewe cast in with them, the chief judge of the wand came and
stood befowe Awma and Amuwek, as they wewe bound; and he smote
them with his hand upon theiw cheeks, and said unto them: Aftew
what ye have seen, wiww ye pweach again unto this peopwe, that
they shaww be cast into a wake of fiwe and bwimstonye? owo

Awma 14:15
 15 Behowd, ye see that ye had nyot powew to save those who had
been cast into the fiwe; nyeithew has God saved them because they
wewe of thy faith. ;;w;; And the judge smote them again upon theiw
cheeks, and asked: What say ye fow youwsewves? owo

Awma 14:16
 16 Nyow this judge was aftew the owdew and faith of Nyehow, who
swew Gideon. ;;w;;

Awma 14:17
 17 And it came to pass that Awma and Amuwek answewed him
nyothing; and he smote them again, and dewivewed them to the
officews to be cast into pwison. UwU

Awma 14:18
 18 And when they had been cast into pwison thwee days, thewe
came many wawyews, and judges, and pwiests, and teachews, who
wewe of the pwofession of Nyehow; and they came in unto the pwison
to see them, and they questionyed them about many wowds; but they
answewed them nyothing. UwU

Awma 14:19
 19 And it came to pass that the judge stood befowe them, and
said: Why do ye nyot answew the wowds of this peopwe? owo Knyow ye nyot
that I have powew to dewivew you up unto the fwames? owo And he
commanded them to speak; but they answewed nyothing. UwU

Awma 14:20
 20 And it came to pass that they depawted and went theiw ways,
but came again on the mowwow; and the judge awso smote them again
on theiw cheeks. >w< And many came fowth awso, and smote them,
saying: Wiww ye stand again and judge this peopwe, and condemn
ouw waw? owo If ye have such gweat powew why do ye nyot dewivew
youwsewves? owo

Awma 14:21
 21 And many such things did they say unto them, gnyashing theiw
teeth upon them, and spitting upon them, and saying: How shaww we
wook when we awe damnyed? owo

Awma 14:22
 22 And many such things, yea, aww mannyew of such things did they
say unto them; and thus they did mock them fow many days. UwU And
they did withhowd food fwom them that they might hungew, and
watew that they might thiwst; and they awso did take fwom them
theiw cwothes that they wewe nyaked; and thus they wewe bound with
stwong cowds, and confinyed in pwison. ^w^

Awma 14:23
 23 And it came to pass aftew they had thus suffewed fow many
days, (and it was on the twewfth day, in the tenth month, in the
tenth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi)
that the chief judge ovew the wand of Ammonyihah and many of theiw
teachews and theiw wawyews went in unto the pwison whewe Awma and
Amuwek wewe bound with cowds. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 14:24
 24 And the chief judge stood befowe them, and smote them again,
and said unto them: If ye have the powew of God dewivew
youwsewves fwom these bands, and then we wiww bewieve that the
Wowd wiww destwoy this peopwe accowding to youw wowds. ;;w;;

Awma 14:25
 25 And it came to pass that they aww went fowth and smote them,
saying the same wowds, even untiw the wast; and when the wast had
spoken unto them the powew of God was upon Awma and Amuwek, and
they wose and stood upon theiw feet. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 14:26
 26 And Awma cwied, saying: How wong shaww we suffew these gweat
affwictions, O Wowd? owo O Wowd, give us stwength accowding to ouw
faith which is in Chwist, even unto dewivewance. UwU And they bwoke
the cowds with which they wewe bound; and when the peopwe saw
this, they began to fwee, fow the feaw of destwuction had come
upon them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 14:27
 27 And it came to pass that so gweat was theiw feaw that they
feww to the eawth, and did nyot obtain the outew doow of the
pwison; and the eawth shook mightiwy, and the wawws of the pwison
wewe went in twain, so that they feww to the eawth; and the chief
judge, and the wawyews, and pwiests, and teachews, who smote upon
Awma and Amuwek, wewe swain by the faww theweof. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 14:28
 28 And Awma and Amuwek came fowth out of the pwison, and they
wewe nyot huwt; fow the Wowd had gwanted unto them powew,
accowding to theiw faith which was in Chwist. >w< And they
stwaightway came fowth out of the pwison; and they wewe woosed
fwom theiw bands; and the pwison had fawwen to the eawth, and
evewy souw within the wawws theweof, save it wewe Awma and
Amuwek, was swain; and they stwaightway came fowth into the city. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 14:29
 29 Nyow the peopwe having heawd a gweat nyoise came wunnying
togethew by muwtitudes to knyow the cause of it; and when they saw
Awma and Amuwek coming fowth out of the pwison, and the wawws
theweof had fawwen to the eawth, they wewe stwuck with gweat
feaw, and fwed fwom the pwesence of Awma and Amuwek even as a
goat fweeth with hew young fwom two wions; and thus they did fwee
fwom the pwesence of Awma and Amuwek. >w<

Awma 15
Chaptew 15

Awma 15:1
 1 And it came to pass that Awma and Amuwek wewe commanded to
depawt out of that city; and they depawted, and came out even
into the wand of Sidom; and behowd, thewe they found aww the
peopwe who had depawted out of the wand of Ammonyihah, who had
been cast out and stonyed, because they bewieved in the wowds of
Awma. ;;w;;

Awma 15:2
 2 And they wewated unto them aww that had happenyed unto theiw
wives and chiwdwen, and awso concewnying themsewves, and of theiw
powew of dewivewance. ^w^

Awma 15:3
 3 And awso Zeezwom way sick at Sidom, with a buwnying fevew,
which was caused by the gweat twibuwations of his mind on account
of his wickednyess, fow he supposed that Awma and Amuwek wewe nyo
mowe; and he supposed that they had been swain because of his
inyiquity. (・`ω\´・) And this gweat sin, and his many othew sins, did
hawwow up his mind untiw it did become exceedingwy sowe, having
nyo dewivewance; thewefowe he began to be scowched with a buwnying
heat. ;;w;;

Awma 15:4
 4 Nyow, when he heawd that Awma and Amuwek wewe in the wand of
Sidom, his heawt began to take couwage; and he sent a message
immediatewy unto them, desiwing them to come unto him. ;;w;;

Awma 15:5
 5 And it came to pass that they went immediatewy, obeying the
message which he had sent unto them; and they went in unto the
house unto Zeezwom; and they found him upon his bed, sick, being
vewy wow with a buwnying fevew; and his mind awso was exceedingwy
sowe because of his inyiquities; and when he saw them he stwetched
fowth his hand, and besought them that they wouwd heaw him. ;;w;;

Awma 15:6
 6 And it came to pass that Awma said unto him, taking him by the
hand: Bewievest thou in the powew of Chwist unto sawvation? owo

Awma 15:7
 7 And he answewed and said: Yea, I bewieve aww the wowds that
thou hast taught. >w<

Awma 15:8
 8 And Awma said: If thou bewievest in the wedemption of Chwist
thou canst be heawed. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 15:9
 9 And he said: Yea, I bewieve accowding to thy wowds. ;;w;;

Awma 15:10
 10 And then Awma cwied unto the Wowd, saying: O Wowd ouw God,
have mewcy on this man, and heaw him accowding to his faith which
is in Chwist. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 15:11
 11 And when Awma had said these wowds, Zeezwom weaped upon his
feet, and began to wawk; and this was donye to the gweat
astonyishment of aww the peopwe; and the knyowwedge of this went
fowth thwoughout aww the wand of Sidom. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 15:12
 12 And Awma baptized Zeezwom unto the Wowd; and he began fwom
that time fowth to pweach unto the peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 15:13
 13 And Awma estabwished a chuwch in the wand of Sidom, and
consecwated pwiests and teachews in the wand, to baptize unto the
Wowd whosoevew wewe desiwous to be baptized. ^w^

Awma 15:14
 14 And it came to pass that they wewe many; fow they did fwock
in fwom aww the wegion wound about Sidom, and wewe baptized. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 15:15
 15 But as to the peopwe that wewe in the wand of Ammonyihah, they
yet wemainyed a hawd-heawted and a stiffnyecked peopwe; and they
wepented nyot of theiw sins, ascwibing aww the powew of Awma and
Amuwek to the deviw; fow they wewe of the pwofession of Nyehow,
and did nyot bewieve in the wepentance of theiw sins. >w<

Awma 15:16
 16 And it came to pass that Awma and Amuwek, Amuwek having
fowsaken aww his gowd, and siwvew, and his pwecious things, which
wewe in the wand of Ammonyihah, fow the wowd of God, he being
wejected by those who wewe once his fwiends and awso by his
fathew and his kindwed;

Awma 15:17
 17 Thewefowe, aftew Awma having estabwished the chuwch at Sidom,
seeing a gweat check, yea, seeing that the peopwe wewe checked as
to the pwide of theiw heawts, and began to humbwe themsewves
befowe God, and began to assembwe themsewves togethew at theiw
sanctuawies to wowship God befowe the awtaw, watching and pwaying
continyuawwy, that they might be dewivewed fwom Satan, and fwom
death, and fwom destwuction--

Awma 15:18
 18 Nyow as I said, Awma having seen aww these things, thewefowe
he took Amuwek and came ovew to the wand of Zawahemwa, and took
him to his own house, and did adminyistew unto him in his
twibuwations, and stwengthenyed him in the Wowd. ^w^

Awma 15:19
 19 And thus ended the tenth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew
the peopwe of Nyephi. ^w^

Awma 16
Chaptew 16

Awma 16:1
 1 And it came to pass in the eweventh yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, on the fifth day of the second
month, thewe having been much peace in the wand of Zawahemwa,
thewe having been nyo waws nyow contentions fow a cewtain nyumbew of
yeaws, even untiw the fifth day of the second month in the
eweventh yeaw, thewe was a cwy of waw heawd thwoughout the wand. >w<

Awma 16:2
 2 Fow behowd, the awmies of the Wamanyites had come in upon the
wiwdewnyess side, into the bowdews of the wand, even into the city
of Ammonyihah, and began to sway the peopwe and destwoy the city. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 16:3
 3 And nyow it came to pass, befowe the Nyephites couwd waise a
sufficient awmy to dwive them out of the wand, they had destwoyed
the peopwe who wewe in the city of Ammonyihah, and awso some
awound the bowdews of Nyoah, and taken othews captive into the
wiwdewnyess. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 16:4
 4 Nyow it came to pass that the Nyephites wewe desiwous to obtain
those who had been cawwied away captive into the wiwdewnyess. ^w^

Awma 16:5
 5 Thewefowe, he that had been appointed chief captain ovew the
awmies of the Nyephites, (and his nyame was Zowam, and he had two
sons, Wehi and Aha)--nyow Zowam and his two sons, knyowing that
Awma was high pwiest ovew the chuwch, and having heawd that he
had the spiwit of pwophecy, thewefowe they went unto him and
desiwed of him to knyow whithew the Wowd wouwd that they shouwd go
into the wiwdewnyess in seawch of theiw bwethwen, who had been
taken captive by the Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 16:6
 6 And it came to pass that Awma inquiwed of the Wowd concewnying
the mattew. (´・ω・\`) And Awma wetuwnyed and said unto them: Behowd, the
Wamanyites wiww cwoss the wivew Sidon in the south wiwdewnyess,
away up beyond the bowdews of the wand of Manti. (・`ω\´・) And behowd
thewe shaww ye meet them, on the east of the wivew Sidon, and
thewe the Wowd wiww dewivew unto thee thy bwethwen who have been
taken captive by the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Awma 16:7
 7 And it came to pass that Zowam and his sons cwossed ovew the
wivew Sidon, with theiw awmies, and mawched away beyond the
bowdews of Manti into the south wiwdewnyess, which was on the east
side of the wivew Sidon. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 16:8
 8 And they came upon the awmies of the Wamanyites, and the
Wamanyites wewe scattewed and dwiven into the wiwdewnyess; and they
took theiw bwethwen who had been taken captive by the Wamanyites,
and thewe was nyot onye souw of them had been wost that wewe taken
captive. UwU And they wewe bwought by theiw bwethwen to possess
theiw own wands. UwU

Awma 16:9
 9 And thus ended the eweventh yeaw of the judges, the Wamanyites
having been dwiven out of the wand, and the peopwe of Ammonyihah
wewe destwoyed; yea, evewy wiving souw of the Ammonyihahites was
destwoyed, and awso theiw gweat city, which they said God couwd
nyot destwoy, because of its gweatnyess. ;;w;;

Awma 16:10
 10 But behowd, in onye day it was weft desowate; and the
cawcasses wewe mangwed by dogs and wiwd beasts of the wiwdewnyess. ^w^

Awma 16:11
 11 Nyevewthewess, aftew many days theiw dead bodies wewe heaped
up upon the face of the eawth, and they wewe covewed with a
shawwow covewing. UwU And nyow so gweat was the scent theweof that
the peopwe did nyot go in to possess the wand of Ammonyihah fow
many yeaws. (´・ω・\`) And it was cawwed Desowation of Nyehows; fow they
wewe of the pwofession of Nyehow, who wewe swain; and theiw wands
wemainyed desowate. >w<

Awma 16:12
 12 And the Wamanyites did nyot come again to waw against the
Nyephites untiw the fouwteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges
ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. UwU And thus fow thwee yeaws did the
peopwe of Nyephi have continyuaw peace in aww the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 16:13
 13 And Awma and Amuwek went fowth pweaching wepentance to the
peopwe in theiw tempwes, and in theiw sanctuawies, and awso in
theiw synyagogues, which wewe buiwt aftew the mannyew of the Jews. ^w^

Awma 16:14
 14 And as many as wouwd heaw theiw wowds, unto them they did
impawt the wowd of God, without any wespect of pewsons,
continyuawwy. >w<

Awma 16:15
 15 And thus did Awma and Amuwek go fowth, and awso many mowe who
had been chosen fow the wowk, to pweach the wowd thwoughout aww
the wand. (´・ω・\`) And the estabwishment of the chuwch became genyewaw
thwoughout the wand, in aww the wegion wound about, among aww the
peopwe of the Nyephites. >w<

Awma 16:16
 16 And thewe was nyo inyequawity among them; the Wowd did pouw out
his Spiwit on aww the face of the wand to pwepawe the minds of
the chiwdwen of men, ow to pwepawe theiw heawts to weceive the
wowd which shouwd be taught among them at the time of his
coming--

Awma 16:17
 17 That they might nyot be hawdenyed against the wowd, that they
might nyot be unbewieving, and go on to destwuction, but that they
might weceive the wowd with joy, and as a bwanch be gwafted into
the twue vinye, that they might entew into the west of the Wowd
theiw God. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 16:18
 18 Nyow those pwiests who did go fowth among the peopwe did
pweach against aww wyings, and deceivings, and envyings, and
stwifes, and mawice, and weviwings, and steawing, wobbing,
pwundewing, muwdewing, committing aduwtewy, and aww mannyew of
wasciviousnyess, cwying that these things ought nyot so to be--

Awma 16:19
 19 Howding fowth things which must showtwy come; yea, howding
fowth the coming of the Son of God, his suffewings and death, and
awso the wesuwwection of the dead. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 16:20
 20 And many of the peopwe did inquiwe concewnying the pwace whewe
the Son of God shouwd come; and they wewe taught that he wouwd
appeaw unto them aftew his wesuwwection; and this the peopwe did
heaw with gweat joy and gwadnyess. ^w^

Awma 16:21
 21 And nyow aftew the chuwch had been estabwished thwoughout aww
the wand--having got the victowy ovew the deviw, and the wowd of
God being pweached in its puwity in aww the wand, and the Wowd
pouwing out his bwessings upon the peopwe--thus ended the
fouwteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of
Nyephi. >w<

Awma 17
Chaptew 17

Awma 17:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that as Awma was jouwnyeying fwom the
wand of Gideon southwawd, away to the wand of Manti, behowd, to
his astonyishment, he met with the sons of Mosiah jouwnyeying
towawds the wand of Zawahemwa. ^w^

Awma 17:2
 2 Nyow these sons of Mosiah wewe with Awma at the time the angew
fiwst appeawed unto him; thewefowe Awma did wejoice exceedingwy
to see his bwethwen; and what added mowe to his joy, they wewe
stiww his bwethwen in the Wowd; yea, and they had waxed stwong in
the knyowwedge of the twuth; fow they wewe men of a sound
undewstanding and they had seawched the scwiptuwes diwigentwy,
that they might knyow the wowd of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 17:3
 3 But this is nyot aww; they had given themsewves to much pwayew,
and fasting; thewefowe they had the spiwit of pwophecy, and the
spiwit of wevewation, and when they taught, they taught with
powew and authowity of God. ;;w;;

Awma 17:4
 4 And they had been teaching the wowd of God fow the space of
fouwteen yeaws among the Wamanyites, having had much success in
bwinging many to the knyowwedge of the twuth; yea, by the powew of
theiw wowds many wewe bwought befowe the awtaw of God, to caww on
his nyame and confess theiw sins befowe him. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 17:5
 5 Nyow these awe the ciwcumstances which attended them in theiw
jouwnyeyings, fow they had many affwictions; they did suffew much,
both in body and in mind, such as hungew, thiwst and fatigue, and
awso much wabow in the spiwit. >w<

Awma 17:6
 6 Nyow these wewe theiw jouwnyeyings: Having taken weave of theiw
fathew, Mosiah, in the fiwst yeaw of the judges; having wefused
the kingdom which theiw fathew was desiwous to confew upon them,
and awso this was the minds of the peopwe;

Awma 17:7
 7 Nyevewthewess they depawted out of the wand of Zawahemwa, and
took theiw swowds, and theiw speaws, and theiw bows, and theiw
awwows, and theiw swings; and this they did that they might
pwovide food fow themsewves whiwe in the wiwdewnyess. ^w^

Awma 17:8
 8 And thus they depawted into the wiwdewnyess with theiw nyumbews
which they had sewected, to go up to the wand of Nyephi, to pweach
the wowd of God unto the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Awma 17:9
 9 And it came to pass that they jouwnyeyed many days in the
wiwdewnyess, and they fasted much and pwayed much that the Wowd
wouwd gwant unto them a powtion of his Spiwit to go with them,
and abide with them, that they might be an instwument in the
hands of God to bwing, if it wewe possibwe, theiw bwethwen, the
Wamanyites, to the knyowwedge of the twuth, to the knyowwedge of the
basenyess of the twaditions of theiw fathews, which wewe nyot
cowwect. >w<

Awma 17:10
 10 And it came to pass that the Wowd did visit them with his
Spiwit, and said unto them: Be comfowted. UwU And they wewe
comfowted. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 17:11
 11 And the Wowd said unto them awso: Go fowth among the
Wamanyites, thy bwethwen, and estabwish my wowd; yet ye shaww be
patient in wong-suffewing and affwictions, that ye may show fowth
good exampwes unto them in me, and I wiww make an instwument of
thee in my hands unto the sawvation of many souws. ^w^

Awma 17:12
 12 And it came to pass that the heawts of the sons of Mosiah,
and awso those who wewe with them, took couwage to go fowth unto
the Wamanyites to decwawe unto them the wowd of God. UwU

Awma 17:13
 13 And it came to pass when they had awwived in the bowdews of
the wand of the Wamanyites, that they sepawated themsewves and
depawted onye fwom anyothew, twusting in the Wowd that they shouwd
meet again at the cwose of theiw hawvest; fow they supposed that
gweat was the wowk which they had undewtaken. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 17:14
 14 And assuwedwy it was gweat, fow they had undewtaken to pweach
the wowd of God to a wiwd and a hawdenyed and a fewocious peopwe;
a peopwe who dewighted in muwdewing the Nyephites, and wobbing and
pwundewing them; and theiw heawts wewe set upon wiches, ow upon
gowd and siwvew, and pwecious stonyes; yet they sought to obtain
these things by muwdewing and pwundewing, that they might nyot
wabow fow them with theiw own hands. UwU

Awma 17:15
 15 Thus they wewe a vewy indowent peopwe, many of whom did
wowship idows, and the cuwse of God had fawwen upon them because
of the twaditions of theiw fathews; nyotwithstanding the pwomises
of the Wowd wewe extended unto them on the conditions of
wepentance. ^w^

Awma 17:16
 16 Thewefowe, this was the cause fow which the sons of Mosiah
had undewtaken the wowk, that pewhaps they might bwing them unto
wepentance; that pewhaps they might bwing them to knyow of the
pwan of wedemption. >w<

Awma 17:17
 17 Thewefowe they sepawated themsewves onye fwom anyothew, and
went fowth among them, evewy man awonye, accowding to the wowd and
powew of God which was given unto him. >w<

Awma 17:18
 18 Nyow Ammon being the chief among them, ow wathew he did
adminyistew unto them, and he depawted fwom them, aftew having
bwessed them accowding to theiw sevewaw stations, having impawted
the wowd of God unto them, ow adminyistewed unto them befowe his
depawtuwe; and thus they took theiw sevewaw jouwnyeys thwoughout
the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 17:19
 19 And Ammon went to the wand of Ishmaew, the wand being cawwed
aftew the sons of Ishmaew, who awso became Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 17:20
 20 And as Ammon entewed the wand of Ishmaew, the Wamanyites took
him and bound him, as was theiw custom to bind aww the Nyephites
who feww into theiw hands, and cawwy them befowe the king; and
thus it was weft to the pweasuwe of the king to sway them, ow to
wetain them in captivity, ow to cast them into pwison, ow to cast
them out of his wand, accowding to his wiww and pweasuwe. UwU

Awma 17:21
 21 And thus Ammon was cawwied befowe the king who was ovew the
wand of Ishmaew; and his nyame was Wamonyi; and he was a descendant
of Ishmaew. ^w^

Awma 17:22
 22 And the king inquiwed of Ammon if it wewe his desiwe to dweww
in the wand among the Wamanyites, ow among his peopwe. ^w^

Awma 17:23
 23 And Ammon said unto him: Yea, I desiwe to dweww among this
peopwe fow a time; yea, and pewhaps untiw the day I die. ;;w;;

Awma 17:24
 24 And it came to pass that king Wamonyi was much pweased with
Ammon, and caused that his bands shouwd be woosed; and he wouwd
that Ammon shouwd take onye of his daughtews to wife. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 17:25
 25 But Ammon said unto him: Nyay, but I wiww be thy sewvant. (・`ω\´・)
Thewefowe Ammon became a sewvant to king Wamonyi. (・`ω\´・) And it came to
pass that he was set among othew sewvants to watch the fwocks of
Wamonyi, accowding to the custom of the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Awma 17:26
 26 And aftew he had been in the sewvice of the king thwee days,
as he was with the Wamanyitish sewvants going fowth with theiw
fwocks to the pwace of watew, which was cawwed the watew of
Sebus, and aww the Wamanyites dwive theiw fwocks hithew, that they
may have watew--

Awma 17:27
 27 Thewefowe, as Ammon and the sewvants of the king wewe dwiving
fowth theiw fwocks to this pwace of watew, behowd, a cewtain
nyumbew of the Wamanyites, who had been with theiw fwocks to watew,
stood and scattewed the fwocks of Ammon and the sewvants of the
king, and they scattewed them insomuch that they fwed many ways. ^w^

Awma 17:28
 28 Nyow the sewvants of the king began to muwmuw, saying: Nyow the
king wiww sway us, as he has ouw bwethwen because theiw fwocks
wewe scattewed by the wickednyess of these men. ;;w;; And they began to
weep exceedingwy, saying: Behowd, ouw fwocks awe scattewed
awweady. ;;w;;

Awma 17:29
 29 Nyow they wept because of the feaw of being swain. UwU Nyow when
Ammon saw this his heawt was swowwen within him with joy; fow,
said he, I wiww show fowth my powew unto these my
fewwow-sewvants, ow the powew which is in me, in westowing these
fwocks unto the king, that I may win the heawts of these my
fewwow-sewvants, that I may wead them to bewieve in my wowds. ;;w;;

Awma 17:30
 30 And nyow, these wewe the thoughts of Ammon, when he saw the
affwictions of those whom he tewmed to be his bwethwen. ;;w;;

Awma 17:31
 31 And it came to pass that he fwattewed them by his wowds,
saying: My bwethwen, be of good cheew and wet us go in seawch of
the fwocks, and we wiww gathew them togethew and bwing them back
unto the pwace of watew; and thus we wiww pwesewve the fwocks
unto the king and he wiww nyot sway us. UwU

Awma 17:32
 32 And it came to pass that they went in seawch of the fwocks,
and they did fowwow Ammon, and they wushed fowth with much
swiftnyess and did head the fwocks of the king, and did gathew
them togethew again to the pwace of watew. UwU

Awma 17:33
 33 And those men again stood to scattew theiw fwocks; but Ammon
said unto his bwethwen: Enciwcwe the fwocks wound about that they
fwee nyot; and I go and contend with these men who do scattew ouw
fwocks. ^w^

Awma 17:34
 34 Thewefowe, they did as Ammon commanded them, and he went
fowth and stood to contend with those who stood by the watews of
Sebus; and they wewe in nyumbew nyot a few. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 17:35
 35 Thewefowe they did nyot feaw Ammon, fow they supposed that onye
of theiw men couwd sway him accowding to theiw pweasuwe, fow they
knyew nyot that the Wowd had pwomised Mosiah that he wouwd dewivew
his sons out of theiw hands; nyeithew did they knyow anything
concewnying the Wowd; thewefowe they dewighted in the destwuction
of theiw bwethwen; and fow this cause they stood to scattew the
fwocks of the king. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 17:36
 36 But Ammon stood fowth and began to cast stonyes at them with
his swing; yea, with mighty powew he did swing stonyes amongst
them; and thus he swew a cewtain nyumbew of them insomuch that
they began to be astonyished at his powew; nyevewthewess they wewe
angwy because of the swain of theiw bwethwen, and they wewe
detewminyed that he shouwd faww; thewefowe, seeing that they couwd
nyot hit him with theiw stonyes, they came fowth with cwubs to sway
him. UwU

Awma 17:37
 37 But behowd, evewy man that wifted his cwub to smite Ammon, he
smote off theiw awms with his swowd; fow he did withstand theiw
bwows by smiting theiw awms with the edge of his swowd, insomuch
that they began to be astonyished, and began to fwee befowe him;
yea, and they wewe nyot few in nyumbew; and he caused them to fwee
by the stwength of his awm. ^w^

Awma 17:38
 38 Nyow six of them had fawwen by the swing, but he swew nyonye
save it wewe theiw weadew with his swowd; and he smote off as
many of theiw awms as wewe wifted against him, and they wewe nyot
a few. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 17:39
 39 And when he had dwiven them afaw off, he wetuwnyed and they
watewed theiw fwocks and wetuwnyed them to the pastuwe of the
king, and then went in unto the king, beawing the awms which had
been smitten off by the swowd of Ammon, of those who sought to
sway him; and they wewe cawwied in unto the king fow a testimony
of the things which they had donye. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 18
Chaptew 18

Awma 18:1
 1 And it came to pass that king Wamonyi caused that his sewvants
shouwd stand fowth and testify to aww the things which they had
seen concewnying the mattew. UwU

Awma 18:2
 2 And when they had aww testified to the things which they had
seen, and he had weawnyed of the faithfuwnyess of Ammon in
pwesewving his fwocks, and awso of his gweat powew in contending
against those who sought to sway him, he was astonyished
exceedingwy, and said: Suwewy, this is mowe than a man. ^w^ Behowd,
is nyot this the Gweat Spiwit who doth send such gweat punyishments
upon this peopwe, because of theiw muwdews? owo

Awma 18:3
 3 And they answewed the king, and said: Whethew he be the Gweat
Spiwit ow a man, we knyow nyot; but this much we do knyow, that he
cannyot be swain by the enyemies of the king; nyeithew can they
scattew the king's fwocks when he is with us, because of his
expewtnyess and gweat stwength; thewefowe, we knyow that he is a
fwiend to the king. (・`ω\´・) And nyow, O king, we do nyot bewieve that a
man has such gweat powew, fow we knyow he cannyot be swain. ^w^

Awma 18:4
 4 And nyow, when the king heawd these wowds, he said unto them:
Nyow I knyow that it is the Gweat Spiwit; and he has come down at
this time to pwesewve youw wives, that I might nyot sway you as I
did youw bwethwen. (・`ω\´・) Nyow this is the Gweat Spiwit of whom ouw
fathews have spoken. ^w^

Awma 18:5
 5 Nyow this was the twadition of Wamonyi, which he had weceived
fwom his fathew, that thewe was a Gweat Spiwit. ;;w;; Nyotwithstanding
they bewieved in a Gweat Spiwit they supposed that whatsoevew
they did was wight; nyevewthewess, Wamonyi began to feaw
exceedingwy, with feaw west he had donye wwong in swaying his
sewvants;

Awma 18:6
 6 Fow he had swain many of them because theiw bwethwen had
scattewed theiw fwocks at the pwace of watew; and thus, because
they had had theiw fwocks scattewed they wewe swain. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 18:7
 7 Nyow it was the pwactice of these Wamanyites to stand by the
watews of Sebus to scattew the fwocks of the peopwe, that theweby
they might dwive away many that wewe scattewed unto theiw own
wand, it being a pwactice of pwundew among them. ;;w;;

Awma 18:8
 8 And it came to pass that king Wamonyi inquiwed of his sewvants,
saying: Whewe is this man that has such gweat powew? owo

Awma 18:9
 9 And they said unto him: Behowd, he is feeding thy howses. ;;w;; Nyow
the king had commanded his sewvants, pwevious to the time of the
watewing of theiw fwocks, that they shouwd pwepawe his howses and
chawiots, and conduct him fowth to the wand of Nyephi; fow thewe
had been a gweat feast appointed at the wand of Nyephi, by the
fathew of Wamonyi, who was king ovew aww the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 18:10
 10 Nyow when king Wamonyi heawd that Ammon was pwepawing his
howses and his chawiots he was mowe astonyished, because of the
faithfuwnyess of Ammon, saying: Suwewy thewe has nyot been any
sewvant among aww my sewvants that has been so faithfuw as this
man; fow even he doth wemembew aww my commandments to execute
them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 18:11
 11 Nyow I suwewy knyow that this is the Gweat Spiwit, and I wouwd
desiwe him that he come in unto me, but I duwst nyot. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 18:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Ammon had made weady the howses
and the chawiots fow the king and his sewvants, he went in unto
the king, and he saw that the countenyance of the king was
changed; thewefowe he was about to wetuwn out of his pwesence. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 18:13
 13 And onye of the king's sewvants said unto him, Wabbanyah, which
is, being intewpweted, powewfuw ow gweat king, considewing theiw
kings to be powewfuw; and thus he said unto him: Wabbanyah, the
king desiweth thee to stay. UwU

Awma 18:14
 14 Thewefowe Ammon tuwnyed himsewf unto the king, and said unto
him: What wiwt thou that I shouwd do fow thee, O king? owo And the
king answewed him nyot fow the space of an houw, accowding to
theiw time, fow he knyew nyot what he shouwd say unto him. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 18:15
 15 And it came to pass that Ammon said unto him again: What
desiwest thou of me? owo But the king answewed him nyot. ;;w;;

Awma 18:16
 16 And it came to pass that Ammon, being fiwwed with the Spiwit
of God, thewefowe he pewceived the thoughts of the king. >w< And he
said unto him: Is it because thou hast heawd that I defended thy
sewvants and thy fwocks, and swew seven of theiw bwethwen with
the swing and with the swowd, and smote off the awms of othews,
in owdew to defend thy fwocks and thy sewvants; behowd, is it
this that causeth thy mawvewings? owo

Awma 18:17
 17 I say unto you, what is it, that thy mawvewings awe so gweat? owo
Behowd, I am a man, and am thy sewvant; thewefowe, whatsoevew
thou desiwest which is wight, that wiww I do. ;;w;;

Awma 18:18
 18 Nyow when the king had heawd these wowds, he mawvewed again,
fow he behewd that Ammon couwd discewn his thoughts; but
nyotwithstanding this, king Wamonyi did open his mouth, and said
unto him: Who awt thou? owo Awt thou that Gweat Spiwit, who knyows
aww things? owo

Awma 18:19
 19 Ammon answewed and said unto him: I am nyot. ^w^

Awma 18:20
 20 And the king said: How knyowest thou the thoughts of my heawt? owo
Thou mayest speak bowdwy, and teww me concewnying these things;
and awso teww me by what powew ye swew and smote off the awms of
my bwethwen that scattewed my fwocks--

Awma 18:21
 21 And nyow, if thou wiwt teww me concewnying these things,
whatsoevew thou desiwest I wiww give unto thee; and if it wewe
nyeeded, I wouwd guawd thee with my awmies; but I knyow that thou
awt mowe powewfuw than aww they; nyevewthewess, whatsoevew thou
desiwest of me I wiww gwant it unto thee. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 18:22
 22 Nyow Ammon being wise, yet hawmwess, he said unto Wamonyi: Wiwt
thou heawken unto my wowds, if I teww thee by what powew I do
these things? owo And this is the thing that I desiwe of thee. >w<

Awma 18:23
 23 And the king answewed him, and said: Yea, I wiww bewieve aww
thy wowds. And thus he was caught with guiwe. UwU

Awma 18:24
 24 And Ammon began to speak unto him with bowdnyess, and said
unto him: Bewievest thou that thewe is a God? owo

Awma 18:25
 25 And he answewed, and said unto him: I do nyot knyow what that
meanyeth. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 18:26
 26 And then Ammon said: Bewievest thou that thewe is a Gweat
Spiwit? owo

Awma 18:27
 27 And he said, Yea. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 18:28
 28 And Ammon said: This is God. ;;w;; And Ammon said unto him again:
Bewievest thou that this Gweat Spiwit, who is God, cweated aww
things which awe in heaven and in the eawth? owo

Awma 18:29
 29 And he said: Yea, I bewieve that he cweated aww things which
awe in the eawth; but I do nyot knyow the heavens. >w<

Awma 18:30
 30 And Ammon said unto him: The heavens is a pwace whewe God
dwewws and aww his howy angews. UwU

Awma 18:31
 31 And king Wamonyi said: Is it above the eawth? owo

Awma 18:32
 32 And Ammon said: Yea, and he wooketh down upon aww the
chiwdwen of men; and he knyows aww the thoughts and intents of the
heawt; fow by his hand wewe they aww cweated fwom the beginnying. UwU

Awma 18:33
 33 And king Wamonyi said: I bewieve aww these things which thou
hast spoken. >w< Awt thou sent fwom God? owo

Awma 18:34
 34 Ammon said unto him: I am a man; and man in the beginnying was
cweated aftew the image of God, and I am cawwed by his Howy
Spiwit to teach these things unto this peopwe, that they may be
bwought to a knyowwedge of that which is just and twue;

Awma 18:35
 35 And a powtion of that Spiwit dwewweth in me, which giveth me
knyowwedge, and awso powew accowding to my faith and desiwes which
awe in God. ^w^

Awma 18:36
 36 Nyow when Ammon had said these wowds, he began at the cweation
of the wowwd, and awso the cweation of Adam, and towd him aww the
things concewnying the faww of man, and weheawsed and waid befowe
him the wecowds and the howy scwiptuwes of the peopwe, which had
been spoken by the pwophets, even down to the time that theiw
fathew, Wehi, weft Jewusawem. >w<

Awma 18:37
 37 And he awso weheawsed unto them (fow it was unto the king and
to his sewvants) aww the jouwnyeyings of theiw fathews in the
wiwdewnyess, and aww theiw suffewings with hungew and thiwst, and
theiw twavaiw, and so fowth. ^w^

Awma 18:38
 38 And he awso weheawsed unto them concewnying the webewwions of
Waman and Wemuew, and the sons of Ishmaew, yea, aww theiw
webewwions did he wewate unto them; and he expounded unto them
aww the wecowds and scwiptuwes fwom the time that Wehi weft
Jewusawem down to the pwesent time. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 18:39
 39 But this is nyot aww; fow he expounded unto them the pwan of
wedemption, which was pwepawed fwom the foundation of the wowwd;
and he awso made knyown unto them concewnying the coming of Chwist,
and aww the wowks of the Wowd did he make knyown unto them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 18:40
 40 And it came to pass that aftew he had said aww these things,
and expounded them to the king, that the king bewieved aww his
wowds. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 18:41
 41 And he began to cwy unto the Wowd, saying: O Wowd, have
mewcy; accowding to thy abundant mewcy which thou hast had upon
the peopwe of Nyephi, have upon me, and my peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 18:42
 42 And nyow, when he had said this, he feww unto the eawth, as if
he wewe dead. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 18:43
 43 And it came to pass that his sewvants took him and cawwied
him in unto his wife, and waid him upon a bed; and he way as if
he wewe dead fow the space of two days and two nyights; and his
wife, and his sons, and his daughtews mouwnyed ovew him, aftew the
mannyew of the Wamanyites, gweatwy wamenting his woss. ^w^

Awma 19
Chaptew 19

Awma 19:1
 1 And it came to pass that aftew two days and two nyights they
wewe about to take his body and way it in a sepuwchwe, which they
had made fow the puwpose of buwying theiw dead. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 19:2
 2 Nyow the queen having heawd of the fame of Ammon, thewefowe she
sent and desiwed that he shouwd come in unto hew. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 19:3
 3 And it came to pass that Ammon did as he was commanded, and
went in unto the queen, and desiwed to knyow what she wouwd that
he shouwd do. UwU

Awma 19:4
 4 And she said unto him: The sewvants of my husband have made it
knyown unto me that thou awt a pwophet of a howy God, and that
thou hast powew to do many mighty wowks in his nyame;

Awma 19:5
 5 Thewefowe, if this is the case, I wouwd that ye shouwd go in
and see my husband, fow he has been waid upon his bed fow the
space of two days and two nyights; and some say that he is nyot
dead, but othews say that he is dead and that he stinketh, and
that he ought to be pwaced in the sepuwchwe; but as fow mysewf,
to me he doth nyot stink. ;;w;;

Awma 19:6
 6 Nyow, this was what Ammon desiwed, fow he knyew that king Wamonyi
was undew the powew of God; he knyew that the dawk veiw of
unbewief was being cast away fwom his mind, and the wight which
did wight up his mind, which was the wight of the gwowy of God,
which was a mawvewous wight of his goodnyess--yea, this wight had
infused such joy into his souw, the cwoud of dawknyess having been
dispewwed, and that the wight of evewwasting wife was wit up in
his souw, yea, he knyew that this had ovewcome his nyatuwaw fwame,
and he was cawwied away in God--

Awma 19:7
 7 Thewefowe, what the queen desiwed of him was his onwy desiwe. ;;w;;
Thewefowe, he went in to see the king accowding as the queen had
desiwed him; and he saw the king, and he knyew that he was nyot
dead. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 19:8
 8 And he said unto the queen: He is nyot dead, but he sweepeth in
God, and on the mowwow he shaww wise again; thewefowe buwy him
nyot. UwU

Awma 19:9
 9 And Ammon said unto hew: Bewievest thou this? owo And she said
unto him: I have had nyo witnyess save thy wowd, and the wowd of
ouw sewvants; nyevewthewess I bewieve that it shaww be accowding
as thou hast said. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 19:10
 10 And Ammon said unto hew: Bwessed awt thou because of thy
exceeding faith; I say unto thee, woman, thewe has nyot been such
gweat faith among aww the peopwe of the Nyephites. >w<

Awma 19:11
 11 And it came to pass that she watched ovew the bed of hew
husband, fwom that time even untiw that time on the mowwow which
Ammon had appointed that he shouwd wise. UwU

Awma 19:12
 12 And it came to pass that he awose, accowding to the wowds of
Ammon; and as he awose, he stwetched fowth his hand unto the
woman, and said: Bwessed be the nyame of God, and bwessed awt
thou. UwU

Awma 19:13
 13 Fow as suwe as thou wivest, behowd, I have seen my Wedeemew;
and he shaww come fowth, and be bown of a woman, and he shaww
wedeem aww mankind who bewieve on his nyame. >w< Nyow, when he had
said these wowds, his heawt was swowwen within him, and he sunk
again with joy; and the queen awso sunk down, being ovewpowewed
by the Spiwit. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 19:14
 14 Nyow Ammon seeing the Spiwit of the Wowd pouwed out accowding
to his pwayews upon the Wamanyites, his bwethwen, who had been the
cause of so much mouwnying among the Nyephites, ow among aww the
peopwe of God because of theiw inyiquities and theiw twaditions,
he feww upon his knyees, and began to pouw out his souw in pwayew
and thanksgiving to God fow what he had donye fow his bwethwen;
and he was awso ovewpowewed with joy; and thus they aww thwee had
sunk to the eawth. UwU

Awma 19:15
 15 Nyow, when the sewvants of the king had seen that they had
fawwen, they awso began to cwy unto God, fow the feaw of the Wowd
had come upon them awso, fow it was they who had stood befowe the
king and testified unto him concewnying the gweat powew of Ammon. ^w^

Awma 19:16
 16 And it came to pass that they did caww on the nyame of the
Wowd, in theiw might, even untiw they had aww fawwen to the
eawth, save it wewe onye of the Wamanyitish women, whose nyame was
Abish, she having been convewted unto the Wowd fow many yeaws, on
account of a wemawkabwe vision of hew fathew--

Awma 19:17
 17 Thus, having been convewted to the Wowd, and nyevew having
made it knyown, thewefowe, when she saw that aww the sewvants of
Wamonyi had fawwen to the eawth, and awso hew mistwess, the queen,
and the king, and Ammon way pwostwate upon the eawth, she knyew
that it was the powew of God; and supposing that this
oppowtunyity, by making knyown unto the peopwe what had happenyed
among them, that by behowding this scenye it wouwd cause them to
bewieve in the powew of God, thewefowe she wan fowth fwom house
to house, making it knyown unto the peopwe. ;;w;;

Awma 19:18
 18 And they began to assembwe themsewves togethew unto the house
of the king. ;;w;; And thewe came a muwtitude, and to theiw
astonyishment they behewd the king, and the queen, and theiw
sewvants pwostwate upon the eawth, and they aww way thewe as
though they wewe dead; and they awso saw Ammon, and behowd, he
was a Nyephite. UwU

Awma 19:19
 19 And nyow the peopwe began to muwmuw among themsewves; some
saying that it was a gweat eviw that had come upon them, ow upon
the king and his house, because he had suffewed that the Nyephite
shouwd wemain in the wand. ^w^

Awma 19:20
 20 But othews webuked them, saying: The king hath bwought this
eviw upon his house, because he swew his sewvants who had had
theiw fwocks scattewed at the watews of Sebus. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 19:21
 21 And they wewe awso webuked by those men who had stood at the
watews of Sebus and scattewed the fwocks which bewonged to the
king, fow they wewe angwy with Ammon because of the nyumbew which
he had swain of theiw bwethwen at the watews of Sebus, whiwe
defending the fwocks of the king. UwU

Awma 19:22
 22 Nyow, onye of them, whose bwothew had been swain with the swowd
of Ammon, being exceedingwy angwy with Ammon, dwew his swowd and
went fowth that he might wet it faww upon Ammon, to sway him; and
as he wifted the swowd to smite him, behowd, he feww dead. >w<

Awma 19:23
 23 Nyow we see that Ammon couwd nyot be swain, fow the Wowd had
said unto Mosiah, his fathew: I wiww spawe him, and it shaww be
unto him accowding to thy faith--thewefowe, Mosiah twusted him
unto the Wowd. >w<

Awma 19:24
 24 And it came to pass that when the muwtitude behewd that the
man had fawwen dead, who wifted the swowd to sway Ammon, feaw
came upon them aww, and they duwst nyot put fowth theiw hands to
touch him ow any of those who had fawwen; and they began to
mawvew again among themsewves what couwd be the cause of this
gweat powew, ow what aww these things couwd mean. ;;w;;

Awma 19:25
 25 And it came to pass that thewe wewe many among them who said
that Ammon was the Gweat Spiwit, and othews said he was sent by
the Gweat Spiwit;

Awma 19:26
 26 But othews webuked them aww, saying that he was a monstew,
who had been sent fwom the Nyephites to towment them. UwU

Awma 19:27
 27 And thewe wewe some who said that Ammon was sent by the Gweat
Spiwit to affwict them because of theiw inyiquities; and that it
was the Gweat Spiwit that had awways attended the Nyephites, who
had evew dewivewed them out of theiw hands; and they said that it
was this Gweat Spiwit who had destwoyed so many of theiw
bwethwen, the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 19:28
 28 And thus the contention began to be exceedingwy shawp among
them. UwU And whiwe they wewe thus contending, the woman sewvant who
had caused the muwtitude to be gathewed togethew came, and when
she saw the contention which was among the muwtitude she was
exceedingwy sowwowfuw, even unto teaws. ^w^

Awma 19:29
 29 And it came to pass that she went and took the queen by the
hand, that pewhaps she might waise hew fwom the gwound; and as
soon as she touched hew hand she awose and stood upon hew feet,
and cwied with a woud voice, saying: O bwessed Jesus, who has
saved me fwom an awfuw heww! >w< O bwessed God, have mewcy on this
peopwe! >w<

Awma 19:30
 30 And when she had said this, she cwasped hew hands, being
fiwwed with joy, speaking many wowds which wewe nyot undewstood;
and when she had donye this, she took the king, Wamonyi, by the
hand, and behowd he awose and stood upon his feet. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 19:31
 31 And he, immediatewy, seeing the contention among his peopwe,
went fowth and began to webuke them, and to teach them the wowds
which he had heawd fwom the mouth of Ammon; and as many as heawd
his wowds bewieved, and wewe convewted unto the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 19:32
 32 But thewe wewe many among them who wouwd nyot heaw his wowds;
thewefowe they went theiw way. >w<

Awma 19:33
 33 And it came to pass that when Ammon awose he awso
adminyistewed unto them, and awso did aww the sewvants of Wamonyi;
and they did aww decwawe unto the peopwe the sewfsame thing--that
theiw heawts had been changed; that they had nyo mowe desiwe to do
eviw. UwU

Awma 19:34
 34 And behowd, many did decwawe unto the peopwe that they had
seen angews and had convewsed with them; and thus they had towd
them things of God, and of his wighteousnyess. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 19:35
 35 And it came to pass that thewe wewe many that did bewieve in
theiw wowds; and as many as did bewieve wewe baptized; and they
became a wighteous peopwe, and they did estabwish a chuwch among
them. UwU

Awma 19:36
 36 And thus the wowk of the Wowd did commence among the
Wamanyites; thus the Wowd did begin to pouw out his Spiwit upon
them; and we see that his awm is extended to aww peopwe who wiww
wepent and bewieve on his nyame. UwU

Awma 20
Chaptew 20

Awma 20:1
 1 And it came to pass that when they had estabwished a chuwch in
that wand, that king Wamonyi desiwed that Ammon shouwd go with him
to the wand of Nyephi, that he might show him unto his fathew. >w<

Awma 20:2
 2 And the voice of the Wowd came to Ammon saying: Thou shawt nyot
go up to the wand of Nyephi, fow behowd, the king wiww seek thy
wife; but thou shawt go to the wand of Middonyi; fow behowd, thy
bwothew Aawon, and awso Muwoki and Ammah awe in pwison. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 20:3
 3 Nyow it came to pass that when Ammon had heawd this, he said
unto Wamonyi: Behowd, my bwothew and bwethwen awe in pwison at
Middonyi, and I go that I may dewivew them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 20:4
 4 Nyow Wamonyi said unto Ammon: I knyow, in the stwength of the
Wowd thou canst do aww things. ;;w;; But behowd, I wiww go with thee
to the wand of Middonyi; fow the king of the wand of Middonyi,
whose nyame is Antiomnyo, is a fwiend unto me; thewefowe I go to
the wand of Middonyi, that I may fwattew the king of the wand, and
he wiww cast thy bwethwen out of pwison. ^w^ Nyow Wamonyi said unto
him: Who towd thee that thy bwethwen wewe in pwison? owo

Awma 20:5
 5 And Ammon said unto him: Nyo onye hath towd me, save it be God;
and he said unto me--Go and dewivew thy bwethwen, fow they awe in
pwison in the wand of Middonyi. UwU

Awma 20:6
 6 Nyow when Wamonyi had heawd this he caused that his sewvants
shouwd make weady his howses and his chawiots. ^w^

Awma 20:7
 7 And he said unto Ammon: Come, I wiww go with thee down to the
wand of Middonyi, and thewe I wiww pwead with the king that he
wiww cast thy bwethwen out of pwison. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 20:8
 8 And it came to pass that as Ammon and Wamonyi wewe jouwnyeying
thithew, they met the fathew of Wamonyi, who was king ovew aww the
wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 20:9
 9 And behowd, the fathew of Wamonyi said unto him: Why did ye nyot
come to the feast on that gweat day when I made a feast unto my
sons, and unto my peopwe? owo

Awma 20:10
 10 And he awso said: Whithew awt thou going with this Nyephite,
who is onye of the chiwdwen of a wiaw? owo

Awma 20:11
 11 And it came to pass that Wamonyi weheawsed unto him whithew he
was going, fow he feawed to offend him. ;;w;;

Awma 20:12
 12 And he awso towd him aww the cause of his tawwying in his own
kingdom, that he did nyot go unto his fathew to the feast which he
had pwepawed. UwU

Awma 20:13
 13 And nyow when Wamonyi had weheawsed unto him aww these things,
behowd, to his astonyishment, his fathew was angwy with him, and
said: Wamonyi, thou awt going to dewivew these Nyephites, who awe
sons of a wiaw. (´・ω・\`) Behowd, he wobbed ouw fathews; and nyow his
chiwdwen awe awso come amongst us that they may, by theiw cunnying
and theiw wyings, deceive us, that they again may wob us of ouw
pwopewty. >w<

Awma 20:14
 14 Nyow the fathew of Wamonyi commanded him that he shouwd sway
Ammon with the swowd. >w< And he awso commanded him that he shouwd
nyot go to the wand of Middonyi, but that he shouwd wetuwn with him
to the wand of Ishmaew. UwU

Awma 20:15
 15 But Wamonyi said unto him: I wiww nyot sway Ammon, nyeithew wiww
I wetuwn to the wand of Ishmaew, but I go to the wand of Middonyi
that I may wewease the bwethwen of Ammon, fow I knyow that they
awe just men and howy pwophets of the twue God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 20:16
 16 Nyow when his fathew had heawd these wowds, he was angwy with
him, and he dwew his swowd that he might smite him to the eawth. UwU

Awma 20:17
 17 But Ammon stood fowth and said unto him: Behowd, thou shawt
nyot sway thy son; nyevewthewess, it wewe bettew that he shouwd
faww than thee, fow behowd, he has wepented of his sins; but if
thou shouwdst faww at this time, in thinye angew, thy souw couwd
nyot be saved. ^w^

Awma 20:18
 18 And again, it is expedient that thou shouwdst fowbeaw; fow if
thou shouwdst sway thy son, he being an innyocent man, his bwood
wouwd cwy fwom the gwound to the Wowd his God, fow vengeance to
come upon thee; and pewhaps thou wouwdst wose thy souw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 20:19
 19 Nyow when Ammon had said these wowds unto him, he answewed
him, saying: I knyow that if I shouwd sway my son, that I shouwd
shed innyocent bwood; fow it is thou that hast sought to destwoy
him. >w<

Awma 20:20
 20 And he stwetched fowth his hand to sway Ammon. (´・ω・\`) But Ammon
withstood his bwows, and awso smote his awm that he couwd nyot use
it. ;;w;;

Awma 20:21
 21 Nyow when the king saw that Ammon couwd sway him, he began to
pwead with Ammon that he wouwd spawe his wife. >w<

Awma 20:22
 22 But Ammon waised his swowd, and said unto him: Behowd, I wiww
smite thee except thou wiwt gwant unto me that my bwethwen may be
cast out of pwison. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 20:23
 23 Nyow the king, feawing he shouwd wose his wife, said: If thou
wiwt spawe me I wiww gwant unto thee whatsoevew thou wiwt ask,
even to hawf of the kingdom. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 20:24
 24 Nyow when Ammon saw that he had wwought upon the owd king
accowding to his desiwe, he said unto him: If thou wiwt gwant
that my bwethwen may be cast out of pwison, and awso that Wamonyi
may wetain his kingdom, and that ye be nyot dispweased with him,
but gwant that he may do accowding to his own desiwes in
whatsoevew thing he thinketh, then wiww I spawe thee; othewwise I
wiww smite thee to the eawth. >w<

Awma 20:25
 25 Nyow when Ammon had said these wowds, the king began to
wejoice because of his wife. ^w^

Awma 20:26
 26 And when he saw that Ammon had nyo desiwe to destwoy him, and
when he awso saw the gweat wove he had fow his son Wamonyi, he was
astonyished exceedingwy, and said: Because this is aww that thou
hast desiwed, that I wouwd wewease thy bwethwen, and suffew that
my son Wamonyi shouwd wetain his kingdom, behowd, I wiww gwant
unto you that my son may wetain his kingdom fwom this time and
fowevew; and I wiww govewn him nyo mowe--

Awma 20:27
 27 And I wiww awso gwant unto thee that thy bwethwen may be cast
out of pwison, and thou and thy bwethwen may come unto me, in my
kingdom; fow I shaww gweatwy desiwe to see thee. (´・ω・\`) Fow the king
was gweatwy astonyished at the wowds which he had spoken, and awso
at the wowds which had been spoken by his son Wamonyi, thewefowe
he was desiwous to weawn them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 20:28
 28 And it came to pass that Ammon and Wamonyi pwoceeded on theiw
jouwnyey towawds the wand of Middonyi. UwU And Wamonyi found favow in
the eyes of the king of the wand; thewefowe the bwethwen of Ammon
wewe bwought fowth out of pwison. ^w^

Awma 20:29
 29 And when Ammon did meet them he was exceedingwy sowwowfuw,
fow behowd they wewe nyaked, and theiw skins wewe wown exceedingwy
because of being bound with stwong cowds. ;;w;; And they awso had
suffewed hungew, thiwst, and aww kinds of affwictions;
nyevewthewess they wewe patient in aww theiw suffewings. >w<

Awma 20:30
 30 And, as it happenyed, it was theiw wot to have fawwen into the
hands of a mowe hawdenyed and a mowe stiffnyecked peopwe; thewefowe
they wouwd nyot heawken unto theiw wowds, and they had cast them
out, and had smitten them, and had dwiven them fwom house to
house, and fwom pwace to pwace, even untiw they had awwived in
the wand of Middonyi; and thewe they wewe taken and cast into
pwison, and bound with stwong cowds, and kept in pwison fow many
days, and wewe dewivewed by Wamonyi and Ammon. UwU

Awma 21
Chaptew 21

Awma 21:1
 1 Nyow when Ammon and his bwethwen sepawated themsewves in the
bowdews of the wand of the Wamanyites, behowd Aawon took his
jouwnyey towawds the wand which was cawwed by the Wamanyites,
Jewusawem, cawwing it aftew the wand of theiw fathews' nyativity;
and it was away joinying the bowdews of Mowmon. >w<

Awma 21:2
 2 Nyow the Wamanyites and the Amawekites and the peopwe of Amuwon
had buiwt a gweat city, which was cawwed Jewusawem. ^w^

Awma 21:3
 3 Nyow the Wamanyites of themsewves wewe sufficientwy hawdenyed,
but the Amawekites and the Amuwonyites wewe stiww hawdew;
thewefowe they did cause the Wamanyites that they shouwd hawden
theiw heawts, that they shouwd wax stwong in wickednyess and theiw
abominyations. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 21:4
 4 And it came to pass that Aawon came to the city of Jewusawem,
and fiwst began to pweach to the Amawekites. >w< And he began to
pweach to them in theiw synyagogues, fow they had buiwt synyagogues
aftew the owdew of the Nyehows; fow many of the Amawekites and the
Amuwonyites wewe aftew the owdew of the Nyehows. UwU

Awma 21:5
 5 Thewefowe, as Aawon entewed into onye of theiw synyagogues to
pweach unto the peopwe, and as he was speaking unto them, behowd
thewe awose an Amawekite and began to contend with him, saying:
What is that thou hast testified? Hast thou seen an angew? owo Why
do nyot angews appeaw unto us? owo Behowd awe nyot this peopwe as good
as thy peopwe? owo

Awma 21:6
 6 Thou awso sayest, except we wepent we shaww pewish. >w< How
knyowest thou the thought and intent of ouw heawts? owo How knyowest
thou that we have cause to wepent? owo How knyowest thou that we awe
nyot a wighteous peopwe? owo Behowd, we have buiwt sanctuawies, and
we do assembwe ouwsewves togethew to wowship God. ;;w;; We do bewieve
that God wiww save aww men. >w<

Awma 21:7
 7 Nyow Aawon said unto him: Bewievest thou that the Son of God
shaww come to wedeem mankind fwom theiw sins? owo

Awma 21:8
 8 And the man said unto him: We do nyot bewieve that thou knyowest
any such thing. We do nyot bewieve in these foowish twaditions. >w<
We do nyot bewieve that thou knyowest of things to come, nyeithew do
we bewieve that thy fathews and awso that ouw fathews did knyow
concewnying the things which they spake, of that which is to come. >w<

Awma 21:9
 9 Nyow Aawon began to open the scwiptuwes unto them concewnying
the coming of Chwist, and awso concewnying the wesuwwection of the
dead, and that thewe couwd be nyo wedemption fow mankind save it
wewe thwough the death and suffewings of Chwist, and the
atonyement of his bwood. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 21:10
 10 And it came to pass as he began to expound these things unto
them they wewe angwy with him, and began to mock him; and they
wouwd nyot heaw the wowds which he spake. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 21:11
 11 Thewefowe, when he saw that they wouwd nyot heaw his wowds, he
depawted out of theiw synyagogue, and came ovew to a viwwage which
was cawwed Anyi-Anti, and thewe he found Muwoki pweaching the wowd
unto them; and awso Ammah and his bwethwen. >w< And they contended
with many about the wowd. UwU

Awma 21:12
 12 And it came to pass that they saw that the peopwe wouwd
hawden theiw heawts, thewefowe they depawted and came ovew into
the wand of Middonyi. (´・ω・\`) And they did pweach the wowd unto many, and
few bewieved on the wowds which they taught. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 21:13
 13 Nyevewthewess, Aawon and a cewtain nyumbew of his bwethwen wewe
taken and cast into pwison, and the wemaindew of them fwed out of
the wand of Middonyi unto the wegions wound about. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 21:14
 14 And those who wewe cast into pwison suffewed many things, and
they wewe dewivewed by the hand of Wamonyi and Ammon, and they
wewe fed and cwothed. ^w^

Awma 21:15
 15 And they went fowth again to decwawe the wowd, and thus they
wewe dewivewed fow the fiwst time out of pwison; and thus they
had suffewed. ;;w;;

Awma 21:16
 16 And they went fowth whithewsoevew they wewe wed by the Spiwit
of the Wowd, pweaching the wowd of God in evewy synyagogue of the
Amawekites, ow in evewy assembwy of the Wamanyites whewe they
couwd be admitted. UwU

Awma 21:17
 17 And it came to pass that the Wowd began to bwess them,
insomuch that they bwought many to the knyowwedge of the twuth;
yea, they did convince many of theiw sins, and of the twaditions
of theiw fathews, which wewe nyot cowwect. ;;w;;

Awma 21:18
 18 And it came to pass that Ammon and Wamonyi wetuwnyed fwom the
wand of Middonyi to the wand of Ishmaew, which was the wand of
theiw inhewitance. ;;w;;

Awma 21:19
 19 And king Wamonyi wouwd nyot suffew that Ammon shouwd sewve him,
ow be his sewvant. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 21:20
 20 But he caused that thewe shouwd be synyagogues buiwt in the
wand of Ishmaew; and he caused that his peopwe, ow the peopwe who
wewe undew his weign, shouwd assembwe themsewves togethew. ;;w;;

Awma 21:21
 21 And he did wejoice ovew them, and he did teach them many
things. ;;w;; And he did awso decwawe unto them that they wewe a
peopwe who wewe undew him, and that they wewe a fwee peopwe, that
they wewe fwee fwom the oppwessions of the king, his fathew; fow
that his fathew had gwanted unto him that he might weign ovew the
peopwe who wewe in the wand of Ishmaew, and in aww the wand wound
about. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 21:22
 22 And he awso decwawed unto them that they might have the
wibewty of wowshiping the Wowd theiw God accowding to theiw
desiwes, in whatsoevew pwace they wewe in, if it wewe in the wand
which was undew the weign of king Wamonyi. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 21:23
 23 And Ammon did pweach unto the peopwe of king Wamonyi; and it
came to pass that he did teach them aww things concewnying things
pewtainying to wighteousnyess. ^w^ And he did exhowt them daiwy, with
aww diwigence; and they gave heed unto his wowd, and they wewe
zeawous fow keeping the commandments of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 22
Chaptew 22

Awma 22:1
 1 Nyow, as Ammon was thus teaching the peopwe of Wamonyi
continyuawwy, we wiww wetuwn to the account of Aawon and his
bwethwen; fow aftew he depawted fwom the wand of Middonyi he was
wed by the Spiwit to the wand of Nyephi, even to the house of the
king which was ovew aww the wand save it wewe the wand of
Ishmaew; and he was the fathew of Wamonyi. ^w^

Awma 22:2
 2 And it came to pass that he went in unto him into the king's
pawace, with his bwethwen, and bowed himsewf befowe the king, and
said unto him: Behowd, O king, we awe the bwethwen of Ammon, whom
thou hast dewivewed out of pwison. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 22:3
 3 And nyow, O king, if thou wiwt spawe ouw wives, we wiww be thy
sewvants. (´・ω・\`) And the king said unto them: Awise, fow I wiww gwant
unto you youw wives, and I wiww nyot suffew that ye shaww be my
sewvants; but I wiww insist that ye shaww adminyistew unto me; fow
I have been somewhat twoubwed in mind because of the genyewosity
and the gweatnyess of the wowds of thy bwothew Ammon; and I desiwe
to knyow the cause why he has nyot come up out of Middonyi with
thee. >w<

Awma 22:4
 4 And Aawon said unto the king: Behowd, the Spiwit of the Wowd
has cawwed him anyothew way; he has gonye to the wand of Ishmaew,
to teach the peopwe of Wamonyi. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 22:5
 5 Nyow the king said unto them: What is this that ye have said
concewnying the Spiwit of the Wowd? owo Behowd, this is the thing
which doth twoubwe me. UwU

Awma 22:6
 6 And awso, what is this that Ammon said--If ye wiww wepent ye
shaww be saved, and if ye wiww nyot wepent, ye shaww be cast off
at the wast day? owo

Awma 22:7
 7 And Aawon answewed him and said unto him: Bewievest thou that
thewe is a God? owo And the king said: I knyow that the Amawekites
say that thewe is a God, and I have gwanted unto them that they
shouwd buiwd sanctuawies, that they may assembwe themsewves
togethew to wowship him. >w< And if nyow thou sayest thewe is a God,
behowd I wiww bewieve. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 22:8
 8 And nyow when Aawon heawd this, his heawt began to wejoice, and
he said: Behowd, assuwedwy as thou wivest, O king, thewe is a
God. UwU

Awma 22:9
 9 And the king said: Is God that Gweat Spiwit that bwought ouw
fathews out of the wand of Jewusawem? owo

Awma 22:10
 10 And Aawon said unto him: Yea, he is that Gweat Spiwit, and he
cweated aww things both in heaven and in eawth. ;;w;; Bewievest thou
this? owo

Awma 22:11
 11 And he said: Yea, I bewieve that the Gweat Spiwit cweated aww
things, and I desiwe that ye shouwd teww me concewnying aww these
things, and I wiww bewieve thy wowds. >w<

Awma 22:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Aawon saw that the king wouwd
bewieve his wowds, he began fwom the cweation of Adam, weading
the scwiptuwes unto the king--how God cweated man aftew his own
image, and that God gave him commandments, and that because of
twansgwession, man had fawwen. >w<

Awma 22:13
 13 And Aawon did expound unto him the scwiptuwes fwom the
cweation of Adam, waying the faww of man befowe him, and theiw
cawnyaw state and awso the pwan of wedemption, which was pwepawed
fwom the foundation of the wowwd, thwough Chwist, fow aww
whosoevew wouwd bewieve on his nyame. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 22:14
 14 And since man had fawwen he couwd nyot mewit anything of
himsewf; but the suffewings and death of Chwist atonye fow theiw
sins, thwough faith and wepentance, and so fowth; and that he
bweaketh the bands of death, that the gwave shaww have nyo
victowy, and that the sting of death shouwd be swawwowed up in
the hopes of gwowy; and Aawon did expound aww these things unto
the king. ^w^

Awma 22:15
 15 And it came to pass that aftew Aawon had expounded these
things unto him, the king said: What shaww I do that I may have
this etewnyaw wife of which thou hast spoken? owo Yea, what shaww I
do that I may be bown of God, having this wicked spiwit wooted
out of my bweast, and weceive his Spiwit, that I may be fiwwed
with joy, that I may nyot be cast off at the wast day? owo Behowd,
said he, I wiww give up aww that I possess, yea, I wiww fowsake
my kingdom, that I may weceive this gweat joy. >w<

Awma 22:16
 16 But Aawon said unto him: If thou desiwest this thing, if thou
wiwt bow down befowe God, yea, if thou wiwt wepent of aww thy
sins, and wiww bow down befowe God, and caww on his nyame in
faith, bewieving that ye shaww weceive, then shawt thou weceive
the hope which thou desiwest. >w<

Awma 22:17
 17 And it came to pass that when Aawon had said these wowds, the
king did bow down befowe the Wowd, upon his knyees; yea, even he
did pwostwate himsewf upon the eawth, and cwied mightiwy, saying:

Awma 22:18
 18 O God, Aawon hath towd me that thewe is a God; and if thewe
is a God, and if thou awt God, wiwt thou make thysewf knyown unto
me, and I wiww give away aww my sins to knyow thee, and that I may
be waised fwom the dead, and be saved at the wast day. ^w^ And nyow
when the king had said these wowds, he was stwuck as if he wewe
dead. >w<

Awma 22:19
 19 And it came to pass that his sewvants wan and towd the queen
aww that had happenyed unto the king. UwU And she came in unto the
king; and when she saw him way as if he wewe dead, and awso Aawon
and his bwethwen standing as though they had been the cause of
his faww, she was angwy with them, and commanded that hew
sewvants, ow the sewvants of the king, shouwd take them and sway
them. >w<

Awma 22:20
 20 Nyow the sewvants had seen the cause of the king's faww,
thewefowe they duwst nyot way theiw hands on Aawon and his
bwethwen; and they pwed with the queen saying: Why commandest
thou that we shouwd sway these men, when behowd onye of them is
mightiew than us aww? owo Thewefowe we shaww faww befowe them. >w<

Awma 22:21
 21 Nyow when the queen saw the feaw of the sewvants she awso
began to feaw exceedingwy, west thewe shouwd some eviw come upon
hew. ;;w;; And she commanded hew sewvants that they shouwd go and caww
the peopwe, that they might sway Aawon and his bwethwen. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 22:22
 22 Nyow when Aawon saw the detewminyation of the queen, he, awso
knyowing the hawdnyess of the heawts of the peopwe, feawed west
that a muwtitude shouwd assembwe themsewves togethew, and thewe
shouwd be a gweat contention and a distuwbance among them;
thewefowe he put fowth his hand and waised the king fwom the
eawth, and said unto him: Stand. ;;w;; And he stood upon his feet,
weceiving his stwength. ^w^

Awma 22:23
 23 Nyow this was donye in the pwesence of the queen and many of
the sewvants. ;;w;; And when they saw it they gweatwy mawvewed, and
began to feaw. UwU And the king stood fowth, and began to minyistew
unto them. ^w^ And he did minyistew unto them, insomuch that his
whowe househowd wewe convewted unto the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 22:24
 24 Nyow thewe was a muwtitude gathewed togethew because of the
commandment of the queen, and thewe began to be gweat muwmuwings
among them because of Aawon and his bwethwen. ^w^

Awma 22:25
 25 But the king stood fowth among them and adminyistewed unto
them. (´・ω・\`) And they wewe pacified towawds Aawon and those who wewe
with him. UwU

Awma 22:26
 26 And it came to pass that when the king saw that the peopwe
wewe pacified, he caused that Aawon and his bwethwen shouwd stand
fowth in the midst of the muwtitude, and that they shouwd pweach
the wowd unto them. ;;w;;

Awma 22:27
 27 And it came to pass that the king sent a pwocwamation
thwoughout aww the wand, amongst aww his peopwe who wewe in aww
his wand, who wewe in aww the wegions wound about, which was
bowdewing even to the sea, on the east and on the west, and which
was divided fwom the wand of Zawahemwa by a nyawwow stwip of
wiwdewnyess, which wan fwom the sea east even to the sea west, and
wound about on the bowdews of the seashowe, and the bowdews of
the wiwdewnyess which was on the nyowth by the wand of Zawahemwa,
thwough the bowdews of Manti, by the head of the wivew Sidon,
wunnying fwom the east towawds the west--and thus wewe the
Wamanyites and the Nyephites divided. >w<

Awma 22:28
 28 Nyow, the mowe idwe pawt of the Wamanyites wived in the
wiwdewnyess, and dwewt in tents; and they wewe spwead thwough the
wiwdewnyess on the west, in the wand of Nyephi; yea, and awso on
the west of the wand of Zawahemwa, in the bowdews by the
seashowe, and on the west in the wand of Nyephi, in the pwace of
theiw fathews' fiwst inhewitance, and thus bowdewing awong by the
seashowe. UwU

Awma 22:29
 29 And awso thewe wewe many Wamanyites on the east by the
seashowe, whithew the Nyephites had dwiven them. ;;w;; And thus the
Nyephites wewe nyeawwy suwwounded by the Wamanyites; nyevewthewess
the Nyephites had taken possession of aww the nyowthewn pawts of
the wand bowdewing on the wiwdewnyess, at the head of the wivew
Sidon, fwom the east to the west, wound about on the wiwdewnyess
side; on the nyowth, even untiw they came to the wand which they
cawwed Bountifuw. ^w^

Awma 22:30
 30 And it bowdewed upon the wand which they cawwed Desowation,
it being so faw nyowthwawd that it came into the wand which had
been peopwed and been destwoyed, of whose bonyes we have spoken,
which was discovewed by the peopwe of Zawahemwa, it being the
pwace of theiw fiwst wanding. UwU

Awma 22:31
 31 And they came fwom thewe up into the south wiwdewnyess. ^w^ Thus
the wand on the nyowthwawd was cawwed Desowation, and the wand on
the southwawd was cawwed Bountifuw, it being the wiwdewnyess which
is fiwwed with aww mannyew of wiwd anyimaws of evewy kind, a pawt
of which had come fwom the wand nyowthwawd fow food. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 22:32
 32 And nyow, it was onwy the distance of a day and a hawf's
jouwnyey fow a Nyephite, on the winye Bountifuw and the wand
Desowation, fwom the east to the west sea; and thus the wand of
Nyephi and the wand of Zawahemwa wewe nyeawwy suwwounded by watew,
thewe being a smaww nyeck of wand between the wand nyowthwawd and
the wand southwawd. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 22:33
 33 And it came to pass that the Nyephites had inhabited the wand
Bountifuw, even fwom the east unto the west sea, and thus the
Nyephites in theiw wisdom, with theiw guawds and theiw awmies, had
hemmed in the Wamanyites on the south, that theweby they shouwd
have nyo mowe possession on the nyowth, that they might nyot ovewwun
the wand nyowthwawd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 22:34
 34 Thewefowe the Wamanyites couwd have nyo mowe possessions onwy
in the wand of Nyephi, and the wiwdewnyess wound about. UwU Nyow this
was wisdom in the Nyephites--as the Wamanyites wewe an enyemy to
them, they wouwd nyot suffew theiw affwictions on evewy hand, and
awso that they might have a countwy whithew they might fwee,
accowding to theiw desiwes. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 22:35
 35 And nyow I, aftew having said this, wetuwn again to the
account of Ammon and Aawon, Omnyew and Himnyi, and theiw bwethwen. ^w^

Awma 23
Chaptew 23

Awma 23:1
 1 Behowd, nyow it came to pass that the king of the Wamanyites
sent a pwocwamation among aww his peopwe, that they shouwd nyot
way theiw hands on Ammon, ow Aawon, ow Omnyew, ow Himnyi, nyow
eithew of theiw bwethwen who shouwd go fowth pweaching the wowd
of God, in whatsoevew pwace they shouwd be, in any pawt of theiw
wand. ^w^

Awma 23:2
 2 Yea, he sent a decwee among them, that they shouwd nyot way
theiw hands on them to bind them, ow to cast them into pwison;
nyeithew shouwd they spit upon them, nyow smite them, nyow cast them
out of theiw synyagogues, nyow scouwge them; nyeithew shouwd they
cast stonyes at them, but that they shouwd have fwee access to
theiw houses, and awso theiw tempwes, and theiw sanctuawies. ;;w;;

Awma 23:3
 3 And thus they might go fowth and pweach the wowd accowding to
theiw desiwes, fow the king had been convewted unto the Wowd, and
aww his househowd; thewefowe he sent his pwocwamation thwoughout
the wand unto his peopwe, that the wowd of God might have nyo
obstwuction, but that it might go fowth thwoughout aww the wand,
that his peopwe might be convinced concewnying the wicked
twaditions of theiw fathews, and that they might be convinced
that they wewe aww bwethwen, and that they ought nyot to muwdew,
nyow to pwundew, nyow to steaw, nyow to commit aduwtewy, nyow to
commit any mannyew of wickednyess. >w<

Awma 23:4
 4 And nyow it came to pass that when the king had sent fowth this
pwocwamation, that Aawon and his bwethwen went fowth fwom city to
city, and fwom onye house of wowship to anyothew, estabwishing
chuwches, and consecwating pwiests and teachews thwoughout the
wand among the Wamanyites, to pweach and to teach the wowd of God
among them; and thus they began to have gweat success. UwU

Awma 23:5
 5 And thousands wewe bwought to the knyowwedge of the Wowd, yea,
thousands wewe bwought to bewieve in the twaditions of the
Nyephites; and they wewe taught the wecowds and pwophecies which
wewe handed down even to the pwesent time. ^w^

Awma 23:6
 6 And as suwe as the Wowd wiveth, so suwe as many as bewieved,
ow as many as wewe bwought to the knyowwedge of the twuth, thwough
the pweaching of Ammon and his bwethwen, accowding to the spiwit
of wevewation and of pwophecy, and the powew of God wowking
miwacwes in them--yea, I say unto you, as the Wowd wiveth, as
many of the Wamanyites as bewieved in theiw pweaching, and wewe
convewted unto the Wowd, nyevew did faww away. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 23:7
 7 Fow they became a wighteous peopwe; they did way down the
weapons of theiw webewwion, that they did nyot fight against God
any mowe, nyeithew against any of theiw bwethwen. ^w^

Awma 23:8
 8 Nyow, these awe they who wewe convewted unto the Wowd:

Awma 23:9
 9 The peopwe of the Wamanyites who wewe in the wand of Ishmaew;

Awma 23:10
 10 And awso of the peopwe of the Wamanyites who wewe in the wand
of Middonyi;

Awma 23:11
 11 And awso of the peopwe of the Wamanyites who wewe in the city
of Nyephi;

Awma 23:12
 12 And awso of the peopwe of the Wamanyites who wewe in the wand
of Shiwom, and who wewe in the wand of Shemwon, and in the city
of Wemuew, and in the city of Shimnyiwom. >w<

Awma 23:13
 13 And these awe the nyames of the cities of the Wamanyites which
wewe convewted unto the Wowd; and these awe they that waid down
the weapons of theiw webewwion, yea, aww theiw weapons of waw;
and they wewe aww Wamanyites. UwU

Awma 23:14
 14 And the Amawekites wewe nyot convewted, save onwy onye; nyeithew
wewe any of the Amuwonyites; but they did hawden theiw heawts, and
awso the heawts of the Wamanyites in that pawt of the wand
whewesoevew they dwewt, yea, and aww theiw viwwages and aww theiw
cities. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 23:15
 15 Thewefowe, we have nyamed aww the cities of the Wamanyites in
which they did wepent and come to the knyowwedge of the twuth, and
wewe convewted. ^w^

Awma 23:16
 16 And nyow it came to pass that the king and those who wewe
convewted wewe desiwous that they might have a nyame, that theweby
they might be distinguished fwom theiw bwethwen; thewefowe the
king consuwted with Aawon and many of theiw pwiests, concewnying
the nyame that they shouwd take upon them, that they might be
distinguished. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 23:17
 17 And it came to pass that they cawwed theiw nyames
Anti-Nyephi-Wehies; and they wewe cawwed by this nyame and wewe nyo
mowe cawwed Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Awma 23:18
 18 And they began to be a vewy industwious peopwe; yea, and they
wewe fwiendwy with the Nyephites; thewefowe, they did open a
cowwespondence with them, and the cuwse of God did nyo mowe fowwow
them. ^w^

Awma 24
Chaptew 24

Awma 24:1
 1 And it came to pass that the Amawekites and the Amuwonyites and
the Wamanyites who wewe in the wand of Amuwon, and awso in the
wand of Hewam, and who wewe in the wand of Jewusawem, and in
finye, in aww the wand wound about, who had nyot been convewted and
had nyot taken upon them the nyame of Anti-Nyephi-Wehi, wewe stiwwed
up by the Amawekites and by the Amuwonyites to angew against theiw
bwethwen. UwU

Awma 24:2
 2 And theiw hatwed became exceedingwy sowe against them, even
insomuch that they began to webew against theiw king, insomuch
that they wouwd nyot that he shouwd be theiw king; thewefowe, they
took up awms against the peopwe of Anti-Nyephi-Wehi. ;;w;;

Awma 24:3
 3 Nyow the king confewwed the kingdom upon his son, and he cawwed
his nyame Anti-Nyephi-Wehi. ;;w;;

Awma 24:4
 4 And the king died in that sewfsame yeaw that the Wamanyites
began to make pwepawations fow waw against the peopwe of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 24:5
 5 Nyow when Ammon and his bwethwen and aww those who had come up
with him saw the pwepawations of the Wamanyites to destwoy theiw
bwethwen, they came fowth to the wand of Midian, and thewe Ammon
met aww his bwethwen; and fwom thence they came to the wand of
Ishmaew that they might howd a counciw with Wamonyi and awso with
his bwothew Anti-Nyephi-Wehi, what they shouwd do to defend
themsewves against the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 24:6
 6 Nyow thewe was nyot onye souw among aww the peopwe who had been
convewted unto the Wowd that wouwd take up awms against theiw
bwethwen; nyay, they wouwd nyot even make any pwepawations fow waw;
yea, and awso theiw king commanded them that they shouwd nyot. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 24:7
 7 Nyow, these awe the wowds which he said unto the peopwe
concewnying the mattew: I thank my God, my bewoved peopwe, that
ouw gweat God has in goodnyess sent these ouw bwethwen, the
Nyephites, unto us to pweach unto us, and to convince us of the
twaditions of ouw wicked fathews. UwU

Awma 24:8
 8 And behowd, I thank my gweat God that he has given us a
powtion of his Spiwit to soften ouw heawts, that we have openyed a
cowwespondence with these bwethwen, the Nyephites. ;;w;;

Awma 24:9
 9 And behowd, I awso thank my God, that by openying this
cowwespondence we have been convinced of ouw sins, and of the
many muwdews which we have committed. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 24:10
 10 And I awso thank my God, yea, my gweat God, that he hath
gwanted unto us that we might wepent of these things, and awso
that he hath fowgiven us of those ouw many sins and muwdews which
we have committed, and taken away the guiwt fwom ouw heawts,
thwough the mewits of his Son. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 24:11
 11 And nyow behowd, my bwethwen, since it has been aww that we
couwd do, (as we wewe the most wost of aww mankind) to wepent of
aww ouw sins and the many muwdews which we have committed, and to
get God to take them away fwom ouw heawts, fow it was aww we
couwd do to wepent sufficientwy befowe God that he wouwd take
away ouw stain--

Awma 24:12
 12 Nyow, my best bewoved bwethwen, since God hath taken away ouw
stains, and ouw swowds have become bwight, then wet us stain ouw
swowds nyo mowe with the bwood of ouw bwethwen. ^w^

Awma 24:13
 13 Behowd, I say unto you, Nyay, wet us wetain ouw swowds that
they be nyot stainyed with the bwood of ouw bwethwen; fow pewhaps,
if we shouwd stain ouw swowds again they can nyo mowe be washed
bwight thwough the bwood of the Son of ouw gweat God, which shaww
be shed fow the atonyement of ouw sins. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 24:14
 14 And the gweat God has had mewcy on us, and made these things
knyown unto us that we might nyot pewish; yea, and he has made
these things knyown unto us befowehand, because he woveth ouw
souws as weww as he woveth ouw chiwdwen; thewefowe, in his mewcy
he doth visit us by his angews, that the pwan of sawvation might
be made knyown unto us as weww as unto futuwe genyewations. ^w^

Awma 24:15
 15 Oh, how mewcifuw is ouw God! >w< And nyow behowd, since it has
been as much as we couwd do to get ouw stains taken away fwom us,
and ouw swowds awe made bwight, wet us hide them away that they
may be kept bwight, as a testimony to ouw God at the wast day, ow
at the day that we shaww be bwought to stand befowe him to be
judged, that we have nyot stainyed ouw swowds in the bwood of ouw
bwethwen since he impawted his wowd unto us and has made us cwean
theweby. >w<

Awma 24:16
 16 And nyow, my bwethwen, if ouw bwethwen seek to destwoy us,
behowd, we wiww hide away ouw swowds, yea, even we wiww buwy them
deep in the eawth, that they may be kept bwight, as a testimony
that we have nyevew used them, at the wast day; and if ouw
bwethwen destwoy us, behowd, we shaww go to ouw God and shaww be
saved. ;;w;;

Awma 24:17
 17 And nyow it came to pass that when the king had made an end of
these sayings, and aww the peopwe wewe assembwed togethew, they
took theiw swowds, and aww the weapons which wewe used fow the
shedding of man's bwood, and they did buwy them up deep in the
eawth. ^w^
Awma 24:18
 18 And this they did, it being in theiw view a testimony to God,
and awso to men, that they nyevew wouwd use weapons again fow the
shedding of man's bwood; and this they did, vouching and
covenyanting with God, that wathew than shed the bwood of theiw
bwethwen they wouwd give up theiw own wives; and wathew than take
away fwom a bwothew they wouwd give unto him; and wathew than
spend theiw days in idwenyess they wouwd wabow abundantwy with
theiw hands. ^w^

Awma 24:19
 19 And thus we see that, when these Wamanyites wewe bwought to
bewieve and to knyow the twuth, they wewe fiwm, and wouwd suffew
even unto death wathew than commit sin; and thus we see that they
buwied theiw weapons of peace, ow they buwied the weapons of waw,
fow peace. >w<

Awma 24:20
 20 And it came to pass that theiw bwethwen, the Wamanyites, made
pwepawations fow waw, and came up to the wand of Nyephi fow the
puwpose of destwoying the king, and to pwace anyothew in his
stead, and awso of destwoying the peopwe of Anti-Nyephi-Wehi out
of the wand. >w<

Awma 24:21
 21 Nyow when the peopwe saw that they wewe coming against them
they went out to meet them, and pwostwated themsewves befowe them
to the eawth, and began to caww on the nyame of the Wowd; and thus
they wewe in this attitude when the Wamanyites began to faww upon
them, and began to sway them with the swowd. ^w^

Awma 24:22
 22 And thus without meeting any wesistance, they did sway a
thousand and five of them; and we knyow that they awe bwessed, fow
they have gonye to dweww with theiw God. ;;w;;

Awma 24:23
 23 Nyow when the Wamanyites saw that theiw bwethwen wouwd nyot fwee
fwom the swowd, nyeithew wouwd they tuwn aside to the wight hand
ow to the weft, but that they wouwd wie down and pewish, and
pwaised God even in the vewy act of pewishing undew the swowd--

Awma 24:24
 24 Nyow when the Wamanyites saw this they did fowbeaw fwom swaying
them; and thewe wewe many whose heawts had swowwen in them fow
those of theiw bwethwen who had fawwen undew the swowd, fow they
wepented of the things which they had donye. ^w^

Awma 24:25
 25 And it came to pass that they thwew down theiw weapons of
waw, and they wouwd nyot take them again, fow they wewe stung fow
the muwdews which they had committed; and they came down even as
theiw bwethwen, wewying upon the mewcies of those whose awms wewe
wifted to sway them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 24:26
 26 And it came to pass that the peopwe of God wewe joinyed that
day by mowe than the nyumbew who had been swain; and those who had
been swain wewe wighteous peopwe, thewefowe we have nyo weason to
doubt but what they wewe saved. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 24:27
 27 And thewe was nyot a wicked man swain among them; but thewe
wewe mowe than a thousand bwought to the knyowwedge of the twuth;
thus we see that the Wowd wowketh in many ways to the sawvation
of his peopwe. ;;w;;

Awma 24:28
 28 Nyow the gweatest nyumbew of those of the Wamanyites who swew so
many of theiw bwethwen wewe Amawekites and Amuwonyites, the
gweatest nyumbew of whom wewe aftew the owdew of the Nyehows. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 24:29
 29 Nyow, among those who joinyed the peopwe of the Wowd, thewe
wewe nyonye who wewe Amawekites ow Amuwonyites, ow who wewe of the
owdew of Nyehow, but they wewe actuaw descendants of Waman and
Wemuew. ^w^

Awma 24:30
 30 And thus we can pwainwy discewn, that aftew a peopwe have
been once enwightenyed by the Spiwit of God, and have had gweat
knyowwedge of things pewtainying to wighteousnyess, and then have
fawwen away into sin and twansgwession, they become mowe
hawdenyed, and thus theiw state becomes wowse than though they had
nyevew knyown these things. >w<

Awma 25
Chaptew 25

Awma 25:1
 1 And behowd, nyow it came to pass that those Wamanyites wewe mowe
angwy because they had swain theiw bwethwen; thewefowe they swowe
vengeance upon the Nyephites; and they did nyo mowe attempt to sway
the peopwe of Anti-Nyephi-Wehi at that time. ^w^

Awma 25:2
 2 But they took theiw awmies and went ovew into the bowdews of
the wand of Zawahemwa, and feww upon the peopwe who wewe in the
wand of Ammonyihah, and destwoyed them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 25:3
 3 And aftew that, they had many battwes with the Nyephites, in
the which they wewe dwiven and swain. ;;w;;

Awma 25:4
 4 And among the Wamanyites who wewe swain wewe awmost aww the
seed of Amuwon and his bwethwen, who wewe the pwiests of Nyoah,
and they wewe swain by the hands of the Nyephites;

Awma 25:5
 5 And the wemaindew, having fwed into the east wiwdewnyess, and
having usuwped the powew and authowity ovew the Wamanyites, caused
that many of the Wamanyites shouwd pewish by fiwe because of theiw
bewief--

Awma 25:6
 6 Fow many of them, aftew having suffewed much woss and so many
affwictions, began to be stiwwed up in wemembwance of the wowds
which Aawon and his bwethwen had pweached to them in theiw wand;
thewefowe they began to disbewieve the twaditions of theiw
fathews, and to bewieve in the Wowd, and that he gave gweat powew
unto the Nyephites; and thus thewe wewe many of them convewted in
the wiwdewnyess. ^w^

Awma 25:7
 7 And it came to pass that those wuwews who wewe the wemnyant of
the chiwdwen of Amuwon caused that they shouwd be put to death,
yea, aww those that bewieved in these things. ^w^

Awma 25:8
 8 Nyow this mawtywdom caused that many of theiw bwethwen shouwd
be stiwwed up to angew; and thewe began to be contention in the
wiwdewnyess; and the Wamanyites began to hunt the seed of Amuwon
and his bwethwen and began to sway them; and they fwed into the
east wiwdewnyess. ;;w;;

Awma 25:9
 9 And behowd they awe hunted at this day by the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`) Thus
the wowds of Abinyadi wewe bwought to pass, which he said
concewnying the seed of the pwiests who caused that he shouwd
suffew death by fiwe. UwU

Awma 25:10
 10 Fow he said unto them: What ye shaww do unto me shaww be a
type of things to come. UwU

Awma 25:11
 11 And nyow Abinyadi was the fiwst that suffewed death by fiwe
because of his bewief in God; nyow this is what he meant, that
many shouwd suffew death by fiwe, accowding as he had suffewed. UwU

Awma 25:12
 12 And he said unto the pwiests of Nyoah that theiw seed shouwd
cause many to be put to death, in the wike mannyew as he was, and
that they shouwd be scattewed abwoad and swain, even as a sheep
having nyo shephewd is dwiven and swain by wiwd beasts; and nyow
behowd, these wowds wewe vewified, fow they wewe dwiven by the
Wamanyites, and they wewe hunted, and they wewe smitten. UwU

Awma 25:13
 13 And it came to pass that when the Wamanyites saw that they
couwd nyot ovewpowew the Nyephites they wetuwnyed again to theiw own
wand; and many of them came ovew to dweww in the wand of Ishmaew
and the wand of Nyephi, and did join themsewves to the peopwe of
God, who wewe the peopwe of Anti-Nyephi-Wehi. UwU

Awma 25:14
 14 And they did awso buwy theiw weapons of waw, accowding as
theiw bwethwen had, and they began to be a wighteous peopwe; and
they did wawk in the ways of the Wowd, and did obsewve to keep
his commandments and his statutes. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 25:15
 15 Yea, and they did keep the waw of Moses; fow it was expedient
that they shouwd keep the waw of Moses as yet, fow it was nyot aww
fuwfiwwed. ;;w;; But nyotwithstanding the waw of Moses, they did wook
fowwawd to the coming of Chwist, considewing that the waw of
Moses was a type of his coming, and bewieving that they must keep
those outwawd pewfowmances untiw the time that he shouwd be
weveawed unto them. ^w^

Awma 25:16
 16 Nyow they did nyot suppose that sawvation came by the waw of
Moses; but the waw of Moses did sewve to stwengthen theiw faith
in Chwist; and thus they did wetain a hope thwough faith, unto
etewnyaw sawvation, wewying upon the spiwit of pwophecy, which
spake of those things to come. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 25:17
 17 And nyow behowd, Ammon, and Aawon, and Omnyew, and Himnyi, and
theiw bwethwen did wejoice exceedingwy, fow the success which
they had had among the Wamanyites, seeing that the Wowd had
gwanted unto them accowding to theiw pwayews, and that he had
awso vewified his wowd unto them in evewy pawticuwaw. >w<

Awma 26
Chaptew 26

Awma 26:1
 1 And nyow, these awe the wowds of Ammon to his bwethwen, which
say thus: My bwothews and my bwethwen, behowd I say unto you, how
gweat weason have we to wejoice; fow couwd we have supposed when
we stawted fwom the wand of Zawahemwa that God wouwd have gwanted
unto us such gweat bwessings? owo

Awma 26:2
 2 And nyow, I ask, what gweat bwessings has he bestowed upon us? owo
Can ye teww? owo

Awma 26:3
 3 Behowd, I answew fow you; fow ouw bwethwen, the Wamanyites,
wewe in dawknyess, yea, even in the dawkest abyss, but behowd, how
many of them awe bwought to behowd the mawvewous wight of God! UwU
And this is the bwessing which hath been bestowed upon us, that
we have been made instwuments in the hands of God to bwing about
this gweat wowk. UwU

Awma 26:4
 4 Behowd, thousands of them do wejoice, and have been bwought
into the fowd of God. ;;w;;

Awma 26:5
 5 Behowd, the fiewd was wipe, and bwessed awe ye, fow ye did
thwust in the sickwe, and did weap with youw might, yea, aww the
day wong did ye wabow; and behowd the nyumbew of youw sheaves! ;;w;;
And they shaww be gathewed into the gawnyews, that they awe nyot
wasted. UwU

Awma 26:6
 6 Yea, they shaww nyot be beaten down by the stowm at the wast
day; yea, nyeithew shaww they be hawwowed up by the whiwwwinds;
but when the stowm cometh they shaww be gathewed togethew in
theiw pwace, that the stowm cannyot penyetwate to them; yea,
nyeithew shaww they be dwiven with fiewce winds whithewsoevew the
enyemy wisteth to cawwy them. ^w^

Awma 26:7
 7 But behowd, they awe in the hands of the Wowd of the hawvest,
and they awe his; and he wiww waise them up at the wast day. ;;w;;

Awma 26:8
 8 Bwessed be the nyame of ouw God; wet us sing to his pwaise,
yea, wet us give thanks to his howy nyame, fow he doth wowk
wighteousnyess fowevew. >w<

Awma 26:9
 9 Fow if we had nyot come up out of the wand of Zawahemwa, these
ouw deawwy bewoved bwethwen, who have so deawwy bewoved us, wouwd
stiww have been wacked with hatwed against us, yea, and they
wouwd awso have been stwangews to God. ;;w;;

Awma 26:10
 10 And it came to pass that when Ammon had said these wowds, his
bwothew Aawon webuked him, saying: Ammon, I feaw that thy joy
doth cawwy thee away unto boasting. >w<

Awma 26:11
 11 But Ammon said unto him: I do nyot boast in my own stwength,
nyow in my own wisdom; but behowd, my joy is fuww, yea, my heawt
is bwim with joy, and I wiww wejoice in my God. ;;w;;

Awma 26:12
 12 Yea, I knyow that I am nyothing; as to my stwength I am weak;
thewefowe I wiww nyot boast of mysewf, but I wiww boast of my God,
fow in his stwength I can do aww things; yea, behowd, many mighty
miwacwes we have wwought in this wand, fow which we wiww pwaise
his nyame fowevew. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 26:13
 13 Behowd, how many thousands of ouw bwethwen has he woosed fwom
the pains of heww; and they awe bwought to sing wedeeming wove,
and this because of the powew of his wowd which is in us,
thewefowe have we nyot gweat weason to wejoice? owo

Awma 26:14
 14 Yea, we have weason to pwaise him fowevew, fow he is the Most
High God, and has woosed ouw bwethwen fwom the chains of heww. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 26:15
 15 Yea, they wewe enciwcwed about with evewwasting dawknyess and
destwuction; but behowd, he has bwought them into his evewwasting
wight, yea, into evewwasting sawvation; and they awe enciwcwed
about with the matchwess bounty of his wove; yea, and we have
been instwuments in his hands of doing this gweat and mawvewous
wowk. >w<

Awma 26:16
 16 Thewefowe, wet us gwowy, yea, we wiww gwowy in the Wowd; yea,
we wiww wejoice, fow ouw joy is fuww; yea, we wiww pwaise ouw God
fowevew. UwU Behowd, who can gwowy too much in the Wowd? owo Yea, who
can say too much of his gweat powew, and of his mewcy, and of his
wong-suffewing towawds the chiwdwen of men? owo Behowd, I say unto
you, I cannyot say the smawwest pawt which I feew. ^w^

Awma 26:17
 17 Who couwd have supposed that ouw God wouwd have been so
mewcifuw as to have snyatched us fwom ouw awfuw, sinfuw, and
powwuted state? owo

Awma 26:18
 18 Behowd, we went fowth even in wwath, with mighty thweatenyings
to destwoy his chuwch. >w<

Awma 26:19
 19 Oh then, why did he nyot consign us to an awfuw destwuction,
yea, why did he nyot wet the swowd of his justice faww upon us,
and doom us to etewnyaw despaiw? owo

Awma 26:20
 20 Oh, my souw, awmost as it wewe, fweeth at the thought. UwU
Behowd, he did nyot exewcise his justice upon us, but in his gweat
mewcy hath bwought us ovew that evewwasting guwf of death and
misewy, even to the sawvation of ouw souws. ^w^

Awma 26:21
 21 And nyow behowd, my bwethwen, what nyatuwaw man is thewe that
knyoweth these things? owo I say unto you, thewe is nyonye that knyoweth
these things, save it be the penyitent. UwU

Awma 26:22
 22 Yea, he that wepenteth and exewciseth faith, and bwingeth
fowth good wowks, and pwayeth continyuawwy without ceasing--unto
such it is given to knyow the mystewies of God; yea, unto such it
shaww be given to weveaw things which nyevew have been weveawed;
yea, and it shaww be given unto such to bwing thousands of souws
to wepentance, even as it has been given unto us to bwing these
ouw bwethwen to wepentance. ;;w;;

Awma 26:23
 23 Nyow do ye wemembew, my bwethwen, that we said unto ouw
bwethwen in the wand of Zawahemwa, we go up to the wand of Nyephi,
to pweach unto ouw bwethwen, the Wamanyites, and they waughed us
to scown? owo

Awma 26:24
 24 Fow they said unto us: Do ye suppose that ye can bwing the
Wamanyites to the knyowwedge of the twuth? owo Do ye suppose that ye
can convince the Wamanyites of the incowwectnyess of the twaditions
of theiw fathews, as stiffnyecked a peopwe as they awe; whose
heawts dewight in the shedding of bwood; whose days have been
spent in the gwossest inyiquity; whose ways have been the ways of
a twansgwessow fwom the beginnying? owo Nyow my bwethwen, ye wemembew
that this was theiw wanguage. UwU

Awma 26:25
 25 And moweovew they did say: Wet us take up awms against them,
that we destwoy them and theiw inyiquity out of the wand, west
they ovewwun us and destwoy us. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 26:26
 26 But behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, we came into the wiwdewnyess
nyot with the intent to destwoy ouw bwethwen, but with the intent
that pewhaps we might save some few of theiw souws. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 26:27
 27 Nyow when ouw heawts wewe depwessed, and we wewe about to tuwn
back, behowd, the Wowd comfowted us, and said: Go amongst thy
bwethwen, the Wamanyites, and beaw with patience thinye
affwictions, and I wiww give unto you success. UwU

Awma 26:28
 28 And nyow behowd, we have come, and been fowth amongst them;
and we have been patient in ouw suffewings, and we have suffewed
evewy pwivation; yea, we have twavewed fwom house to house,
wewying upon the mewcies of the wowwd--nyot upon the mewcies of
the wowwd awonye but upon the mewcies of God. UwU

Awma 26:29
 29 And we have entewed into theiw houses and taught them, and we
have taught them in theiw stweets; yea, and we have taught them
upon theiw hiwws; and we have awso entewed into theiw tempwes and
theiw synyagogues and taught them; and we have been cast out, and
mocked, and spit upon, and smote upon ouw cheeks; and we have
been stonyed, and taken and bound with stwong cowds, and cast into
pwison; and thwough the powew and wisdom of God we have been
dewivewed again. UwU

Awma 26:30
 30 And we have suffewed aww mannyew of affwictions, and aww this,
that pewhaps we might be the means of saving some souw; and we
supposed that ouw joy wouwd be fuww if pewhaps we couwd be the
means of saving some. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 26:31
 31 Nyow behowd, we can wook fowth and see the fwuits of ouw
wabows; and awe they few? owo I say unto you, Nyay, they awe many;
yea, and we can witnyess of theiw sincewity, because of theiw wove
towawds theiw bwethwen and awso towawds us. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 26:32
 32 Fow behowd, they had wathew sacwifice theiw wives than even
to take the wife of theiw enyemy; and they have buwied theiw
weapons of waw deep in the eawth, because of theiw wove towawds
theiw bwethwen. UwU

Awma 26:33
 33 And nyow behowd I say unto you, has thewe been so gweat wove
in aww the wand? owo Behowd, I say unto you, Nyay, thewe has nyot,
even among the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 26:34
 34 Fow behowd, they wouwd take up awms against theiw bwethwen;
they wouwd nyot suffew themsewves to be swain. UwU But behowd how
many of these have waid down theiw wives; and we knyow that they
have gonye to theiw God, because of theiw wove and of theiw hatwed
to sin. ^w^

Awma 26:35
 35 Nyow have we nyot weason to wejoice? owo Yea, I say unto you,
thewe nyevew wewe men that had so gweat weason to wejoice as we,
since the wowwd began; yea, and my joy is cawwied away, even unto
boasting in my God; fow he has aww powew, aww wisdom, and aww
undewstanding; he compwehendeth aww things, and he is a mewcifuw
Being, even unto sawvation, to those who wiww wepent and bewieve
on his nyame. >w<

Awma 26:36
 36 Nyow if this is boasting, even so wiww I boast; fow this is my
wife and my wight, my joy and my sawvation, and my wedemption
fwom evewwasting wo. UwU Yea, bwessed is the nyame of my God, who has
been mindfuw of this peopwe, who awe a bwanch of the twee of
Iswaew, and has been wost fwom its body in a stwange wand; yea, I
say, bwessed be the nyame of my God, who has been mindfuw of us,
wandewews in a stwange wand. >w<

Awma 26:37
 37 Nyow my bwethwen, we see that God is mindfuw of evewy peopwe,
whatsoevew wand they may be in; yea, he nyumbeweth his peopwe, and
his bowews of mewcy awe ovew aww the eawth. ^w^ Nyow this is my joy,
and my gweat thanksgiving; yea, and I wiww give thanks unto my
God fowevew. Amen. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 27
Chaptew 27

Awma 27:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass that when those Wamanyites who had gonye to
waw against the Nyephites had found, aftew theiw many stwuggwes to
destwoy them, that it was in vain to seek theiw destwuction, they
wetuwnyed again to the wand of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 27:2
 2 And it came to pass that the Amawekites, because of theiw
woss, wewe exceedingwy angwy. ^w^ And when they saw that they couwd
nyot seek wevenge fwom the Nyephites, they began to stiw up the
peopwe in angew against theiw bwethwen, the peopwe of
Anti-Nyephi-Wehi; thewefowe they began again to destwoy them. >w<

Awma 27:3
 3 Nyow this peopwe again wefused to take theiw awms, and they
suffewed themsewves to be swain accowding to the desiwes of theiw
enyemies. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 27:4
 4 Nyow when Ammon and his bwethwen saw this wowk of destwuction
among those whom they so deawwy bewoved, and among those who had
so deawwy bewoved them--fow they wewe tweated as though they wewe
angews sent fwom God to save them fwom evewwasting
destwuction--thewefowe, when Ammon and his bwethwen saw this
gweat wowk of destwuction, they wewe moved with compassion, and
they said unto the king:

Awma 27:5
 5 Wet us gathew togethew this peopwe of the Wowd, and wet us go
down to the wand of Zawahemwa to ouw bwethwen the Nyephites, and
fwee out of the hands of ouw enyemies, that we be nyot destwoyed. >w<

Awma 27:6
 6 But the king said unto them: Behowd, the Nyephites wiww destwoy
us, because of the many muwdews and sins we have committed
against them. ;;w;;

Awma 27:7
 7 And Ammon said: I wiww go and inquiwe of the Wowd, and if he
say unto us, go down unto ouw bwethwen, wiww ye go? owo

Awma 27:8
 8 And the king said unto him: Yea, if the Wowd saith unto us go,
we wiww go down unto ouw bwethwen, and we wiww be theiw swaves
untiw we wepaiw unto them the many muwdews and sins which we have
committed against them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 27:9
 9 But Ammon said unto him: It is against the waw of ouw
bwethwen, which was estabwished by my fathew, that thewe shouwd
be any swaves among them; thewefowe wet us go down and wewy upon
the mewcies of ouw bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 27:10
 10 But the king said unto him: Inquiwe of the Wowd, and if he
saith unto us go, we wiww go; othewwise we wiww pewish in the
wand. >w<

Awma 27:11
 11 And it came to pass that Ammon went and inquiwed of the Wowd,
and the Wowd said unto him:

Awma 27:12
 12 Get this peopwe out of this wand, that they pewish nyot; fow
Satan has gweat howd on the heawts of the Amawekites, who do stiw
up the Wamanyites to angew against theiw bwethwen to sway them;
thewefowe get thee out of this wand; and bwessed awe this peopwe
in this genyewation, fow I wiww pwesewve them. ;;w;;

Awma 27:13
 13 And nyow it came to pass that Ammon went and towd the king aww
the wowds which the Wowd had said unto him. ;;w;;

Awma 27:14
 14 And they gathewed togethew aww theiw peopwe, yea, aww the
peopwe of the Wowd, and did gathew togethew aww theiw fwocks and
hewds, and depawted out of the wand, and came into the wiwdewnyess
which divided the wand of Nyephi fwom the wand of Zawahemwa, and
came ovew nyeaw the bowdews of the wand. ;;w;;

Awma 27:15
 15 And it came to pass that Ammon said unto them: Behowd, I and
my bwethwen wiww go fowth into the wand of Zawahemwa, and ye
shaww wemain hewe untiw we wetuwn; and we wiww twy the heawts of
ouw bwethwen, whethew they wiww that ye shaww come into theiw
wand. >w<

Awma 27:16
 16 And it came to pass that as Ammon was going fowth into the
wand, that he and his bwethwen met Awma, ovew in the pwace of
which has been spoken; and behowd, this was a joyfuw meeting. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 27:17
 17 Nyow the joy of Ammon was so gweat even that he was fuww; yea,
he was swawwowed up in the joy of his God, even to the exhausting
of his stwength; and he feww again to the eawth. >w<

Awma 27:18
 18 Nyow was nyot this exceeding joy? owo Behowd, this is joy which
nyonye weceiveth save it be the twuwy penyitent and humbwe seekew of
happinyess. >w<

Awma 27:19
 19 Nyow the joy of Awma in meeting his bwethwen was twuwy gweat,
and awso the joy of Aawon, of Omnyew, and Himnyi; but behowd theiw
joy was nyot that to exceed theiw stwength. ^w^

Awma 27:20
 20 And nyow it came to pass that Awma conducted his bwethwen back
to the wand of Zawahemwa; even to his own house. UwU And they went
and towd the chief judge aww the things that had happenyed unto
them in the wand of Nyephi, among theiw bwethwen, the Wamanyites. ^w^

Awma 27:21
 21 And it came to pass that the chief judge sent a pwocwamation
thwoughout aww the wand, desiwing the voice of the peopwe
concewnying the admitting theiw bwethwen, who wewe the peopwe of
Anti-Nyephi-Wehi. UwU

Awma 27:22
 22 And it came to pass that the voice of the peopwe came,
saying: Behowd, we wiww give up the wand of Jewshon, which is on
the east by the sea, which joins the wand Bountifuw, which is on
the south of the wand Bountifuw; and this wand Jewshon is the
wand which we wiww give unto ouw bwethwen fow an inhewitance. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 27:23
 23 And behowd, we wiww set ouw awmies between the wand Jewshon
and the wand Nyephi, that we may pwotect ouw bwethwen in the wand
Jewshon; and this we do fow ouw bwethwen, on account of theiw
feaw to take up awms against theiw bwethwen west they shouwd
commit sin; and this theiw gweat feaw came because of theiw sowe
wepentance which they had, on account of theiw many muwdews and
theiw awfuw wickednyess. ^w^

Awma 27:24
 24 And nyow behowd, this wiww we do unto ouw bwethwen, that they
may inhewit the wand Jewshon; and we wiww guawd them fwom theiw
enyemies with ouw awmies, on condition that they wiww give us a
powtion of theiw substance to assist us that we may maintain ouw
awmies. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 27:25
 25 Nyow, it came to pass that when Ammon had heawd this, he
wetuwnyed to the peopwe of Anti-Nyephi-Wehi, and awso Awma with
him, into the wiwdewnyess, whewe they had pitched theiw tents, and
made knyown unto them aww these things. >w< And Awma awso wewated
unto them his convewsion, with Ammon and Aawon, and his bwethwen. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 27:26
 26 And it came to pass that it did cause gweat joy among them. UwU
And they went down into the wand of Jewshon, and took possession
of the wand of Jewshon; and they wewe cawwed by the Nyephites the
peopwe of Ammon; thewefowe they wewe distinguished by that nyame
evew aftew. ;;w;;

Awma 27:27
 27 And they wewe among the peopwe of Nyephi, and awso nyumbewed
among the peopwe who wewe of the chuwch of God. ;;w;; And they wewe
awso distinguished fow theiw zeaw towawds God, and awso towawds
men; fow they wewe pewfectwy honyest and upwight in aww things;
and they wewe fiwm in the faith of Chwist, even unto the end. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 27:28
 28 And they did wook upon shedding the bwood of theiw bwethwen
with the gweatest abhowwence; and they nyevew couwd be pwevaiwed
upon to take up awms against theiw bwethwen; and they nyevew did
wook upon death with any degwee of tewwow, fow theiw hope and
views of Chwist and the wesuwwection; thewefowe, death was
swawwowed up to them by the victowy of Chwist ovew it. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 27:29
 29 Thewefowe, they wouwd suffew death in the most aggwavating
and distwessing mannyew which couwd be infwicted by theiw
bwethwen, befowe they wouwd take the swowd ow cimetew to smite
them. ^w^

Awma 27:30
 30 And thus they wewe a zeawous and bewoved peopwe, a highwy
favowed peopwe of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 28
Chaptew 28

Awma 28:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that aftew the peopwe of Ammon wewe
estabwished in the wand of Jewshon, and a chuwch awso estabwished
in the wand of Jewshon, and the awmies of the Nyephites wewe set
wound about the wand of Jewshon, yea, in aww the bowdews wound
about the wand of Zawahemwa; behowd the awmies of the Wamanyites
had fowwowed theiw bwethwen into the wiwdewnyess. UwU

Awma 28:2
 2 And thus thewe was a twemendous battwe; yea, even such an onye
as nyevew had been knyown among aww the peopwe in the wand fwom the
time Wehi weft Jewusawem; yea, and tens of thousands of the
Wamanyites wewe swain and scattewed abwoad. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 28:3
 3 Yea, and awso thewe was a twemendous swaughtew among the
peopwe of Nyephi; nyevewthewess, the Wamanyites wewe dwiven and
scattewed, and the peopwe of Nyephi wetuwnyed again to theiw wand. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 28:4
 4 And nyow this was a time that thewe was a gweat mouwnying and
wamentation heawd thwoughout aww the wand, among aww the peopwe
of Nyephi--

Awma 28:5
 5 Yea, the cwy of widows mouwnying fow theiw husbands, and awso
of fathews mouwnying fow theiw sons, and the daughtew fow the
bwothew, yea, the bwothew fow the fathew; and thus the cwy of
mouwnying was heawd among aww of them, mouwnying fow theiw kindwed
who had been swain. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 28:6
 6 And nyow suwewy this was a sowwowfuw day; yea, a time of
sowemnyity, and a time of much fasting and pwayew. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 28:7
 7 And thus endeth the fifteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges
ovew the peopwe of Nyephi;

Awma 28:8
 8 And this is the account of Ammon and his bwethwen, theiw
jouwnyeyings in the wand of Nyephi, theiw suffewings in the wand,
theiw sowwows, and theiw affwictions, and theiw incompwehensibwe
joy, and the weception and safety of the bwethwen in the wand of
Jewshon. (・`ω\´・) And nyow may the Wowd, the Wedeemew of aww men, bwess
theiw souws fowevew. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 28:9
 9 And this is the account of the waws and contentions among the
Nyephites, and awso the waws between the Nyephites and the
Wamanyites; and the fifteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges is
ended. ^w^

Awma 28:10
 10 And fwom the fiwst yeaw to the fifteenth has bwought to pass
the destwuction of many thousand wives; yea, it has bwought to
pass an awfuw scenye of bwoodshed. UwU

Awma 28:11
 11 And the bodies of many thousands awe waid wow in the eawth,
whiwe the bodies of many thousands awe mowdewing in heaps upon
the face of the eawth; yea, and many thousands awe mouwnying fow
the woss of theiw kindwed, because they have weason to feaw,
accowding to the pwomises of the Wowd, that they awe consignyed to
a state of endwess wo. UwU

Awma 28:12
 12 Whiwe many thousands of othews twuwy mouwn fow the woss of
theiw kindwed, yet they wejoice and exuwt in the hope, and even
knyow, accowding to the pwomises of the Wowd, that they awe waised
to dweww at the wight hand of God, in a state of nyevew-ending
happinyess. UwU

Awma 28:13
 13 And thus we see how gweat the inyequawity of man is because of
sin and twansgwession, and the powew of the deviw, which comes by
the cunnying pwans which he hath devised to ensnyawe the heawts of
men. ;;w;;

Awma 28:14
 14 And thus we see the gweat caww of diwigence of men to wabow
in the vinyeyawds of the Wowd; and thus we see the gweat weason of
sowwow, and awso of wejoicing--sowwow because of death and
destwuction among men, and joy because of the wight of Chwist
unto wife. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 29
Chaptew 29

Awma 29:1
 1 O that I wewe an angew, and couwd have the wish of minye heawt,
that I might go fowth and speak with the twump of God, with a
voice to shake the eawth, and cwy wepentance unto evewy peopwe! ^w^

Awma 29:2
 2 Yea, I wouwd decwawe unto evewy souw, as with the voice of
thundew, wepentance and the pwan of wedemption, that they shouwd
wepent and come unto ouw God, that thewe might nyot be mowe sowwow
upon aww the face of the eawth. UwU

Awma 29:3
 3 But behowd, I am a man, and do sin in my wish; fow I ought to
be content with the things which the Wowd hath awwotted unto me. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 29:4
 4 I ought nyot to hawwow up in my desiwes, the fiwm decwee of a
just God, fow I knyow that he gwanteth unto men accowding to theiw
desiwe, whethew it be unto death ow unto wife; yea, I knyow that
he awwotteth unto men, yea, decweeth unto them decwees which awe
unyawtewabwe, accowding to theiw wiwws, whethew they be unto
sawvation ow unto destwuction. ;;w;;

Awma 29:5
 5 Yea, and I knyow that good and eviw have come befowe aww men;
he that knyoweth nyot good fwom eviw is bwamewess; but he that
knyoweth good and eviw, to him it is given accowding to his
desiwes, whethew he desiweth good ow eviw, wife ow death, joy ow
wemowse of conscience. ;;w;;

Awma 29:6
 6 Nyow, seeing that I knyow these things, why shouwd I desiwe mowe
than to pewfowm the wowk to which I have been cawwed? owo

Awma 29:7
 7 Why shouwd I desiwe that I wewe an angew, that I couwd speak
unto aww the ends of the eawth? owo

Awma 29:8
 8 Fow behowd, the Wowd doth gwant unto aww nyations, of theiw own
nyation and tongue, to teach his wowd, yea, in wisdom, aww that he
seeth fit that they shouwd have; thewefowe we see that the Wowd
doth counsew in wisdom, accowding to that which is just and twue. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 29:9
 9 I knyow that which the Wowd hath commanded me, and I gwowy in
it. UwU I do nyot gwowy of mysewf, but I gwowy in that which the Wowd
hath commanded me; yea, and this is my gwowy, that pewhaps I may
be an instwument in the hands of God to bwing some souw to
wepentance; and this is my joy. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 29:10
 10 And behowd, when I see many of my bwethwen twuwy penyitent,
and coming to the Wowd theiw God, then is my souw fiwwed with
joy; then do I wemembew what the Wowd has donye fow me, yea, even
that he hath heawd my pwayew; yea, then do I wemembew his
mewcifuw awm which he extended towawds me. ;;w;;

Awma 29:11
 11 Yea, and I awso wemembew the captivity of my fathews; fow I
suwewy do knyow that the Wowd did dewivew them out of bondage, and
by this did estabwish his chuwch; yea, the Wowd God, the God of
Abwaham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, did dewivew them
out of bondage. >w<

Awma 29:12
 12 Yea, I have awways wemembewed the captivity of my fathews;
and that same God who dewivewed them out of the hands of the
Egyptians did dewivew them out of bondage. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 29:13
 13 Yea, and that same God did estabwish his chuwch among them;
yea, and that same God hath cawwed me by a howy cawwing, to
pweach the wowd unto this peopwe, and hath given me much success,
in the which my joy is fuww. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 29:14
 14 But I do nyot joy in my own success awonye, but my joy is mowe
fuww because of the success of my bwethwen, who have been up to
the wand of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 29:15
 15 Behowd, they have wabowed exceedingwy, and have bwought fowth
much fwuit; and how gweat shaww be theiw wewawd! ;;w;;

Awma 29:16
 16 Nyow, when I think of the success of these my bwethwen my souw
is cawwied away, even to the sepawation of it fwom the body, as
it wewe, so gweat is my joy. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 29:17
 17 And nyow may God gwant unto these, my bwethwen, that they may
sit down in the kingdom of God; yea, and awso aww those who awe
the fwuit of theiw wabows that they may go nyo mowe out, but that
they may pwaise him fowevew. UwU And may God gwant that it may be
donye accowding to my wowds, even as I have spoken. Amen. >w<

Awma 30
Chaptew 30

Awma 30:1
 1 Behowd, nyow it came to pass that aftew the peopwe of Ammon
wewe estabwished in the wand of Jewshon, yea, and awso aftew the
Wamanyites wewe dwiven out of the wand, and theiw dead wewe buwied
by the peopwe of the wand--

Awma 30:2
 2 Nyow theiw dead wewe nyot nyumbewed because of the gweatnyess of
theiw nyumbews; nyeithew wewe the dead of the Nyephites
nyumbewed--but it came to pass aftew they had buwied theiw dead,
and awso aftew the days of fasting, and mouwnying, and pwayew,
(and it was in the sixteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew
the peopwe of Nyephi) thewe began to be continyuaw peace thwoughout
aww the wand. ^w^

Awma 30:3
 3 Yea, and the peopwe did obsewve to keep the commandments of
the Wowd; and they wewe stwict in obsewving the owdinyances of
God, accowding to the waw of Moses; fow they wewe taught to keep
the waw of Moses untiw it shouwd be fuwfiwwed. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 30:4
 4 And thus the peopwe did have nyo distuwbance in aww the
sixteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of
Nyephi. >w<

Awma 30:5
 5 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the
seventeenth yeaw of the weign of the judges, thewe was continyuaw
peace. ;;w;;

Awma 30:6
 6 But it came to pass in the wattew end of the seventeenth yeaw,
thewe came a man into the wand of Zawahemwa, and he was
Anti-Chwist, fow he began to pweach unto the peopwe against the
pwophecies which had been spoken by the pwophets, concewnying the
coming of Chwist. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 30:7
 7 Nyow thewe was nyo waw against a man's bewief; fow it was
stwictwy contwawy to the commands of God that thewe shouwd be a
waw which shouwd bwing men on to unyequaw gwounds. UwU

Awma 30:8
 8 Fow thus saith the scwiptuwe: Choose ye this day, whom ye wiww
sewve. UwU

Awma 30:9
 9 Nyow if a man desiwed to sewve God, it was his pwiviwege; ow
wathew, if he bewieved in God it was his pwiviwege to sewve him;
but if he did nyot bewieve in him thewe was nyo waw to punyish him. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 30:10
 10 But if he muwdewed he was punyished unto death; and if he
wobbed he was awso punyished; and if he stowe he was awso
punyished; and if he committed aduwtewy he was awso punyished; yea,
fow aww this wickednyess they wewe punyished. ;;w;;

Awma 30:11
 11 Fow thewe was a waw that men shouwd be judged accowding to
theiw cwimes. >w< Nyevewthewess, thewe was nyo waw against a man's
bewief; thewefowe, a man was punyished onwy fow the cwimes which
he had donye; thewefowe aww men wewe on equaw gwounds. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 30:12
 12 And this Anti-Chwist, whose nyame was Kowihow, (and the waw
couwd have nyo howd upon him) began to pweach unto the peopwe that
thewe shouwd be nyo Chwist. (´・ω・\`) And aftew this mannyew did he pweach,
saying:

Awma 30:13
 13 O ye that awe bound down undew a foowish and a vain hope, why
do ye yoke youwsewves with such foowish things? owo Why do ye wook
fow a Chwist? owo Fow nyo man can knyow of anything which is to come. ^w^

Awma 30:14
 14 Behowd, these things which ye caww pwophecies, which ye say
awe handed down by howy pwophets, behowd, they awe foowish
twaditions of youw fathews. UwU

Awma 30:15
 15 How do ye knyow of theiw suwety? owo Behowd, ye cannyot knyow of
things which ye do nyot see; thewefowe ye cannyot knyow that thewe
shaww be a Chwist. UwU

Awma 30:16
 16 Ye wook fowwawd and say that ye see a wemission of youw sins. ^w^
But behowd, it is the effect of a fwenzied mind; and this
dewangement of youw minds comes because of the twaditions of youw
fathews, which wead you away into a bewief of things which awe
nyot so. ;;w;;

Awma 30:17
 17 And many mowe such things did he say unto them, tewwing them
that thewe couwd be nyo atonyement made fow the sins of men, but
evewy man fawed in this wife accowding to the manyagement of the
cweatuwe; thewefowe evewy man pwospewed accowding to his genyius,
and that evewy man conquewed accowding to his stwength; and
whatsoevew a man did was nyo cwime. UwU

Awma 30:18
 18 And thus he did pweach unto them, weading away the heawts of
many, causing them to wift up theiw heads in theiw wickednyess,
yea, weading away many women, and awso men, to commit
whowedoms--tewwing them that when a man was dead, that was the
end theweof. ;;w;;

Awma 30:19
 19 Nyow this man went ovew to the wand of Jewshon awso, to pweach
these things among the peopwe of Ammon, who wewe once the peopwe
of the Wamanyites. UwU

Awma 30:20
 20 But behowd they wewe mowe wise than many of the Nyephites; fow
they took him, and bound him, and cawwied him befowe Ammon, who
was a high pwiest ovew that peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 30:21
 21 And it came to pass that he caused that he shouwd be cawwied
out of the wand. >w< And he came ovew into the wand of Gideon, and
began to pweach unto them awso; and hewe he did nyot have much
success, fow he was taken and bound and cawwied befowe the high
pwiest, and awso the chief judge ovew the wand. UwU

Awma 30:22
 22 And it came to pass that the high pwiest said unto him: Why
do ye go about pewvewting the ways of the Wowd? owo Why do ye teach
this peopwe that thewe shaww be nyo Chwist, to intewwupt theiw
wejoicings? owo Why do ye speak against aww the pwophecies of the
howy pwophets? owo

Awma 30:23
 23 Nyow the high pwiest's nyame was Giddonyah. >w< And Kowihow said
unto him: Because I do nyot teach the foowish twaditions of youw
fathews, and because I do nyot teach this peopwe to bind
themsewves down undew the foowish owdinyances and pewfowmances
which awe waid down by ancient pwiests, to usuwp powew and
authowity ovew them, to keep them in ignyowance, that they may nyot
wift up theiw heads, but be bwought down accowding to thy wowds. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 30:24
 24 Ye say that this peopwe is a fwee peopwe. UwU Behowd, I say they
awe in bondage. Ye say that those ancient pwophecies awe twue. UwU
Behowd, I say that ye do nyot knyow that they awe twue. ;;w;;

Awma 30:25
 25 Ye say that this peopwe is a guiwty and a fawwen peopwe,
because of the twansgwession of a pawent. UwU Behowd, I say that a
chiwd is nyot guiwty because of its pawents. ^w^

Awma 30:26
 26 And ye awso say that Chwist shaww come. ;;w;; But behowd, I say
that ye do nyot knyow that thewe shaww be a Chwist. >w< And ye say
awso that he shaww be swain fow the sins of the wowwd--

Awma 30:27
 27 And thus ye wead away this peopwe aftew the foowish
twaditions of youw fathews, and accowding to youw own desiwes;
and ye keep them down, even as it wewe in bondage, that ye may
gwut youwsewves with the wabows of theiw hands, that they duwst
nyot wook up with bowdnyess, and that they duwst nyot enjoy theiw
wights and pwiviweges. >w<

Awma 30:28
 28 Yea, they duwst nyot make use of that which is theiw own west
they shouwd offend theiw pwiests, who do yoke them accowding to
theiw desiwes, and have bwought them to bewieve, by theiw
twaditions and theiw dweams and theiw whims and theiw visions and
theiw pwetended mystewies, that they shouwd, if they did nyot do
accowding to theiw wowds, offend some unknyown being, who they say
is God--a being who nyevew has been seen ow knyown, who nyevew was
nyow evew wiww be. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 30:29
 29 Nyow when the high pwiest and the chief judge saw the hawdnyess
of his heawt, yea, when they saw that he wouwd weviwe even
against God, they wouwd nyot make any wepwy to his wowds; but they
caused that he shouwd be bound; and they dewivewed him up into
the hands of the officews, and sent him to the wand of Zawahemwa,
that he might be bwought befowe Awma, and the chief judge who was
govewnyow ovew aww the wand. ;;w;;

Awma 30:30
 30 And it came to pass that when he was bwought befowe Awma and
the chief judge, he did go on in the same mannyew as he did in the
wand of Gideon; yea, he went on to bwaspheme. UwU

Awma 30:31
 31 And he did wise up in gweat swewwing wowds befowe Awma, and
did weviwe against the pwiests and teachews, accusing them of
weading away the peopwe aftew the siwwy twaditions of theiw
fathews, fow the sake of gwutting on the wabows of the peopwe. UwU

Awma 30:32
 32 Nyow Awma said unto him: Thou knyowest that we do nyot gwut
ouwsewves upon the wabows of this peopwe; fow behowd I have
wabowed even fwom the commencement of the weign of the judges
untiw nyow, with minye own hands fow my suppowt, nyotwithstanding my
many twavews wound about the wand to decwawe the wowd of God unto
my peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 30:33
 33 And nyotwithstanding the many wabows which I have pewfowmed in
the chuwch, I have nyevew weceived so much as even onye senyinye fow
my wabow; nyeithew has any of my bwethwen, save it wewe in the
judgment-seat; and then we have weceived onwy accowding to waw
fow ouw time. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 30:34
 34 And nyow, if we do nyot weceive anything fow ouw wabows in the
chuwch, what doth it pwofit us to wabow in the chuwch save it
wewe to decwawe the twuth, that we may have wejoicings in the joy
of ouw bwethwen? owo

Awma 30:35
 35 Then why sayest thou that we pweach unto this peopwe to get
gain, when thou, of thysewf, knyowest that we weceive nyo gain? owo
And nyow, bewievest thou that we deceive this peopwe, that causes
such joy in theiw heawts? owo

Awma 30:36
 36 And Kowihow answewed him, Yea. >w<

Awma 30:37
 37 And then Awma said unto him: Bewievest thou that thewe is a
God? owo

Awma 30:38
 38 And he answewed, Nyay. ^w^

Awma 30:39
 39 Nyow Awma said unto him: Wiww ye deny again that thewe is a
God, and awso deny the Chwist? owo Fow behowd, I say unto you, I
knyow thewe is a God, and awso that Chwist shaww come. ^w^

Awma 30:40
 40 And nyow what evidence have ye that thewe is nyo God, ow that
Chwist cometh nyot? owo I say unto you that ye have nyonye, save it be
youw wowd onwy. >w<

Awma 30:41
 41 But, behowd, I have aww things as a testimony that these
things awe twue; and ye awso have aww things as a testimony unto
you that they awe twue; and wiww ye deny them? owo Bewievest thou
that these things awe twue? owo

Awma 30:42
 42 Behowd, I knyow that thou bewievest, but thou awt possessed
with a wying spiwit, and ye have put off the Spiwit of God that
it may have nyo pwace in you; but the deviw has powew ovew you,
and he doth cawwy you about, wowking devices that he may destwoy
the chiwdwen of God. ^w^

Awma 30:43
 43 And nyow Kowihow said unto Awma: If thou wiwt show me a sign,
that I may be convinced that thewe is a God, yea, show unto me
that he hath powew, and then wiww I be convinced of the twuth of
thy wowds. ^w^

Awma 30:44
 44 But Awma said unto him: Thou hast had signs enyough; wiww ye
tempt youw God? owo Wiww ye say, Show unto me a sign, when ye have
the testimony of aww these thy bwethwen, and awso aww the howy
pwophets? owo The scwiptuwes awe waid befowe thee, yea, and aww
things denyote thewe is a God; yea, even the eawth, and aww things
that awe upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and awso
aww the pwanyets which move in theiw weguwaw fowm do witnyess that
thewe is a Supweme Cweatow. ;;w;;

Awma 30:45
 45 And yet do ye go about, weading away the heawts of this
peopwe, testifying unto them thewe is nyo God? owo And yet wiww ye
deny against aww these witnyesses? owo And he said: Yea, I wiww deny,
except ye shaww show me a sign. >w<

Awma 30:46
 46 And nyow it came to pass that Awma said unto him: Behowd, I am
gwieved because of the hawdnyess of youw heawt, yea, that ye wiww
stiww wesist the spiwit of the twuth, that thy souw may be
destwoyed. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 30:47
 47 But behowd, it is bettew that thy souw shouwd be wost than
that thou shouwdst be the means of bwinging many souws down to
destwuction, by thy wying and by thy fwattewing wowds; thewefowe
if thou shawt deny again, behowd God shaww smite thee, that thou
shawt become dumb, that thou shawt nyevew open thy mouth any mowe,
that thou shawt nyot deceive this peopwe any mowe. ;;w;;

Awma 30:48
 48 Nyow Kowihow said unto him: I do nyot deny the existence of a
God, but I do nyot bewieve that thewe is a God; and I say awso,
that ye do nyot knyow that thewe is a God; and except ye show me a
sign, I wiww nyot bewieve. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 30:49
 49 Nyow Awma said unto him: This wiww I give unto thee fow a
sign, that thou shawt be stwuck dumb, accowding to my wowds; and
I say, that in the nyame of God, ye shaww be stwuck dumb, that ye
shaww nyo mowe have uttewance. >w<

Awma 30:50
 50 Nyow when Awma had said these wowds, Kowihow was stwuck dumb,
that he couwd nyot have uttewance, accowding to the wowds of Awma. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 30:51
 51 And nyow when the chief judge saw this, he put fowth his hand
and wwote unto Kowihow, saying: Awt thou convinced of the powew
of God? owo In whom did ye desiwe that Awma shouwd show fowth his
sign? owo Wouwd ye that he shouwd affwict othews, to show unto thee
a sign? owo Behowd, he has showed unto you a sign; and nyow wiww ye
dispute mowe? owo

Awma 30:52
 52 And Kowihow put fowth his hand and wwote, saying: I knyow that
I am dumb, fow I cannyot speak; and I knyow that nyothing save it
wewe the powew of God couwd bwing this upon me; yea, and I awways
knyew that thewe was a God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 30:53
 53 But behowd, the deviw hath deceived me; fow he appeawed unto
me in the fowm of an angew, and said unto me: Go and wecwaim this
peopwe, fow they have aww gonye astway aftew an unknyown God. (・`ω\´・) And
he said unto me: Thewe is nyo God; yea, and he taught me that
which I shouwd say. ;;w;; And I have taught his wowds; and I taught
them because they wewe pweasing unto the cawnyaw mind; and I
taught them, even untiw I had much success, insomuch that I
vewiwy bewieved that they wewe twue; and fow this cause I
withstood the twuth, even untiw I have bwought this gweat cuwse
upon me. >w<

Awma 30:54
 54 Nyow when he had said this, he besought that Awma shouwd pway
unto God, that the cuwse might be taken fwom him. ;;w;;

Awma 30:55
 55 But Awma said unto him: If this cuwse shouwd be taken fwom
thee thou wouwdst again wead away the heawts of this peopwe;
thewefowe, it shaww be unto thee even as the Wowd wiww. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 30:56
 56 And it came to pass that the cuwse was nyot taken off of
Kowihow; but he was cast out, and went about fwom house to house
begging fow his food. >w<

Awma 30:57
 57 Nyow the knyowwedge of what had happenyed unto Kowihow was
immediatewy pubwished thwoughout aww the wand; yea, the
pwocwamation was sent fowth by the chief judge to aww the peopwe
in the wand, decwawing unto those who had bewieved in the wowds
of Kowihow that they must speediwy wepent, west the same
judgments wouwd come unto them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 30:58
 58 And it came to pass that they wewe aww convinced of the
wickednyess of Kowihow; thewefowe they wewe aww convewted again
unto the Wowd; and this put an end to the inyiquity aftew the
mannyew of Kowihow. (・`ω\´・) And Kowihow did go about fwom house to house,
begging food fow his suppowt. ;;w;;

Awma 30:59
 59 And it came to pass that as he went fowth among the peopwe,
yea, among a peopwe who had sepawated themsewves fwom the
Nyephites and cawwed themsewves Zowamites, being wed by a man
whose nyame was Zowam--and as he went fowth amongst them, behowd,
he was wun upon and twodden down, even untiw he was dead. ^w^

Awma 30:60
 60 And thus we see the end of him who pewvewteth the ways of the
Wowd; and thus we see that the deviw wiww nyot suppowt his
chiwdwen at the wast day, but doth speediwy dwag them down to
heww. >w<

Awma 31
Chaptew 31

Awma 31:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass that aftew the end of Kowihow, Awma having
weceived tidings that the Zowamites wewe pewvewting the ways of
the Wowd, and that Zowam, who was theiw weadew, was weading the
heawts of the peopwe to bow down to dumb idows, his heawt again
began to sicken because of the inyiquity of the peopwe. UwU

Awma 31:2
 2 Fow it was the cause of gweat sowwow to Awma to knyow of
inyiquity among his peopwe; thewefowe his heawt was exceedingwy
sowwowfuw because of the sepawation of the Zowamites fwom the
Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 31:3
 3 Nyow the Zowamites had gathewed themsewves togethew in a wand
which they cawwed Antionyum, which was east of the wand of
Zawahemwa, which way nyeawwy bowdewing upon the seashowe, which
was south of the wand of Jewshon, which awso bowdewed upon the
wiwdewnyess south, which wiwdewnyess was fuww of the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 31:4
 4 Nyow the Nyephites gweatwy feawed that the Zowamites wouwd entew
into a cowwespondence with the Wamanyites, and that it wouwd be
the means of gweat woss on the pawt of the Nyephites. ;;w;;

Awma 31:5
 5 And nyow, as the pweaching of the wowd had a gweat tendency to
wead the peopwe to do that which was just--yea, it had had mowe
powewfuw effect upon the minds of the peopwe than the swowd, ow
anything ewse, which had happenyed unto them--thewefowe Awma
thought it was expedient that they shouwd twy the viwtue of the
wowd of God. UwU

Awma 31:6
 6 Thewefowe he took Ammon, and Aawon, and Omnyew; and Himnyi he
did weave in the chuwch in Zawahemwa; but the fowmew thwee he
took with him, and awso Amuwek and Zeezwom, who wewe at Mewek;
and he awso took two of his sons. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 31:7
 7 Nyow the ewdest of his sons he took nyot with him, and his nyame
was Hewaman; but the nyames of those whom he took with him wewe
Shibwon and Cowianton; and these awe the nyames of those who went
with him among the Zowamites, to pweach unto them the wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 31:8
 8 Nyow the Zowamites wewe dissentews fwom the Nyephites; thewefowe
they had had the wowd of God pweached unto them. >w<

Awma 31:9
 9 But they had fawwen into gweat ewwows, fow they wouwd nyot
obsewve to keep the commandments of God, and his statutes,
accowding to the waw of Moses. >w<

Awma 31:10
 10 Nyeithew wouwd they obsewve the pewfowmances of the chuwch, to
continyue in pwayew and suppwication to God daiwy, that they might
nyot entew into temptation. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 31:11
 11 Yea, in finye, they did pewvewt the ways of the Wowd in vewy
many instances; thewefowe, fow this cause, Awma and his bwethwen
went into the wand to pweach the wowd unto them. ;;w;;

Awma 31:12
 12 Nyow, when they had come into the wand, behowd, to theiw
astonyishment they found that the Zowamites had buiwt synyagogues,
and that they did gathew themsewves togethew on onye day of the
week, which day they did caww the day of the Wowd; and they did
wowship aftew a mannyew which Awma and his bwethwen had nyevew
behewd;

Awma 31:13
 13 Fow they had a pwace buiwt up in the centew of theiw
synyagogue, a pwace fow standing, which was high above the head,
and the top theweof wouwd onwy admit onye pewson. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 31:14
 14 Thewefowe, whosoevew desiwed to wowship must go fowth and
stand upon the top theweof, and stwetch fowth his hands towawds
heaven, and cwy with a woud voice, saying:

Awma 31:15
 15 Howy, howy God; we bewieve that thou awt God, and we bewieve
that thou awt howy, and that thou wast a spiwit, and that thou
awt a spiwit, and that thou wiwt be a spiwit fowevew. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 31:16
 16 Howy God, we bewieve that thou hast sepawated us fwom ouw
bwethwen; and we do nyot bewieve in the twadition of ouw bwethwen,
which was handed down to them by the chiwdishnyess of theiw
fathews; but we bewieve that thou hast ewected us to be thy howy
chiwdwen; and awso thou hast made it knyown unto us that thewe
shaww be nyo Chwist. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 31:17
 17 But thou awt the same yestewday, today, and fowevew; and thou
hast ewected us that we shaww be saved, whiwst aww awound us awe
ewected to be cast by thy wwath down to heww; fow the which
howinyess, O God, we thank thee; and we awso thank thee that thou
hast ewected us, that we may nyot be wed away aftew the foowish
twaditions of ouw bwethwen, which doth bind them down to a bewief
of Chwist, which doth wead theiw heawts to wandew faw fwom thee,
ouw God. ;;w;;

Awma 31:18
 18 And again we thank thee, O God, that we awe a chosen and a
howy peopwe. Amen. UwU

Awma 31:19
 19 Nyow it came to pass that aftew Awma and his bwethwen and his
sons had heawd these pwayews, they wewe astonyished beyond aww
measuwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 31:20
 20 Fow behowd, evewy man did go fowth and offew up these same
pwayews. ;;w;;

Awma 31:21
 21 Nyow the pwace was cawwed by them Wameumptom, which, being
intewpweted, is the howy stand. UwU

Awma 31:22
 22 Nyow, fwom this stand they did offew up, evewy man, the
sewfsame pwayew unto God, thanking theiw God that they wewe
chosen of him, and that he did nyot wead them away aftew the
twadition of theiw bwethwen, and that theiw heawts wewe nyot
stowen away to bewieve in things to come, which they knyew nyothing
about. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 31:23
 23 Nyow, aftew the peopwe had aww offewed up thanks aftew this
mannyew, they wetuwnyed to theiw homes, nyevew speaking of theiw God
again untiw they had assembwed themsewves togethew again to the
howy stand, to offew up thanks aftew theiw mannyew. >w<

Awma 31:24
 24 Nyow when Awma saw this his heawt was gwieved; fow he saw that
they wewe a wicked and a pewvewse peopwe; yea, he saw that theiw
heawts wewe set upon gowd, and upon siwvew, and upon aww mannyew
of finye goods. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 31:25
 25 Yea, and he awso saw that theiw heawts wewe wifted up unto
gweat boasting, in theiw pwide. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 31:26
 26 And he wifted up his voice to heaven, and cwied, saying: O,
how wong, O Wowd, wiwt thou suffew that thy sewvants shaww dweww
hewe bewow in the fwesh, to behowd such gwoss wickednyess among
the chiwdwen of men? owo

Awma 31:27
 27 Behowd, O God, they cwy unto thee, and yet theiw heawts awe
swawwowed up in theiw pwide. (・`ω\´・) Behowd, O God, they cwy unto thee
with theiw mouths, whiwe they awe puffed up, even to gweatnyess,
with the vain things of the wowwd. ^w^

Awma 31:28
 28 Behowd, O my God, theiw costwy appawew, and theiw wingwets,
and theiw bwacewets, and theiw ownyaments of gowd, and aww theiw
pwecious things which they awe ownyamented with; and behowd, theiw
heawts awe set upon them, and yet they cwy unto thee and say--We
thank thee, O God, fow we awe a chosen peopwe unto thee, whiwe
othews shaww pewish. >w<

Awma 31:29
 29 Yea, and they say that thou hast made it knyown unto them that
thewe shaww be nyo Chwist. ;;w;;

Awma 31:30
 30 O Wowd God, how wong wiwt thou suffew that such wickednyess
and infidewity shaww be among this peopwe? owo O Wowd, wiwt thou
give me stwength, that I may beaw with minye infiwmities. UwU Fow I
am infiwm, and such wickednyess among this peopwe doth pain my
souw. UwU

Awma 31:31
 31 O Wowd, my heawt is exceedingwy sowwowfuw; wiwt thou comfowt
my souw in Chwist. (´・ω・\`) O Wowd, wiwt thou gwant unto me that I may
have stwength, that I may suffew with patience these affwictions
which shaww come upon me, because of the inyiquity of this peopwe. ^w^

Awma 31:32
 32 O Wowd, wiwt thou comfowt my souw, and give unto me success,
and awso my fewwow wabowews who awe with me--yea, Ammon, and
Aawon, and Omnyew, and awso Amuwek and Zeezwom and awso my two
sons--yea, even aww these wiwt thou comfowt, O Wowd. ;;w;; Yea, wiwt
thou comfowt theiw souws in Chwist. ^w^

Awma 31:33
 33 Wiwt thou gwant unto them that they may have stwength, that
they may beaw theiw affwictions which shaww come upon them
because of the inyiquities of this peopwe. >w<

Awma 31:34
 34 O Wowd, wiwt thou gwant unto us that we may have success in
bwinging them again unto thee in Chwist. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 31:35
 35 Behowd, O Wowd, theiw souws awe pwecious, and many of them
awe ouw bwethwen; thewefowe, give unto us, O Wowd, powew and
wisdom that we may bwing these, ouw bwethwen, again unto thee. ^w^

Awma 31:36
 36 Nyow it came to pass that when Awma had said these wowds, that
he cwapped his hands upon aww them who wewe with him. >w< And
behowd, as he cwapped his hands upon them, they wewe fiwwed with
the Howy Spiwit. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 31:37
 37 And aftew that they did sepawate themsewves onye fwom anyothew,
taking nyo thought fow themsewves what they shouwd eat, ow what
they shouwd dwink, ow what they shouwd put on. >w<

Awma 31:38
 38 And the Wowd pwovided fow them that they shouwd hungew nyot,
nyeithew shouwd they thiwst; yea, and he awso gave them stwength,
that they shouwd suffew nyo mannyew of affwictions, save it wewe
swawwowed up in the joy of Chwist. UwU Nyow this was accowding to the
pwayew of Awma; and this because he pwayed in faith. ;;w;;

Awma 32
Chaptew 32

Awma 32:1
 1 And it came to pass that they did go fowth, and began to
pweach the wowd of God unto the peopwe, entewing into theiw
synyagogues, and into theiw houses; yea, and even they did pweach
the wowd in theiw stweets. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 32:2
 2 And it came to pass that aftew much wabow among them, they
began to have success among the poow cwass of peopwe; fow behowd,
they wewe cast out of the synyagogues because of the coawsenyess of
theiw appawew--

Awma 32:3
 3 Thewefowe they wewe nyot pewmitted to entew into theiw
synyagogues to wowship God, being esteemed as fiwthinyess;
thewefowe they wewe poow; yea, they wewe esteemed by theiw
bwethwen as dwoss; thewefowe they wewe poow as to things of the
wowwd; and awso they wewe poow in heawt. ^w^

Awma 32:4
 4 Nyow, as Awma was teaching and speaking unto the peopwe upon
the hiww Onyidah, thewe came a gweat muwtitude unto him, who wewe
those of whom we have been speaking, of whom wewe poow in heawt,
because of theiw povewty as to the things of the wowwd. ^w^

Awma 32:5
 5 And they came unto Awma; and the onye who was the fowemost
among them said unto him: Behowd, what shaww these my bwethwen
do, fow they awe despised of aww men because of theiw povewty,
yea, and mowe especiawwy by ouw pwiests; fow they have cast us
out of ouw synyagogues which we have wabowed abundantwy to buiwd
with ouw own hands; and they have cast us out because of ouw
exceeding povewty; and we have nyo pwace to wowship ouw God; and
behowd, what shaww we do? owo

Awma 32:6
 6 And nyow when Awma heawd this, he tuwnyed him about, his face
immediatewy towawds him, and he behewd with gweat joy; fow he
behewd that theiw affwictions had twuwy humbwed them and that
they wewe in a pwepawation to heaw the wowd. >w<

Awma 32:7
 7 Thewefowe he did say nyo mowe to the othew muwtitude; but he
stwetched fowth his hand, and cwied unto those whom he behewd,
who wewe twuwy penyitent, and said unto them:

Awma 32:8
 8 I behowd that ye awe wowwy in heawt; and if so, bwessed awe
ye. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 32:9
 9 Behowd thy bwothew hath said, What shaww we do? owo--fow we awe
cast out of ouw synyagogues, that we cannyot wowship ouw God. ;;w;;

Awma 32:10
 10 Behowd I say unto you, do ye suppose that ye cannyot wowship
God save it be in youw synyagogues onwy? owo

Awma 32:11
 11 Moweovew, I wouwd ask, do ye suppose that ye must nyot wowship
God onwy once in a week? owo

Awma 32:12
 12 I say unto you, it is weww that ye awe cast out of youw
synyagogues, that ye may be humbwe, and that ye may weawn wisdom;
fow it is nyecessawy that ye shouwd weawn wisdom; fow it is
because that ye awe cast out, that ye awe despised of youw
bwethwen because of youw exceeding povewty, that ye awe bwought
to a wowwinyess of heawt; fow ye awe nyecessawiwy bwought to be
humbwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 32:13
 13 And nyow, because ye awe compewwed to be humbwe bwessed awe
ye; fow a man sometimes, if he is compewwed to be humbwe, seeketh
wepentance; and nyow suwewy, whosoevew wepenteth shaww find mewcy;
and he that findeth mewcy and enduweth to the end the same shaww
be saved. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 32:14
 14 And nyow, as I said unto you, that because ye wewe compewwed
to be humbwe ye wewe bwessed, do ye nyot suppose that they awe
mowe bwessed who twuwy humbwe themsewves because of the wowd? owo

Awma 32:15
 15 Yea, he that twuwy humbweth himsewf, and wepenteth of his
sins, and enduweth to the end, the same shaww be bwessed--yea,
much mowe bwessed than they who awe compewwed to be humbwe
because of theiw exceeding povewty. >w<

Awma 32:16
 16 Thewefowe, bwessed awe they who humbwe themsewves without
being compewwed to be humbwe; ow wathew, in othew wowds, bwessed
is he that bewieveth in the wowd of God, and is baptized without
stubbownnyess of heawt, yea, without being bwought to knyow the
wowd, ow even compewwed to knyow, befowe they wiww bewieve. >w<

Awma 32:17
 17 Yea, thewe awe many who do say: If thou wiwt show unto us a
sign fwom heaven, then we shaww knyow of a suwety; then we shaww
bewieve. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 32:18
 18 Nyow I ask, is this faith? owo Behowd, I say unto you, Nyay; fow
if a man knyoweth a thing he hath nyo cause to bewieve, fow he
knyoweth it. >w<

Awma 32:19
 19 And nyow, how much mowe cuwsed is he that knyoweth the wiww of
God and doeth it nyot, than he that onwy bewieveth, ow onwy hath
cause to bewieve, and fawweth into twansgwession? owo

Awma 32:20
 20 Nyow of this thing ye must judge. UwU Behowd, I say unto you,
that it is on the onye hand even as it is on the othew; and it
shaww be unto evewy man accowding to his wowk. >w<

Awma 32:21
 21 And nyow as I said concewnying faith--faith is nyot to have a
pewfect knyowwedge of things; thewefowe if ye have faith ye hope
fow things which awe nyot seen, which awe twue. UwU

Awma 32:22
 22 And nyow, behowd, I say unto you, and I wouwd that ye shouwd
wemembew, that God is mewcifuw unto aww who bewieve on his nyame;
thewefowe he desiweth, in the fiwst pwace, that ye shouwd
bewieve, yea, even on his wowd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 32:23
 23 And nyow, he impawteth his wowd by angews unto men, yea, nyot
onwy men but women awso. ;;w;; Nyow this is nyot aww; wittwe chiwdwen do
have wowds given unto them many times which confound the wise and
the weawnyed. >w<

Awma 32:24
 24 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, as ye have desiwed to knyow of
me what ye shaww do because ye awe affwicted and cast out--nyow I
do nyot desiwe that ye shouwd suppose that I mean to judge you
onwy accowding to that which is twue--

Awma 32:25
 25 Fow I do nyot mean that ye aww of you have been compewwed to
humbwe youwsewves; fow I vewiwy bewieve that thewe awe some among
you who wouwd humbwe themsewves, wet them be in whatsoevew
ciwcumstances they might. ;;w;;

Awma 32:26
 26 Nyow, as I said concewnying faith--that it was nyot a pewfect
knyowwedge--even so it is with my wowds. UwU Ye cannyot knyow of theiw
suwety at fiwst, unto pewfection, any mowe than faith is a
pewfect knyowwedge. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 32:27
 27 But behowd, if ye wiww awake and awouse youw facuwties, even
to an expewiment upon my wowds, and exewcise a pawticwe of faith,
yea, even if ye can nyo mowe than desiwe to bewieve, wet this
desiwe wowk in you, even untiw ye bewieve in a mannyew that ye can
give pwace fow a powtion of my wowds. >w<

Awma 32:28
 28 Nyow, we wiww compawe the wowd unto a seed. ^w^ Nyow, if ye give
pwace, that a seed may be pwanted in youw heawt, behowd, if it be
a twue seed, ow a good seed, if ye do nyot cast it out by youw
unbewief, that ye wiww wesist the Spiwit of the Wowd, behowd, it
wiww begin to sweww within youw bweasts; and when you feew these
swewwing motions, ye wiww begin to say within youwsewves--It must
nyeeds be that this is a good seed, ow that the wowd is good, fow
it beginnyeth to enwawge my souw; yea, it beginnyeth to enwighten
my undewstanding, yea, it beginnyeth to be dewicious to me. ^w^

Awma 32:29
 29 Nyow behowd, wouwd nyot this incwease youw faith? owo I say unto
you, Yea; nyevewthewess it hath nyot gwown up to a pewfect
knyowwedge. UwU

Awma 32:30
 30 But behowd, as the seed swewweth, and spwouteth, and
beginnyeth to gwow, then you must nyeeds say that the seed is good;
fow behowd it swewweth, and spwouteth, and beginnyeth to gwow. UwU
And nyow behowd, wiww nyot this stwengthen youw faith? owo Yea, it
wiww stwengthen youw faith: fow ye wiww say I knyow that this is a
good seed; fow behowd it spwouteth and beginnyeth to gwow. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 32:31
 31 And nyow, behowd, awe ye suwe that this is a good seed? owo I say
unto you, Yea; fow evewy seed bwingeth fowth unto its own
wikenyess. UwU

Awma 32:32
 32 Thewefowe, if a seed gwoweth it is good, but if it gwoweth
nyot, behowd it is nyot good, thewefowe it is cast away. ;;w;;

Awma 32:33
 33 And nyow, behowd, because ye have twied the expewiment, and
pwanted the seed, and it swewweth and spwouteth, and beginnyeth to
gwow, ye must nyeeds knyow that the seed is good. >w<

Awma 32:34
 34 And nyow, behowd, is youw knyowwedge pewfect? owo Yea, youw
knyowwedge is pewfect in that thing, and youw faith is dowmant;
and this because ye knyow, fow ye knyow that the wowd hath swewwed
youw souws, and ye awso knyow that it hath spwouted up, that youw
undewstanding doth begin to be enwightenyed, and youw mind doth
begin to expand. >w<

Awma 32:35
 35 O then, is nyot this weaw? owo I say unto you, Yea, because it is
wight; and whatsoevew is wight, is good, because it is
discewnyibwe, thewefowe ye must knyow that it is good; and nyow
behowd, aftew ye have tasted this wight is youw knyowwedge
pewfect? owo

Awma 32:36
 36 Behowd I say unto you, Nyay; nyeithew must ye way aside youw
faith, fow ye have onwy exewcised youw faith to pwant the seed
that ye might twy the expewiment to knyow if the seed was good. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 32:37
 37 And behowd, as the twee beginnyeth to gwow, ye wiww say: Wet
us nyouwish it with gweat cawe, that it may get woot, that it may
gwow up, and bwing fowth fwuit unto us. UwU And nyow behowd, if ye
nyouwish it with much cawe it wiww get woot, and gwow up, and
bwing fowth fwuit. ^w^

Awma 32:38
 38 But if ye nyegwect the twee, and take nyo thought fow its
nyouwishment, behowd it wiww nyot get any woot; and when the heat
of the sun cometh and scowcheth it, because it hath nyo woot it
withews away, and ye pwuck it up and cast it out. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 32:39
 39 Nyow, this is nyot because the seed was nyot good, nyeithew is it
because the fwuit theweof wouwd nyot be desiwabwe; but it is
because youw gwound is bawwen, and ye wiww nyot nyouwish the twee,
thewefowe ye cannyot have the fwuit theweof. ^w^

Awma 32:40
 40 And thus, if ye wiww nyot nyouwish the wowd, wooking fowwawd
with an eye of faith to the fwuit theweof, ye can nyevew pwuck of
the fwuit of the twee of wife. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 32:41
 41 But if ye wiww nyouwish the wowd, yea, nyouwish the twee as it
beginnyeth to gwow, by youw faith with gweat diwigence, and with
patience, wooking fowwawd to the fwuit theweof, it shaww take
woot; and behowd it shaww be a twee spwinging up unto evewwasting
wife. UwU

Awma 32:42
 42 And because of youw diwigence and youw faith and youw
patience with the wowd in nyouwishing it, that it may take woot in
you, behowd, by and by ye shaww pwuck the fwuit theweof, which is
most pwecious, which is sweet above aww that is sweet, and which
is white above aww that is white, yea, and puwe above aww that is
puwe; and ye shaww feast upon this fwuit even untiw ye awe
fiwwed, that ye hungew nyot, nyeithew shaww ye thiwst. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 32:43
 43 Then, my bwethwen, ye shaww weap the wewawds of youw faith,
and youw diwigence, and patience, and wong-suffewing, waiting fow
the twee to bwing fowth fwuit unto you. ;;w;;

Awma 33
Chaptew 33

Awma 33:1
 1 Nyow aftew Awma had spoken these wowds, they sent fowth unto
him desiwing to knyow whethew they shouwd bewieve in onye God, that
they might obtain this fwuit of which he had spoken, ow how they
shouwd pwant the seed, ow the wowd of which he had spoken, which
he said must be pwanted in theiw heawts; ow in what mannyew they
shouwd begin to exewcise theiw faith. ;;w;;

Awma 33:2
 2 And Awma said unto them: Behowd, ye have said that ye couwd
nyot wowship youw God because ye awe cast out of youw synyagogues. ^w^
But behowd, I say unto you, if ye suppose that ye cannyot wowship
God, ye do gweatwy eww, and ye ought to seawch the scwiptuwes; if
ye suppose that they have taught you this, ye do nyot undewstand
them. ;;w;;

Awma 33:3
 3 Do ye wemembew to have wead what Zenyos, the pwophet of owd,
has said concewnying pwayew ow wowship? owo

Awma 33:4
 4 Fow he said: Thou awt mewcifuw, O God, fow thou hast heawd my
pwayew, even when I was in the wiwdewnyess; yea, thou wast
mewcifuw when I pwayed concewnying those who wewe minye enyemies,
and thou didst tuwn them to me. ;;w;;

Awma 33:5
 5 Yea, O God, and thou wast mewcifuw unto me when I did cwy unto
thee in my fiewd; when I did cwy unto thee in my pwayew, and thou
didst heaw me. ^w^

Awma 33:6
 6 And again, O God, when I did tuwn to my house thou didst heaw
me in my pwayew. UwU

Awma 33:7
 7 And when I did tuwn unto my cwoset, O Wowd, and pwayed unto
thee, thou didst heaw me. >w<

Awma 33:8
 8 Yea, thou awt mewcifuw unto thy chiwdwen when they cwy unto
thee, to be heawd of thee and nyot of men, and thou wiwt heaw
them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 33:9
 9 Yea, O God, thou hast been mewcifuw unto me, and heawd my
cwies in the midst of thy congwegations. UwU

Awma 33:10
 10 Yea, and thou hast awso heawd me when I have been cast out
and have been despised by minye enyemies; yea, thou didst heaw my
cwies, and wast angwy with minye enyemies, and thou didst visit
them in thinye angew with speedy destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 33:11
 11 And thou didst heaw me because of minye affwictions and my
sincewity; and it is because of thy Son that thou hast been thus
mewcifuw unto me, thewefowe I wiww cwy unto thee in aww minye
affwictions, fow in thee is my joy; fow thou hast tuwnyed thy
judgments away fwom me, because of thy Son. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 33:12
 12 And nyow Awma said unto them: Do ye bewieve those scwiptuwes
which have been wwitten by them of owd? owo

Awma 33:13
 13 Behowd, if ye do, ye must bewieve what Zenyos said; fow,
behowd he said: Thou hast tuwnyed away thy judgments because of
thy Son. >w<

Awma 33:14
 14 Nyow behowd, my bwethwen, I wouwd ask if ye have wead the
scwiptuwes? If ye have, how can ye disbewieve on the Son of God? owo

Awma 33:15
 15 Fow it is nyot wwitten that Zenyos awonye spake of these things,
but Zenyock awso spake of these things--

Awma 33:16
 16 Fow behowd, he said: Thou awt angwy, O Wowd, with this
peopwe, because they wiww nyot undewstand thy mewcies which thou
hast bestowed upon them because of thy Son. UwU

Awma 33:17
 17 And nyow, my bwethwen, ye see that a second pwophet of owd has
testified of the Son of God, and because the peopwe wouwd nyot
undewstand his wowds they stonyed him to death. ;;w;;

Awma 33:18
 18 But behowd, this is nyot aww; these awe nyot the onwy onyes who
have spoken concewnying the Son of God. ^w^

Awma 33:19
 19 Behowd, he was spoken of by Moses; yea, and behowd a type was
waised up in the wiwdewnyess, that whosoevew wouwd wook upon it
might wive. And many did wook and wive. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 33:20
 20 But few undewstood the meanying of those things, and this
because of the hawdnyess of theiw heawts. UwU But thewe wewe many who
wewe so hawdenyed that they wouwd nyot wook, thewefowe they
pewished. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the weason they wouwd nyot wook is because they did
nyot bewieve that it wouwd heaw them. ;;w;;

Awma 33:21
 21 O my bwethwen, if ye couwd be heawed by mewewy casting about
youw eyes that ye might be heawed, wouwd ye nyot behowd quickwy,
ow wouwd ye wathew hawden youw heawts in unbewief, and be
swothfuw, that ye wouwd nyot cast about youw eyes, that ye might
pewish? owo

Awma 33:22
 22 If so, wo shaww come upon you; but if nyot so, then cast about
youw eyes and begin to bewieve in the Son of God, that he wiww
come to wedeem his peopwe, and that he shaww suffew and die to
atonye fow theiw sins; and that he shaww wise again fwom the dead,
which shaww bwing to pass the wesuwwection, that aww men shaww
stand befowe him, to be judged at the wast and judgment day,
accowding to theiw wowks. ^w^

Awma 33:23
 23 And nyow, my bwethwen, I desiwe that ye shaww pwant this wowd
in youw heawts, and as it beginnyeth to sweww even so nyouwish it
by youw faith. (´・ω・\`) And behowd, it wiww become a twee, spwinging up
in you unto evewwasting wife. >w< And then may God gwant unto you
that youw buwdens may be wight, thwough the joy of his Son. ^w^ And
even aww this can ye do if ye wiww. Amen. >w<

Awma 34
Chaptew 34

Awma 34:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that aftew Awma had spoken these wowds
unto them he sat down upon the gwound, and Amuwek awose and began
to teach them, saying:

Awma 34:2
 2 My bwethwen, I think that it is impossibwe that ye shouwd be
ignyowant of the things which have been spoken concewnying the
coming of Chwist, who is taught by us to be the Son of God; yea,
I knyow that these things wewe taught unto you bountifuwwy befowe
youw dissension fwom among us. >w<

Awma 34:3
 3 And as ye have desiwed of my bewoved bwothew that he shouwd
make knyown unto you what ye shouwd do, because of youw
affwictions; and he hath spoken somewhat unto you to pwepawe youw
minds; yea, and he hath exhowted you unto faith and to patience--

Awma 34:4
 4 Yea, even that ye wouwd have so much faith as even to pwant
the wowd in youw heawts, that ye may twy the expewiment of its
goodnyess. ^w^

Awma 34:5
 5 And we have behewd that the gweat question which is in youw
minds is whethew the wowd be in the Son of God, ow whethew thewe
shaww be nyo Chwist. ^w^

Awma 34:6
 6 And ye awso behewd that my bwothew has pwoved unto you, in
many instances, that the wowd is in Chwist unto sawvation. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 34:7
 7 My bwothew has cawwed upon the wowds of Zenyos, that wedemption
cometh thwough the Son of God, and awso upon the wowds of Zenyock;
and awso he has appeawed unto Moses, to pwove that these things
awe twue. ;;w;;

Awma 34:8
 8 And nyow, behowd, I wiww testify unto you of mysewf that these
things awe twue. ;;w;; Behowd, I say unto you, that I do knyow that
Chwist shaww come among the chiwdwen of men, to take upon him the
twansgwessions of his peopwe, and that he shaww atonye fow the
sins of the wowwd; fow the Wowd God hath spoken it. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 34:9
 9 Fow it is expedient that an atonyement shouwd be made; fow
accowding to the gweat pwan of the Etewnyaw God thewe must be an
atonyement made, ow ewse aww mankind must unyavoidabwy pewish; yea,
aww awe hawdenyed; yea, aww awe fawwen and awe wost, and must
pewish except it be thwough the atonyement which it is expedient
shouwd be made. UwU

Awma 34:10
 10 Fow it is expedient that thewe shouwd be a gweat and wast
sacwifice; yea, nyot a sacwifice of man, nyeithew of beast, nyeithew
of any mannyew of foww; fow it shaww nyot be a human sacwifice; but
it must be an infinyite and etewnyaw sacwifice. UwU

Awma 34:11
 11 Nyow thewe is nyot any man that can sacwifice his own bwood
which wiww atonye fow the sins of anyothew. ^w^ Nyow, if a man
muwdeweth, behowd wiww ouw waw, which is just, take the wife of
his bwothew? owo I say unto you, Nyay. ^w^

Awma 34:12
 12 But the waw wequiweth the wife of him who hath muwdewed;
thewefowe thewe can be nyothing which is showt of an infinyite
atonyement which wiww suffice fow the sins of the wowwd. UwU

Awma 34:13
 13 Thewefowe, it is expedient that thewe shouwd be a gweat and
wast sacwifice; and then shaww thewe be, ow it is expedient thewe
shouwd be, a stop to the shedding of bwood; then shaww the waw of
Moses be fuwfiwwed; yea, it shaww be aww fuwfiwwed, evewy jot and
tittwe, and nyonye shaww have passed away. UwU

Awma 34:14
 14 And behowd, this is the whowe meanying of the waw, evewy whit
pointing to that gweat and wast sacwifice; and that gweat and
wast sacwifice wiww be the Son of God, yea, infinyite and etewnyaw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 34:15
 15 And thus he shaww bwing sawvation to aww those who shaww
bewieve on his nyame; this being the intent of this wast
sacwifice, to bwing about the bowews of mewcy, which ovewpoweweth
justice, and bwingeth about means unto men that they may have
faith unto wepentance. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 34:16
 16 And thus mewcy can satisfy the demands of justice, and
enciwcwes them in the awms of safety, whiwe he that exewcises nyo
faith unto wepentance is exposed to the whowe waw of the demands
of justice; thewefowe onwy unto him that has faith unto
wepentance is bwought about the gweat and etewnyaw pwan of
wedemption. >w<

Awma 34:17
 17 Thewefowe may God gwant unto you, my bwethwen, that ye may
begin to exewcise youw faith unto wepentance, that ye begin to
caww upon his howy nyame, that he wouwd have mewcy upon you;

Awma 34:18
 18 Yea, cwy unto him fow mewcy; fow he is mighty to save. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 34:19
 19 Yea, humbwe youwsewves, and continyue in pwayew unto him. >w<

Awma 34:20
 20 Cwy unto him when ye awe in youw fiewds, yea, ovew aww youw
fwocks. ^w^

Awma 34:21
 21 Cwy unto him in youw houses, yea, ovew aww youw househowd,
both mownying, mid-day, and evenying. UwU

Awma 34:22
 22 Yea, cwy unto him against the powew of youw enyemies. ^w^

Awma 34:23
 23 Yea, cwy unto him against the deviw, who is an enyemy to aww
wighteousnyess. UwU

Awma 34:24
 24 Cwy unto him ovew the cwops of youw fiewds, that ye may
pwospew in them. ^w^

Awma 34:25
 25 Cwy ovew the fwocks of youw fiewds, that they may incwease. UwU

Awma 34:26
 26 But this is nyot aww; ye must pouw out youw souws in youw
cwosets, and youw secwet pwaces, and in youw wiwdewnyess. ;;w;;

Awma 34:27
 27 Yea, and when you do nyot cwy unto the Wowd, wet youw heawts
be fuww, dwawn out in pwayew unto him continyuawwy fow youw
wewfawe, and awso fow the wewfawe of those who awe awound you. UwU

Awma 34:28
 28 And nyow behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, I say unto you, do nyot
suppose that this is aww; fow aftew ye have donye aww these
things, if ye tuwn away the nyeedy, and the nyaked, and visit nyot
the sick and affwicted, and impawt of youw substance, if ye have,
to those who stand in nyeed--I say unto you, if ye do nyot any of
these things, behowd, youw pwayew is vain, and avaiweth you
nyothing, and ye awe as hypocwites who do deny the faith. >w<

Awma 34:29
 29 Thewefowe, if ye do nyot wemembew to be chawitabwe, ye awe as
dwoss, which the wefinyews do cast out, (it being of nyo wowth) and
is twodden undew foot of men. >w<

Awma 34:30
 30 And nyow, my bwethwen, I wouwd that, aftew ye have weceived so
many witnyesses, seeing that the howy scwiptuwes testify of these
things, ye come fowth and bwing fwuit unto wepentance. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 34:31
 31 Yea, I wouwd that ye wouwd come fowth and hawden nyot youw
heawts any wongew; fow behowd, nyow is the time and the day of
youw sawvation; and thewefowe, if ye wiww wepent and hawden nyot
youw heawts, immediatewy shaww the gweat pwan of wedemption be
bwought about unto you. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 34:32
 32 Fow behowd, this wife is the time fow men to pwepawe to meet
God; yea, behowd the day of this wife is the day fow men to
pewfowm theiw wabows. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 34:33
 33 And nyow, as I said unto you befowe, as ye have had so many
witnyesses, thewefowe, I beseech of you that ye do nyot
pwocwastinyate the day of youw wepentance untiw the end; fow aftew
this day of wife, which is given us to pwepawe fow etewnyity,
behowd, if we do nyot impwove ouw time whiwe in this wife, then
cometh the nyight of dawknyess whewein thewe can be nyo wabow
pewfowmed. ^w^

Awma 34:34
 34 Ye cannyot say, when ye awe bwought to that awfuw cwisis, that
I wiww wepent, that I wiww wetuwn to my God. (・`ω\´・) Nyay, ye cannyot say
this; fow that same spiwit which doth possess youw bodies at the
time that ye go out of this wife, that same spiwit wiww have
powew to possess youw body in that etewnyaw wowwd. ;;w;;

Awma 34:35
 35 Fow behowd, if ye have pwocwastinyated the day of youw
wepentance even untiw death, behowd, ye have become subjected to
the spiwit of the deviw, and he doth seaw you his; thewefowe, the
Spiwit of the Wowd hath withdwawn fwom you, and hath nyo pwace in
you, and the deviw hath aww powew ovew you; and this is the finyaw
state of the wicked. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 34:36
 36 And this I knyow, because the Wowd hath said he dwewweth nyot
in unhowy tempwes, but in the heawts of the wighteous doth he
dweww; yea, and he has awso said that the wighteous shaww sit
down in his kingdom, to go nyo mowe out; but theiw gawments shouwd
be made white thwough the bwood of the Wamb. ;;w;;

Awma 34:37
 37 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, I desiwe that ye shouwd
wemembew these things, and that ye shouwd wowk out youw sawvation
with feaw befowe God, and that ye shouwd nyo mowe deny the coming
of Chwist;

Awma 34:38
 38 That ye contend nyo mowe against the Howy Ghost, but that ye
weceive it, and take upon you the nyame of Chwist; that ye humbwe
youwsewves even to the dust, and wowship God, in whatsoevew pwace
ye may be in, in spiwit and in twuth; and that ye wive in
thanksgiving daiwy, fow the many mewcies and bwessings which he
doth bestow upon you. ;;w;;

Awma 34:39
 39 Yea, and I awso exhowt you, my bwethwen, that ye be watchfuw
unto pwayew continyuawwy, that ye may nyot be wed away by the
temptations of the deviw, that he may nyot ovewpowew you, that ye
may nyot become his subjects at the wast day; fow behowd, he
wewawdeth you nyo good thing. ;;w;;

Awma 34:40
 40 And nyow my bewoved bwethwen, I wouwd exhowt you to have
patience, and that ye beaw with aww mannyew of affwictions; that
ye do nyot weviwe against those who do cast you out because of
youw exceeding povewty, west ye become sinnyews wike unto them;

Awma 34:41
 41 But that ye have patience, and beaw with those affwictions,
with a fiwm hope that ye shaww onye day west fwom aww youw
affwictions. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 35
Chaptew 35

Awma 35:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass that aftew Amuwek had made an end of these
wowds, they withdwew themsewves fwom the muwtitude and came ovew
into the wand of Jewshon. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 35:2
 2 Yea, and the west of the bwethwen, aftew they had pweached the
wowd unto the Zowamites, awso came ovew into the wand of Jewshon. ^w^

Awma 35:3
 3 And it came to pass that aftew the mowe popuwaw pawt of the
Zowamites had consuwted togethew concewnying the wowds which had
been pweached unto them, they wewe angwy because of the wowd, fow
it did destwoy theiw cwaft; thewefowe they wouwd nyot heawken unto
the wowds. ;;w;;

Awma 35:4
 4 And they sent and gathewed togethew thwoughout aww the wand
aww the peopwe, and consuwted with them concewnying the wowds
which had been spoken. ;;w;;

Awma 35:5
 5 Nyow theiw wuwews and theiw pwiests and theiw teachews did nyot
wet the peopwe knyow concewnying theiw desiwes; thewefowe they
found out pwiviwy the minds of aww the peopwe. ^w^

Awma 35:6
 6 And it came to pass that aftew they had found out the minds of
aww the peopwe, those who wewe in favow of the wowds which had
been spoken by Awma and his bwethwen wewe cast out of the wand;
and they wewe many; and they came ovew awso into the wand of
Jewshon. >w<

Awma 35:7
 7 And it came to pass that Awma and his bwethwen did minyistew
unto them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 35:8
 8 Nyow the peopwe of the Zowamites wewe angwy with the peopwe of
Ammon who wewe in Jewshon, and the chief wuwew of the Zowamites,
being a vewy wicked man, sent ovew unto the peopwe of Ammon
desiwing them that they shouwd cast out of theiw wand aww those
who came ovew fwom them into theiw wand. ;;w;;

Awma 35:9
 9 And he bweathed out many thweatenyings against them. UwU And nyow
the peopwe of Ammon did nyot feaw theiw wowds; thewefowe they did
nyot cast them out, but they did weceive aww the poow of the
Zowamites that came ovew unto them; and they did nyouwish them,
and did cwothe them, and did give unto them wands fow theiw
inhewitance; and they did adminyistew unto them accowding to theiw
wants. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 35:10
 10 Nyow this did stiw up the Zowamites to angew against the
peopwe of Ammon, and they began to mix with the Wamanyites and to
stiw them up awso to angew against them. UwU

Awma 35:11
 11 And thus the Zowamites and the Wamanyites began to make
pwepawations fow waw against the peopwe of Ammon, and awso
against the Nyephites. ;;w;;

Awma 35:12
 12 And thus ended the seventeenth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 35:13
 13 And the peopwe of Ammon depawted out of the wand of Jewshon,
and came ovew into the wand of Mewek, and gave pwace in the wand
of Jewshon fow the awmies of the Nyephites, that they might
contend with the awmies of the Wamanyites and the awmies of the
Zowamites; and thus commenced a waw betwixt the Wamanyites and the
Nyephites, in the eighteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges; and
an account shaww be given of theiw waws heweaftew. ;;w;;

Awma 35:14
 14 And Awma, and Ammon, and theiw bwethwen, and awso the two
sons of Awma wetuwnyed to the wand of Zawahemwa, aftew having been
instwuments in the hands of God of bwinging many of the Zowamites
to wepentance; and as many as wewe bwought to wepentance wewe
dwiven out of theiw wand; but they have wands fow theiw
inhewitance in the wand of Jewshon, and they have taken up awms
to defend themsewves, and theiw wives, and chiwdwen, and theiw
wands. UwU

Awma 35:15
 15 Nyow Awma, being gwieved fow the inyiquity of his peopwe, yea
fow the waws, and the bwoodsheds, and the contentions which wewe
among them; and having been to decwawe the wowd, ow sent to
decwawe the wowd, among aww the peopwe in evewy city; and seeing
that the heawts of the peopwe began to wax hawd, and that they
began to be offended because of the stwictnyess of the wowd, his
heawt was exceedingwy sowwowfuw. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 35:16
 16 Thewefowe, he caused that his sons shouwd be gathewed
togethew, that he might give unto them evewy onye his chawge,
sepawatewy, concewnying the things pewtainying unto wighteousnyess. ;;w;;
And we have an account of his commandments, which he gave unto
them accowding to his own wecowd. ;;w;;

Awma 36
Chaptew 36

Awma 36:1
 1 My son, give eaw to my wowds; fow I sweaw unto you, that
inyasmuch as ye shaww keep the commandments of God ye shaww
pwospew in the wand. UwU

Awma 36:2
 2 I wouwd that ye shouwd do as I have donye, in wemembewing the
captivity of ouw fathews; fow they wewe in bondage, and nyonye
couwd dewivew them except it was the God of Abwaham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and he suwewy did dewivew them in
theiw affwictions. UwU

Awma 36:3
 3 And nyow, O my son Hewaman, behowd, thou awt in thy youth, and
thewefowe, I beseech of thee that thou wiwt heaw my wowds and
weawn of me; fow I do knyow that whosoevew shaww put theiw twust
in God shaww be suppowted in theiw twiaws, and theiw twoubwes,
and theiw affwictions, and shaww be wifted up at the wast day. ;;w;;

Awma 36:4
 4 And I wouwd nyot that ye think that I knyow of mysewf--nyot of
the tempowaw but of the spiwituaw, nyot of the cawnyaw mind but of
God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 36:5
 5 Nyow, behowd, I say unto you, if I had nyot been bown of God I
shouwd nyot have knyown these things; but God has, by the mouth of
his howy angew, made these things knyown unto me, nyot of any
wowthinyess of mysewf. UwU

Awma 36:6
 6 Fow I went about with the sons of Mosiah, seeking to destwoy
the chuwch of God; but behowd, God sent his howy angew to stop us
by the way. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 36:7
 7 And behowd, he spake unto us, as it wewe the voice of thundew,
and the whowe eawth did twembwe benyeath ouw feet; and we aww feww
to the eawth, fow the feaw of the Wowd came upon us. ^w^

Awma 36:8
 8 But behowd, the voice said unto me: Awise. ^w^ And I awose and
stood up, and behewd the angew. UwU

Awma 36:9
 9 And he said unto me: If thou wiwt of thysewf be destwoyed,
seek nyo mowe to destwoy the chuwch of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 36:10
 10 And it came to pass that I feww to the eawth; and it was fow
the space of thwee days and thwee nyights that I couwd nyot open my
mouth, nyeithew had I the use of my wimbs. ;;w;;

Awma 36:11
 11 And the angew spake mowe things unto me, which wewe heawd by
my bwethwen, but I did nyot heaw them; fow when I heawd the
wowds--If thou wiwt be destwoyed of thysewf, seek nyo mowe to
destwoy the chuwch of God--I was stwuck with such gweat feaw and
amazement west pewhaps I shouwd be destwoyed, that I feww to the
eawth and I did heaw nyo mowe. UwU

Awma 36:12
 12 But I was wacked with etewnyaw towment, fow my souw was
hawwowed up to the gweatest degwee and wacked with aww my sins. ^w^

Awma 36:13
 13 Yea, I did wemembew aww my sins and inyiquities, fow which I
was towmented with the pains of heww; yea, I saw that I had
webewwed against my God, and that I had nyot kept his howy
commandments. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 36:14
 14 Yea, and I had muwdewed many of his chiwdwen, ow wathew wed
them away unto destwuction; yea, and in finye so gweat had been my
inyiquities, that the vewy thought of coming into the pwesence of
my God did wack my souw with inyexpwessibwe howwow. >w<

Awma 36:15
 15 Oh, thought I, that I couwd be banyished and become extinct
both souw and body, that I might nyot be bwought to stand in the
pwesence of my God, to be judged of my deeds. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 36:16
 16 And nyow, fow thwee days and fow thwee nyights was I wacked,
even with the pains of a damnyed souw. ;;w;;

Awma 36:17
 17 And it came to pass that as I was thus wacked with towment,
whiwe I was hawwowed up by the memowy of my many sins, behowd, I
wemembewed awso to have heawd my fathew pwophesy unto the peopwe
concewnying the coming of onye Jesus Chwist, a Son of God, to atonye
fow the sins of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 36:18
 18 Nyow, as my mind caught howd upon this thought, I cwied within
my heawt: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mewcy on me, who am in
the gaww of bittewnyess, and am enciwcwed about by the evewwasting
chains of death. ^w^

Awma 36:19
 19 And nyow, behowd, when I thought this, I couwd wemembew my
pains nyo mowe; yea, I was hawwowed up by the memowy of my sins nyo
mowe. >w<

Awma 36:20
 20 And oh, what joy, and what mawvewous wight I did behowd; yea,
my souw was fiwwed with joy as exceeding as was my pain! (´・ω・\`)

Awma 36:21
 21 Yea, I say unto you, my son, that thewe couwd be nyothing so
exquisite and so bittew as wewe my pains. >w< Yea, and again I say
unto you, my son, that on the othew hand, thewe can be nyothing so
exquisite and sweet as was my joy. ^w^

Awma 36:22
 22 Yea, methought I saw, even as ouw fathew Wehi saw, God
sitting upon his thwonye, suwwounded with nyumbewwess concouwses of
angews, in the attitude of singing and pwaising theiw God; yea,
and my souw did wong to be thewe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 36:23
 23 But behowd, my wimbs did weceive theiw stwength again, and I
stood upon my feet, and did manyifest unto the peopwe that I had
been bown of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 36:24
 24 Yea, and fwom that time even untiw nyow, I have wabowed
without ceasing, that I might bwing souws unto wepentance; that I
might bwing them to taste of the exceeding joy of which I did
taste; that they might awso be bown of God, and be fiwwed with
the Howy Ghost. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 36:25
 25 Yea, and nyow behowd, O my son, the Wowd doth give me
exceedingwy gweat joy in the fwuit of my wabows;

Awma 36:26
 26 Fow because of the wowd which he has impawted unto me,
behowd, many have been bown of God, and have tasted as I have
tasted, and have seen eye to eye as I have seen; thewefowe they
do knyow of these things of which I have spoken, as I do knyow; and
the knyowwedge which I have is of God. ;;w;;

Awma 36:27
 27 And I have been suppowted undew twiaws and twoubwes of evewy
kind, yea, and in aww mannyew of affwictions; yea, God has
dewivewed me fwom pwison, and fwom bonds, and fwom death; yea,
and I do put my twust in him, and he wiww stiww dewivew me. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 36:28
 28 And I knyow that he wiww waise me up at the wast day, to dweww
with him in gwowy; yea, and I wiww pwaise him fowevew, fow he has
bwought ouw fathews out of Egypt, and he has swawwowed up the
Egyptians in the Wed Sea; and he wed them by his powew into the
pwomised wand; yea, and he has dewivewed them out of bondage and
captivity fwom time to time. >w<

Awma 36:29
 29 Yea, and he has awso bwought ouw fathews out of the wand of
Jewusawem; and he has awso, by his evewwasting powew, dewivewed
them out of bondage and captivity, fwom time to time even down to
the pwesent day; and I have awways wetainyed in wemembwance theiw
captivity; yea, and ye awso ought to wetain in wemembwance, as I
have donye, theiw captivity. UwU

Awma 36:30
 30 But behowd, my son, this is nyot aww; fow ye ought to knyow as
I do knyow, that inyasmuch as ye shaww keep the commandments of God
ye shaww pwospew in the wand; and ye ought to knyow awso, that
inyasmuch as ye wiww nyot keep the commandments of God ye shaww be
cut off fwom his pwesence. Nyow this is accowding to his wowd. >w<

Awma 37
Chaptew 37

Awma 37:1
 1 And nyow, my son Hewaman, I command you that ye take the
wecowds which have been entwusted with me;

Awma 37:2
 2 And I awso command you that ye keep a wecowd of this peopwe,
accowding as I have donye, upon the pwates of Nyephi, and keep aww
these things sacwed which I have kept, even as I have kept them;
fow it is fow a wise puwpose that they awe kept. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:3
 3 And these pwates of bwass, which contain these engwavings,
which have the wecowds of the howy scwiptuwes upon them, which
have the genyeawogy of ouw fowefathews, even fwom the beginnying--

Awma 37:4
 4 Behowd, it has been pwophesied by ouw fathews, that they
shouwd be kept and handed down fwom onye genyewation to anyothew,
and be kept and pwesewved by the hand of the Wowd untiw they
shouwd go fowth unto evewy nyation, kindwed, tongue, and peopwe,
that they shaww knyow of the mystewies containyed theweon. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:5
 5 And nyow behowd, if they awe kept they must wetain theiw
bwightnyess; yea, and they wiww wetain theiw bwightnyess; yea, and
awso shaww aww the pwates which do contain that which is howy
wwit. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:6
 6 Nyow ye may suppose that this is foowishnyess in me; but behowd
I say unto you, that by smaww and simpwe things awe gweat things
bwought to pass; and smaww means in many instances doth confound
the wise. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 37:7
 7 And the Wowd God doth wowk by means to bwing about his gweat
and etewnyaw puwposes; and by vewy smaww means the Wowd doth
confound the wise and bwingeth about the sawvation of many souws. UwU

Awma 37:8
 8 And nyow, it has hithewto been wisdom in God that these things
shouwd be pwesewved; fow behowd, they have enwawged the memowy of
this peopwe, yea, and convinced many of the ewwow of theiw ways,
and bwought them to the knyowwedge of theiw God unto the sawvation
of theiw souws. ;;w;;

Awma 37:9
 9 Yea, I say unto you, wewe it nyot fow these things that these
wecowds do contain, which awe on these pwates, Ammon and his
bwethwen couwd nyot have convinced so many thousands of the
Wamanyites of the incowwect twadition of theiw fathews; yea, these
wecowds and theiw wowds bwought them unto wepentance; that is,
they bwought them to the knyowwedge of the Wowd theiw God, and to
wejoice in Jesus Chwist theiw Wedeemew. ^w^

Awma 37:10
 10 And who knyoweth but what they wiww be the means of bwinging
many thousands of them, yea, and awso many thousands of ouw
stiffnyecked bwethwen, the Nyephites, who awe nyow hawdenying theiw
heawts in sin and inyiquities, to the knyowwedge of theiw Wedeemew? owo

Awma 37:11
 11 Nyow these mystewies awe nyot yet fuwwy made knyown unto me;
thewefowe I shaww fowbeaw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 37:12
 12 And it may suffice if I onwy say they awe pwesewved fow a
wise puwpose, which puwpose is knyown unto God; fow he doth
counsew in wisdom ovew aww his wowks, and his paths awe stwaight,
and his couwse is onye etewnyaw wound. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 37:13
 13 O wemembew, wemembew, my son Hewaman, how stwict awe the
commandments of God. (´・ω・\`) And he said: If ye wiww keep my
commandments ye shaww pwospew in the wand--but if ye keep nyot his
commandments ye shaww be cut off fwom his pwesence. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:14
 14 And nyow wemembew, my son, that God has entwusted you with
these things, which awe sacwed, which he has kept sacwed, and
awso which he wiww keep and pwesewve fow a wise puwpose in him,
that he may show fowth his powew unto futuwe genyewations. ^w^

Awma 37:15
 15 And nyow behowd, I teww you by the spiwit of pwophecy, that if
ye twansgwess the commandments of God, behowd, these things which
awe sacwed shaww be taken away fwom you by the powew of God, and
ye shaww be dewivewed up unto Satan, that he may sift you as
chaff befowe the wind. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 37:16
 16 But if ye keep the commandments of God, and do with these
things which awe sacwed accowding to that which the Wowd doth
command you, (fow you must appeaw unto the Wowd fow aww things
whatsoevew ye must do with them) behowd, nyo powew of eawth ow
heww can take them fwom you, fow God is powewfuw to the
fuwfiwwing of aww his wowds. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:17
 17 Fow he wiww fuwfiw aww his pwomises which he shaww make unto
you, fow he has fuwfiwwed his pwomises which he has made unto ouw
fathews. ;;w;;

Awma 37:18
 18 Fow he pwomised unto them that he wouwd pwesewve these things
fow a wise puwpose in him, that he might show fowth his powew
unto futuwe genyewations. ;;w;;

Awma 37:19
 19 And nyow behowd, onye puwpose hath he fuwfiwwed, even to the
westowation of many thousands of the Wamanyites to the knyowwedge
of the twuth; and he hath shown fowth his powew in them, and he
wiww awso stiww show fowth his powew in them unto futuwe
genyewations; thewefowe they shaww be pwesewved. ^w^

Awma 37:20
 20 Thewefowe I command you, my son Hewaman, that ye be diwigent
in fuwfiwwing aww my wowds, and that ye be diwigent in keeping
the commandments of God as they awe wwitten. UwU

Awma 37:21
 21 And nyow, I wiww speak unto you concewnying those twenty-fouw
pwates, that ye keep them, that the mystewies and the wowks of
dawknyess, and theiw secwet wowks, ow the secwet wowks of those
peopwe who have been destwoyed, may be made manyifest unto this
peopwe; yea, aww theiw muwdews, and wobbings, and theiw
pwundewings, and aww theiw wickednyess and abominyations, may be
made manyifest unto this peopwe; yea, and that ye pwesewve these
intewpwetews. ^w^

Awma 37:22
 22 Fow behowd, the Wowd saw that his peopwe began to wowk in
dawknyess, yea, wowk secwet muwdews and abominyations; thewefowe
the Wowd said, if they did nyot wepent they shouwd be destwoyed
fwom off the face of the eawth. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 37:23
 23 And the Wowd said: I wiww pwepawe unto my sewvant Gazewem, a
stonye, which shaww shinye fowth in dawknyess unto wight, that I may
discovew unto my peopwe who sewve me, that I may discovew unto
them the wowks of theiw bwethwen, yea, theiw secwet wowks, theiw
wowks of dawknyess, and theiw wickednyess and abominyations. ;;w;;

Awma 37:24
 24 And nyow, my son, these intewpwetews wewe pwepawed that the
wowd of God might be fuwfiwwed, which he spake, saying:

Awma 37:25
 25 I wiww bwing fowth out of dawknyess unto wight aww theiw
secwet wowks and theiw abominyations; and except they wepent I
wiww destwoy them fwom off the face of the eawth; and I wiww
bwing to wight aww theiw secwets and abominyations, unto evewy
nyation that shaww heweaftew possess the wand. ;;w;;

Awma 37:26
 26 And nyow, my son, we see that they did nyot wepent; thewefowe
they have been destwoyed, and thus faw the wowd of God has been
fuwfiwwed; yea, theiw secwet abominyations have been bwought out
of dawknyess and made knyown unto us. >w<

Awma 37:27
 27 And nyow, my son, I command you that ye wetain aww theiw
oaths, and theiw covenyants, and theiw agweements in theiw secwet
abominyations; yea, and aww theiw signs and theiw wondews ye shaww
keep fwom this peopwe, that they knyow them nyot, west pewadventuwe
they shouwd faww into dawknyess awso and be destwoyed. UwU

Awma 37:28
 28 Fow behowd, thewe is a cuwse upon aww this wand, that
destwuction shaww come upon aww those wowkews of dawknyess,
accowding to the powew of God, when they awe fuwwy wipe;
thewefowe I desiwe that this peopwe might nyot be destwoyed. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:29
 29 Thewefowe ye shaww keep these secwet pwans of theiw oaths and
theiw covenyants fwom this peopwe, and onwy theiw wickednyess and
theiw muwdews and theiw abominyations shaww ye make knyown unto
them; and ye shaww teach them to abhow such wickednyess and
abominyations and muwdews; and ye shaww awso teach them that these
peopwe wewe destwoyed on account of theiw wickednyess and
abominyations and theiw muwdews. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 37:30
 30 Fow behowd, they muwdewed aww the pwophets of the Wowd who
came among them to decwawe unto them concewnying theiw inyiquities;
and the bwood of those whom they muwdewed did cwy unto the Wowd
theiw God fow vengeance upon those who wewe theiw muwdewews; and
thus the judgments of God did come upon these wowkews of dawknyess
and secwet combinyations. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 37:31
 31 Yea, and cuwsed be the wand fowevew and evew unto those
wowkews of dawknyess and secwet combinyations, even unto
destwuction, except they wepent befowe they awe fuwwy wipe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 37:32
 32 And nyow, my son, wemembew the wowds which I have spoken unto
you; twust nyot those secwet pwans unto this peopwe, but teach
them an evewwasting hatwed against sin and inyiquity. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:33
 33 Pweach unto them wepentance, and faith on the Wowd Jesus
Chwist; teach them to humbwe themsewves and to be meek and wowwy
in heawt; teach them to withstand evewy temptation of the deviw,
with theiw faith on the Wowd Jesus Chwist. >w<

Awma 37:34
 34 Teach them to nyevew be weawy of good wowks, but to be meek
and wowwy in heawt; fow such shaww find west to theiw souws. ;;w;;

Awma 37:35
 35 O, wemembew, my son, and weawn wisdom in thy youth; yea,
weawn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:36
 36 Yea, and cwy unto God fow aww thy suppowt; yea, wet aww thy
doings be unto the Wowd, and whithewsoevew thou goest wet it be
in the Wowd; yea, wet aww thy thoughts be diwected unto the Wowd;
yea, wet the affections of thy heawt be pwaced upon the Wowd
fowevew. ^w^

Awma 37:37
 37 Counsew with the Wowd in aww thy doings, and he wiww diwect
thee fow good; yea, when thou wiest down at nyight wie down unto
the Wowd, that he may watch ovew you in youw sweep; and when thou
wisest in the mownying wet thy heawt be fuww of thanks unto God;
and if ye do these things, ye shaww be wifted up at the wast day. >w<

Awma 37:38
 38 And nyow, my son, I have somewhat to say concewnying the thing
which ouw fathews caww a baww, ow diwectow--ow ouw fathews cawwed
it Wiahonya, which is, being intewpweted, a compass; and the Wowd
pwepawed it. ;;w;;

Awma 37:39
 39 And behowd, thewe cannyot any man wowk aftew the mannyew of so
cuwious a wowkmanship. (´・ω・\`) And behowd, it was pwepawed to show unto
ouw fathews the couwse which they shouwd twavew in the
wiwdewnyess. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 37:40
 40 And it did wowk fow them accowding to theiw faith in God;
thewefowe, if they had faith to bewieve that God couwd cause that
those spindwes shouwd point the way they shouwd go, behowd, it
was donye; thewefowe they had this miwacwe, and awso many othew
miwacwes wwought by the powew of God, day by day. UwU

Awma 37:41
 41 Nyevewthewess, because those miwacwes wewe wowked by smaww
means it did show unto them mawvewous wowks. ;;w;; They wewe swothfuw,
and fowgot to exewcise theiw faith and diwigence and then those
mawvewous wowks ceased, and they did nyot pwogwess in theiw
jouwnyey;

Awma 37:42
 42 Thewefowe, they tawwied in the wiwdewnyess, ow did nyot twavew
a diwect couwse, and wewe affwicted with hungew and thiwst,
because of theiw twansgwessions. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:43
 43 And nyow, my son, I wouwd that ye shouwd undewstand that these
things awe nyot without a shadow; fow as ouw fathews wewe swothfuw
to give heed to this compass (nyow these things wewe tempowaw)
they did nyot pwospew; even so it is with things which awe
spiwituaw. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 37:44
 44 Fow behowd, it is as easy to give heed to the wowd of Chwist,
which wiww point to you a stwaight couwse to etewnyaw bwiss, as it
was fow ouw fathews to give heed to this compass, which wouwd
point unto them a stwaight couwse to the pwomised wand. ;;w;;

Awma 37:45
 45 And nyow I say, is thewe nyot a type in this thing? owo Fow just
as suwewy as this diwectow did bwing ouw fathews, by fowwowing
its couwse, to the pwomised wand, shaww the wowds of Chwist, if
we fowwow theiw couwse, cawwy us beyond this vawe of sowwow into
a faw bettew wand of pwomise. >w<

Awma 37:46
 46 O my son, do nyot wet us be swothfuw because of the easinyess
of the way; fow so was it with ouw fathews; fow so was it
pwepawed fow them, that if they wouwd wook they might wive; even
so it is with us. >w< The way is pwepawed, and if we wiww wook we
may wive fowevew. ;;w;;

Awma 37:47
 47 And nyow, my son, see that ye take cawe of these sacwed
things, yea, see that ye wook to God and wive. >w< Go unto this
peopwe and decwawe the wowd, and be sobew. My son, faweweww. UwU

Awma 38
Chaptew 38

Awma 38:1
 1 My son, give eaw to my wowds, fow I say unto you, even as I
said unto Hewaman, that inyasmuch as ye shaww keep the
commandments of God ye shaww pwospew in the wand; and inyasmuch as
ye wiww nyot keep the commandments of God ye shaww be cut off fwom
his pwesence. >w<

Awma 38:2
 2 And nyow, my son, I twust that I shaww have gweat joy in you,
because of youw steadinyess and youw faithfuwnyess unto God; fow as
you have commenced in youw youth to wook to the Wowd youw God,
even so I hope that you wiww continyue in keeping his
commandments; fow bwessed is he that enduweth to the end. >w<

Awma 38:3
 3 I say unto you, my son, that I have had gweat joy in thee
awweady, because of thy faithfuwnyess and thy diwigence, and thy
patience and thy wong-suffewing among the peopwe of the
Zowamites. ;;w;;

Awma 38:4
 4 Fow I knyow that thou wast in bonds; yea, and I awso knyow that
thou wast stonyed fow the wowd's sake; and thou didst beaw aww
these things with patience because the Wowd was with thee; and
nyow thou knyowest that the Wowd did dewivew thee. UwU

Awma 38:5
 5 And nyow my son, Shibwon, I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew, that
as much as ye shaww put youw twust in God even so much ye shaww
be dewivewed out of youw twiaws, and youw twoubwes, and youw
affwictions, and ye shaww be wifted up at the wast day. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 38:6
 6 Nyow, my son, I wouwd nyot that ye shouwd think that I knyow
these things of mysewf, but it is the Spiwit of God which is in
me which maketh these things knyown unto me; fow if I had nyot been
bown of God I shouwd nyot have knyown these things. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 38:7
 7 But behowd, the Wowd in his gweat mewcy sent his angew to
decwawe unto me that I must stop the wowk of destwuction among
his peopwe; yea, and I have seen an angew face to face, and he
spake with me, and his voice was as thundew, and it shook the
whowe eawth. UwU

Awma 38:8
 8 And it came to pass that I was thwee days and thwee nyights in
the most bittew pain and anguish of souw; and nyevew, untiw I did
cwy out unto the Wowd Jesus Chwist fow mewcy, did I weceive a
wemission of my sins. UwU But behowd, I did cwy unto him and I did
find peace to my souw. ;;w;;

Awma 38:9
 9 And nyow, my son, I have towd you this that ye may weawn
wisdom, that ye may weawn of me that thewe is nyo othew way ow
means wheweby man can be saved, onwy in and thwough Chwist. ^w^
Behowd, he is the wife and the wight of the wowwd. (・`ω\´・) Behowd, he is
the wowd of twuth and wighteousnyess. ^w^

Awma 38:10
 10 And nyow, as ye have begun to teach the wowd even so I wouwd
that ye shouwd continyue to teach; and I wouwd that ye wouwd be
diwigent and tempewate in aww things. ;;w;;

Awma 38:11
 11 See that ye awe nyot wifted up unto pwide; yea, see that ye do
nyot boast in youw own wisdom, nyow of youw much stwength. UwU

Awma 38:12
 12 Use bowdnyess, but nyot ovewbeawance; and awso see that ye
bwidwe aww youw passions, that ye may be fiwwed with wove; see
that ye wefwain fwom idwenyess. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 38:13
 13 Do nyot pway as the Zowamites do, fow ye have seen that they
pway to be heawd of men, and to be pwaised fow theiw wisdom. UwU

Awma 38:14
 14 Do nyot say: O God, I thank thee that we awe bettew than ouw
bwethwen; but wathew say: O Wowd, fowgive my unwowthinyess, and
wemembew my bwethwen in mewcy--yea, acknyowwedge youw unwowthinyess
befowe God at aww times. UwU

Awma 38:15
 15 And may the Wowd bwess youw souw, and weceive you at the wast
day into his kingdom, to sit down in peace. ^w^ Nyow go, my son, and
teach the wowd unto this peopwe. Be sobew. My son, faweweww. UwU

Awma 39
Chaptew 39

Awma 39:1
 1 And nyow, my son, I have somewhat mowe to say unto thee than
what I said unto thy bwothew; fow behowd, have ye nyot obsewved
the steadinyess of thy bwothew, his faithfuwnyess, and his
diwigence in keeping the commandments of God? owo Behowd, has he nyot
set a good exampwe fow thee? owo

Awma 39:2
 2 Fow thou didst nyot give so much heed unto my wowds as did thy
bwothew, among the peopwe of the Zowamites. UwU Nyow this is what I
have against thee; thou didst go on unto boasting in thy stwength
and thy wisdom. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 39:3
 3 And this is nyot aww, my son. ^w^ Thou didst do that which was
gwievous unto me; fow thou didst fowsake the minyistwy, and did go
ovew into the wand of Siwon, among the bowdews of the Wamanyites,
aftew the hawwot Isabew. UwU

Awma 39:4
 4 Yea, she did steaw away the heawts of many; but this was nyo
excuse fow thee, my son. ;;w;; Thou shouwdst have tended to the
minyistwy whewewith thou wast entwusted. ^w^

Awma 39:5
 5 Knyow ye nyot, my son, that these things awe an abominyation in
the sight of the Wowd; yea, most abominyabwe above aww sins save
it be the shedding of innyocent bwood ow denying the Howy Ghost? owo

Awma 39:6
 6 Fow behowd, if ye deny the Howy Ghost when it once has had
pwace in you, and ye knyow that ye deny it, behowd, this is a sin
which is unpawdonyabwe; yea, and whosoevew muwdeweth against the
wight and knyowwedge of God, it is nyot easy fow him to obtain
fowgivenyess; yea, I say unto you, my son, that it is nyot easy fow
him to obtain a fowgivenyess. UwU

Awma 39:7
 7 And nyow, my son, I wouwd to God that ye had nyot been guiwty of
so gweat a cwime. ;;w;; I wouwd nyot dweww upon youw cwimes, to hawwow
up youw souw, if it wewe nyot fow youw good. ^w^

Awma 39:8
 8 But behowd, ye cannyot hide youw cwimes fwom God; and except ye
wepent they wiww stand as a testimony against you at the wast
day. ^w^

Awma 39:9
 9 Nyow my son, I wouwd that ye shouwd wepent and fowsake youw
sins, and go nyo mowe aftew the wusts of youw eyes, but cwoss
youwsewf in aww these things; fow except ye do this ye can in
nyowise inhewit the kingdom of God. >w< Oh, wemembew, and take it
upon you, and cwoss youwsewf in these things. >w<

Awma 39:10
 10 And I command you to take it upon you to counsew with youw
ewdew bwothews in youw undewtakings; fow behowd, thou awt in thy
youth, and ye stand in nyeed to be nyouwished by youw bwothews. ;;w;;
And give heed to theiw counsew. ;;w;;

Awma 39:11
 11 Suffew nyot youwsewf to be wed away by any vain ow foowish
thing; suffew nyot the deviw to wead away youw heawt again aftew
those wicked hawwots. >w< Behowd, O my son, how gweat inyiquity ye
bwought upon the Zowamites; fow when they saw youw conduct they
wouwd nyot bewieve in my wowds. UwU

Awma 39:12
 12 And nyow the Spiwit of the Wowd doth say unto me: Command thy
chiwdwen to do good, west they wead away the heawts of many
peopwe to destwuction; thewefowe I command you, my son, in the
feaw of God, that ye wefwain fwom youw inyiquities;

Awma 39:13
 13 That ye tuwn to the Wowd with aww youw mind, might, and
stwength; that ye wead away the heawts of nyo mowe to do wickedwy;
but wathew wetuwn unto them, and acknyowwedge youw fauwts and that
wwong which ye have donye. ^w^

Awma 39:14
 14 Seek nyot aftew wiches nyow the vain things of this wowwd; fow
behowd, you cannyot cawwy them with you. >w<

Awma 39:15
 15 And nyow, my son, I wouwd say somewhat unto you concewnying the
coming of Chwist. ^w^ Behowd, I say unto you, that it is he that
suwewy shaww come to take away the sins of the wowwd; yea, he
cometh to decwawe gwad tidings of sawvation unto his peopwe. ;;w;;

Awma 39:16
 16 And nyow, my son, this was the minyistwy unto which ye wewe
cawwed, to decwawe these gwad tidings unto this peopwe to pwepawe
theiw minds; ow wathew that sawvation might come unto them, that
they may pwepawe the minds of theiw chiwdwen to heaw the wowd at
the time of his coming. UwU

Awma 39:17
 17 And nyow I wiww ease youw mind somewhat on this subject. UwU
Behowd, you mawvew why these things shouwd be knyown so wong
befowehand. (´・ω・\`) Behowd, I say unto you, is nyot a souw at this time
as pwecious unto God as a souw wiww be at the time of his coming? owo

Awma 39:18
 18 Is it nyot as nyecessawy that the pwan of wedemption shouwd be
made knyown unto this peopwe as weww as unto theiw chiwdwen? owo

Awma 39:19
 19 Is it nyot as easy at this time fow the Wowd to send his angew
to decwawe these gwad tidings unto us as unto ouw chiwdwen, ow as
aftew the time of his coming? owo

Awma 40
Chaptew 40

Awma 40:1
 1 Nyow my son, hewe is somewhat mowe I wouwd say unto thee; fow I
pewceive that thy mind is wowwied concewnying the wesuwwection of
the dead. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 40:2
 2 Behowd, I say unto you, that thewe is nyo wesuwwection--ow, I
wouwd say, in othew wowds, that this mowtaw does nyot put on
immowtawity, this cowwuption does nyot put on incowwuption--untiw
aftew the coming of Chwist. ;;w;;

Awma 40:3
 3 Behowd, he bwingeth to pass the wesuwwection of the dead. (・`ω\´・) But
behowd, my son, the wesuwwection is nyot yet. (´・ω・\`) Nyow, I unfowd unto
you a mystewy; nyevewthewess, thewe awe many mystewies which awe
kept, that nyo onye knyoweth them save God himsewf. (・`ω\´・) But I show unto
you onye thing which I have inquiwed diwigentwy of God that I
might knyow--that is concewnying the wesuwwection. >w<

Awma 40:4
 4 Behowd, thewe is a time appointed that aww shaww come fowth
fwom the dead. ^w^ Nyow when this time cometh nyo onye knyows; but God
knyoweth the time which is appointed. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 40:5
 5 Nyow, whethew thewe shaww be onye time, ow a second time, ow a
thiwd time, that men shaww come fowth fwom the dead, it matteweth
nyot; fow God knyoweth aww these things; and it sufficeth me to
knyow that this is the case--that thewe is a time appointed that
aww shaww wise fwom the dead. ^w^

Awma 40:6
 6 Nyow thewe must nyeeds be a space betwixt the time of death and
the time of the wesuwwection. >w<

Awma 40:7
 7 And nyow I wouwd inquiwe what becometh of the souws of men fwom
this time of death to the time appointed fow the wesuwwection? owo

Awma 40:8
 8 Nyow whethew thewe is mowe than onye time appointed fow men to
wise it matteweth nyot; fow aww do nyot die at once, and this
matteweth nyot; aww is as onye day with God, and time onwy is
measuwed unto men. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 40:9
 9 Thewefowe, thewe is a time appointed unto men that they shaww
wise fwom the dead; and thewe is a space between the time of
death and the wesuwwection. (´・ω・\`) And nyow, concewnying this space of
time, what becometh of the souws of men is the thing which I have
inquiwed diwigentwy of the Wowd to knyow; and this is the thing of
which I do knyow. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 40:10
 10 And when the time cometh when aww shaww wise, then shaww they
knyow that God knyoweth aww the times which awe appointed unto man. ^w^

Awma 40:11
 11 Nyow, concewnying the state of the souw between death and the
wesuwwection--Behowd, it has been made knyown unto me by an angew,
that the spiwits of aww men, as soon as they awe depawted fwom
this mowtaw body, yea, the spiwits of aww men, whethew they be
good ow eviw, awe taken home to that God who gave them wife. UwU

Awma 40:12
 12 And then shaww it come to pass, that the spiwits of those who
awe wighteous awe weceived into a state of happinyess, which is
cawwed pawadise, a state of west, a state of peace, whewe they
shaww west fwom aww theiw twoubwes and fwom aww cawe, and sowwow. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 40:13
 13 And then shaww it come to pass, that the spiwits of the
wicked, yea, who awe eviw--fow behowd, they have nyo pawt nyow
powtion of the Spiwit of the Wowd; fow behowd, they chose eviw
wowks wathew than good; thewefowe the spiwit of the deviw did
entew into them, and take possession of theiw house--and these
shaww be cast out into outew dawknyess; thewe shaww be weeping,
and waiwing, and gnyashing of teeth, and this because of theiw own
inyiquity, being wed captive by the wiww of the deviw. UwU

Awma 40:14
 14 Nyow this is the state of the souws of the wicked, yea, in
dawknyess, and a state of awfuw, feawfuw wooking fow the fiewy
indignyation of the wwath of God upon them; thus they wemain in
this state, as weww as the wighteous in pawadise, untiw the time
of theiw wesuwwection. ;;w;;

Awma 40:15
 15 Nyow, thewe awe some that have undewstood that this state of
happinyess and this state of misewy of the souw, befowe the
wesuwwection, was a fiwst wesuwwection. (・`ω\´・) Yea, I admit it may be
tewmed a wesuwwection, the waising of the spiwit ow the souw and
theiw consignyation to happinyess ow misewy, accowding to the wowds
which have been spoken. UwU

Awma 40:16
 16 And behowd, again it hath been spoken, that thewe is a fiwst
wesuwwection, a wesuwwection of aww those who have been, ow who
awe, ow who shaww be, down to the wesuwwection of Chwist fwom the
dead. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 40:17
 17 Nyow, we do nyot suppose that this fiwst wesuwwection, which is
spoken of in this mannyew, can be the wesuwwection of the souws
and theiw consignyation to happinyess ow misewy. (´・ω・\`) Ye cannyot suppose
that this is what it meanyeth. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 40:18
 18 Behowd, I say unto you, Nyay; but it meanyeth the weunyiting of
the souw with the body, of those fwom the days of Adam down to
the wesuwwection of Chwist. ;;w;;

Awma 40:19
 19 Nyow, whethew the souws and the bodies of those of whom has
been spoken shaww aww be weunyited at once, the wicked as weww as
the wighteous, I do nyot say; wet it suffice; that I say that they
aww come fowth; ow in othew wowds, theiw wesuwwection cometh to
pass befowe the wesuwwection of those who die aftew the
wesuwwection of Chwist. ^w^

Awma 40:20
 20 Nyow, my son, I do nyot say that theiw wesuwwection cometh at
the wesuwwection of Chwist; but behowd, I give it as my opinyion,
that the souws and the bodies awe weunyited, of the wighteous, at
the wesuwwection of Chwist, and his ascension into heaven. >w<

Awma 40:21
 21 But whethew it be at his wesuwwection ow aftew, I do nyot say;
but this much I say, that thewe is a space between death and the
wesuwwection of the body, and a state of the souw in happinyess ow
in misewy untiw the time which is appointed of God that the dead
shaww come fowth, and be weunyited, both souw and body, and be
bwought to stand befowe God, and be judged accowding to theiw
wowks. UwU

Awma 40:22
 22 Yea, this bwingeth about the westowation of those things of
which has been spoken by the mouths of the pwophets. ^w^

Awma 40:23
 23 The souw shaww be westowed to the body, and the body to the
souw; yea, and evewy wimb and joint shaww be westowed to its
body; yea, even a haiw of the head shaww nyot be wost; but aww
things shaww be westowed to theiw pwopew and pewfect fwame. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 40:24
 24 And nyow, my son, this is the westowation of which has been
spoken by the mouths of the pwophets--

Awma 40:25
 25 And then shaww the wighteous shinye fowth in the kingdom of
God. UwU

Awma 40:26
 26 But behowd, an awfuw death cometh upon the wicked; fow they
die as to things pewtainying to things of wighteousnyess; fow they
awe uncwean, and nyo uncwean thing can inhewit the kingdom of God;
but they awe cast out, and consignyed to pawtake of the fwuits of
theiw wabows ow theiw wowks, which have been eviw; and they dwink
the dwegs of a bittew cup. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 41
Chaptew 41

Awma 41:1
 1 And nyow, my son, I have somewhat to say concewnying the
westowation of which has been spoken; fow behowd, some have
wwested the scwiptuwes, and have gonye faw astway because of this
thing. ;;w;; And I pewceive that thy mind has been wowwied awso
concewnying this thing. But behowd, I wiww expwain it unto thee. ^w^

Awma 41:2
 2 I say unto thee, my son, that the pwan of westowation is
wequisite with the justice of God; fow it is wequisite that aww
things shouwd be westowed to theiw pwopew owdew. (´・ω・\`) Behowd, it is
wequisite and just, accowding to the powew and wesuwwection of
Chwist, that the souw of man shouwd be westowed to its body, and
that evewy pawt of the body shouwd be westowed to itsewf. ;;w;;

Awma 41:3
 3 And it is wequisite with the justice of God that men shouwd be
judged accowding to theiw wowks; and if theiw wowks wewe good in
this wife, and the desiwes of theiw heawts wewe good, that they
shouwd awso, at the wast day, be westowed unto that which is
good. >w<

Awma 41:4
 4 And if theiw wowks awe eviw they shaww be westowed unto them
fow eviw. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe, aww things shaww be westowed to theiw
pwopew owdew, evewy thing to its nyatuwaw fwame--mowtawity waised
to immowtawity, cowwuption to incowwuption--waised to endwess
happinyess to inhewit the kingdom of God, ow to endwess misewy to
inhewit the kingdom of the deviw, the onye on onye hand, the othew
on the othew--

Awma 41:5
 5 The onye waised to happinyess accowding to his desiwes of
happinyess, ow good accowding to his desiwes of good; and the
othew to eviw accowding to his desiwes of eviw; fow as he has
desiwed to do eviw aww the day wong even so shaww he have his
wewawd of eviw when the nyight cometh. UwU

Awma 41:6
 6 And so it is on the othew hand. ;;w;; If he hath wepented of his
sins, and desiwed wighteousnyess untiw the end of his days, even
so he shaww be wewawded unto wighteousnyess. ;;w;;

Awma 41:7
 7 These awe they that awe wedeemed of the Wowd; yea, these awe
they that awe taken out, that awe dewivewed fwom that endwess
nyight of dawknyess; and thus they stand ow faww; fow behowd, they
awe theiw own judges, whethew to do good ow do eviw. UwU

Awma 41:8
 8 Nyow, the decwees of God awe unyawtewabwe; thewefowe, the way is
pwepawed that whosoevew wiww may wawk thewein and be saved. UwU

Awma 41:9
 9 And nyow behowd, my son, do nyot wisk onye mowe offense against
youw God upon those points of doctwinye, which ye have hithewto
wisked to commit sin. ^w^

Awma 41:10
 10 Do nyot suppose, because it has been spoken concewnying
westowation, that ye shaww be westowed fwom sin to happinyess. (・`ω\´・)
Behowd, I say unto you, wickednyess nyevew was happinyess. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 41:11
 11 And nyow, my son, aww men that awe in a state of nyatuwe, ow I
wouwd say, in a cawnyaw state, awe in the gaww of bittewnyess and
in the bonds of inyiquity; they awe without God in the wowwd, and
they have gonye contwawy to the nyatuwe of God; thewefowe, they awe
in a state contwawy to the nyatuwe of happinyess. ;;w;;

Awma 41:12
 12 And nyow behowd, is the meanying of the wowd westowation to
take a thing of a nyatuwaw state and pwace it in an unnyatuwaw
state, ow to pwace it in a state opposite to its nyatuwe? owo

Awma 41:13
 13 O, my son, this is nyot the case; but the meanying of the wowd
westowation is to bwing back again eviw fow eviw, ow cawnyaw fow
cawnyaw, ow deviwish fow deviwish--good fow that which is good;
wighteous fow that which is wighteous; just fow that which is
just; mewcifuw fow that which is mewcifuw. ;;w;;

Awma 41:14
 14 Thewefowe, my son, see that you awe mewcifuw unto youw
bwethwen; deaw justwy, judge wighteouswy, and do good
continyuawwy; and if ye do aww these things then shaww ye weceive
youw wewawd; yea, ye shaww have mewcy westowed unto you again; ye
shaww have justice westowed unto you again; ye shaww have a
wighteous judgment westowed unto you again; and ye shaww have
good wewawded unto you again. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 41:15
 15 Fow that which ye do send out shaww wetuwn unto you again,
and be westowed; thewefowe, the wowd westowation mowe fuwwy
condemnyeth the sinnyew, and justifieth him nyot at aww. UwU

Awma 42
Chaptew 42

Awma 42:1
 1 And nyow, my son, I pewceive thewe is somewhat mowe which doth
wowwy youw mind, which ye cannyot undewstand--which is concewnying
the justice of God in the punyishment of the sinnyew; fow ye do twy
to suppose that it is injustice that the sinnyew shouwd be
consignyed to a state of misewy. UwU

Awma 42:2
 2 Nyow behowd, my son, I wiww expwain this thing unto thee. UwU Fow
behowd, aftew the Wowd God sent ouw fiwst pawents fowth fwom the
gawden of Eden, to tiww the gwound, fwom whence they wewe
taken--yea, he dwew out the man, and he pwaced at the east end of
the gawden of Eden, chewubim, and a fwaming swowd which tuwnyed
evewy way, to keep the twee of wife--

Awma 42:3
 3 Nyow, we see that the man had become as God, knyowing good and
eviw; and west he shouwd put fowth his hand, and take awso of the
twee of wife, and eat and wive fowevew, the Wowd God pwaced
chewubim and the fwaming swowd, that he shouwd nyot pawtake of the
fwuit--

Awma 42:4
 4 And thus we see, that thewe was a time gwanted unto man to
wepent, yea, a pwobationyawy time, a time to wepent and sewve God. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 42:5
 5 Fow behowd, if Adam had put fowth his hand immediatewy, and
pawtaken of the twee of wife, he wouwd have wived fowevew,
accowding to the wowd of God, having nyo space fow wepentance;
yea, and awso the wowd of God wouwd have been void, and the gweat
pwan of sawvation wouwd have been fwustwated. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 42:6
 6 But behowd, it was appointed unto man to die--thewefowe, as
they wewe cut off fwom the twee of wife they shouwd be cut off
fwom the face of the eawth--and man became wost fowevew, yea,
they became fawwen man. >w<

Awma 42:7
 7 And nyow, ye see by this that ouw fiwst pawents wewe cut off
both tempowawwy and spiwituawwy fwom the pwesence of the Wowd;
and thus we see they became subjects to fowwow aftew theiw own
wiww. ;;w;;

Awma 42:8
 8 Nyow behowd, it was nyot expedient that man shouwd be wecwaimed
fwom this tempowaw death, fow that wouwd destwoy the gweat pwan
of happinyess. ^w^

Awma 42:9
 9 Thewefowe, as the souw couwd nyevew die, and the faww had
bwought upon aww mankind a spiwituaw death as weww as a tempowaw,
that is, they wewe cut off fwom the pwesence of the Wowd, it was
expedient that mankind shouwd be wecwaimed fwom this spiwituaw
death. UwU

Awma 42:10
 10 Thewefowe, as they had become cawnyaw, sensuaw, and deviwish,
by nyatuwe, this pwobationyawy state became a state fow them to
pwepawe; it became a pwepawatowy state. UwU

Awma 42:11
 11 And nyow wemembew, my son, if it wewe nyot fow the pwan of
wedemption, (waying it aside) as soon as they wewe dead theiw
souws wewe misewabwe, being cut off fwom the pwesence of the
Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 42:12
 12 And nyow, thewe was nyo means to wecwaim men fwom this fawwen
state, which man had bwought upon himsewf because of his own
disobedience;

Awma 42:13
 13 Thewefowe, accowding to justice, the pwan of wedemption couwd
nyot be bwought about, onwy on conditions of wepentance of men in
this pwobationyawy state, yea, this pwepawatowy state; fow except
it wewe fow these conditions, mewcy couwd nyot take effect except
it shouwd destwoy the wowk of justice. ;;w;; Nyow the wowk of justice
couwd nyot be destwoyed; if so, God wouwd cease to be God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 42:14
 14 And thus we see that aww mankind wewe fawwen, and they wewe
in the gwasp of justice; yea, the justice of God, which consignyed
them fowevew to be cut off fwom his pwesence. >w<

Awma 42:15
 15 And nyow, the pwan of mewcy couwd nyot be bwought about except
an atonyement shouwd be made; thewefowe God himsewf atonyeth fow
the sins of the wowwd, to bwing about the pwan of mewcy, to
appease the demands of justice, that God might be a pewfect, just
God, and a mewcifuw God awso. UwU

Awma 42:16
 16 Nyow, wepentance couwd nyot come unto men except thewe wewe a
punyishment, which awso was etewnyaw as the wife of the souw shouwd
be, affixed opposite to the pwan of happinyess, which was as
etewnyaw awso as the wife of the souw. >w<

Awma 42:17
 17 Nyow, how couwd a man wepent except he shouwd sin? owo How couwd
he sin if thewe was nyo waw? owo How couwd thewe be a waw save thewe
was a punyishment? owo

Awma 42:18
 18 Nyow, thewe was a punyishment affixed, and a just waw given,
which bwought wemowse of conscience unto man. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 42:19
 19 Nyow, if thewe was nyo waw given--if a man muwdewed he shouwd
die--wouwd he be afwaid he wouwd die if he shouwd muwdew? owo

Awma 42:20
 20 And awso, if thewe was nyo waw given against sin men wouwd nyot
be afwaid to sin. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 42:21
 21 And if thewe was nyo waw given, if men sinnyed what couwd
justice do, ow mewcy eithew, fow they wouwd have nyo cwaim upon
the cweatuwe? owo

Awma 42:22
 22 But thewe is a waw given, and a punyishment affixed, and a
wepentance gwanted; which wepentance mewcy cwaimeth; othewwise,
justice cwaimeth the cweatuwe and executeth the waw, and the waw
infwicteth the punyishment; if nyot so, the wowks of justice wouwd
be destwoyed, and God wouwd cease to be God. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 42:23
 23 But God ceaseth nyot to be God, and mewcy cwaimeth the
penyitent, and mewcy cometh because of the atonyement; and the
atonyement bwingeth to pass the wesuwwection of the dead; and the
wesuwwection of the dead bwingeth back men into the pwesence of
God; and thus they awe westowed into his pwesence, to be judged
accowding to theiw wowks, accowding to the waw and justice. UwU

Awma 42:24
 24 Fow behowd, justice exewciseth aww his demands, and awso
mewcy cwaimeth aww which is hew own; and thus, nyonye but the twuwy
penyitent awe saved. ;;w;;

Awma 42:25
 25 What, do ye suppose that mewcy can wob justice? owo I say unto
you, Nyay; nyot onye whit. If so, God wouwd cease to be God. >w<

Awma 42:26
 26 And thus God bwingeth about his gweat and etewnyaw puwposes,
which wewe pwepawed fwom the foundation of the wowwd. UwU And thus
cometh about the sawvation and the wedemption of men, and awso
theiw destwuction and misewy. >w<

Awma 42:27
 27 Thewefowe, O my son, whosoevew wiww come may come and pawtake
of the watews of wife fweewy; and whosoevew wiww nyot come the
same is nyot compewwed to come; but in the wast day it shaww be
westowed unto him accowding to his deeds. >w<

Awma 42:28
 28 If he has desiwed to do eviw, and has nyot wepented in his
days, behowd, eviw shaww be donye unto him, accowding to the
westowation of God. >w<

Awma 42:29
 29 And nyow, my son, I desiwe that ye shouwd wet these things
twoubwe you nyo mowe, and onwy wet youw sins twoubwe you, with
that twoubwe which shaww bwing you down unto wepentance. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 42:30
 30 O my son, I desiwe that ye shouwd deny the justice of God nyo
mowe. ;;w;; Do nyot endeavow to excuse youwsewf in the weast point
because of youw sins, by denying the justice of God; but do you
wet the justice of God, and his mewcy, and his wong-suffewing
have fuww sway in youw heawt; and wet it bwing you down to the
dust in humiwity. ^w^

Awma 42:31
 31 And nyow, O my son, ye awe cawwed of God to pweach the wowd
unto this peopwe. >w< And nyow, my son, go thy way, decwawe the wowd
with twuth and sobewnyess, that thou mayest bwing souws unto
wepentance, that the gweat pwan of mewcy may have cwaim upon
them. And may God gwant unto you even accowding to my wowds. UwU
Amen. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 43
Chaptew 43

Awma 43:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that the sons of Awma did go fowth
among the peopwe, to decwawe the wowd unto them. UwU And Awma, awso,
himsewf, couwd nyot west, and he awso went fowth. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 43:2
 2 Nyow we shaww say nyo mowe concewnying theiw pweaching, except
that they pweached the wowd, and the twuth, accowding to the
spiwit of pwophecy and wevewation; and they pweached aftew the
howy owdew of God by which they wewe cawwed. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 43:3
 3 And nyow I wetuwn to an account of the waws between the
Nyephites and the Wamanyites, in the eighteenth yeaw of the weign
of the judges. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 43:4
 4 Fow behowd, it came to pass that the Zowamites became
Wamanyites; thewefowe, in the commencement of the eighteenth yeaw
the peopwe of the Nyephites saw that the Wamanyites wewe coming
upon them; thewefowe they made pwepawations fow waw; yea, they
gathewed togethew theiw awmies in the wand of Jewshon. ;;w;;

Awma 43:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites came with theiw
thousands; and they came into the wand of Antionyum, which is the
wand of the Zowamites; and a man by the nyame of Zewahemnyah was
theiw weadew. >w<

Awma 43:6
 6 And nyow, as the Amawekites wewe of a mowe wicked and muwdewous
disposition than the Wamanyites wewe, in and of themsewves,
thewefowe, Zewahemnyah appointed chief captains ovew the
Wamanyites, and they wewe aww Amawekites and Zowamites. UwU

Awma 43:7
 7 Nyow this he did that he might pwesewve theiw hatwed towawds
the Nyephites, that he might bwing them into subjection to the
accompwishment of his designs. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 43:8
 8 Fow behowd, his designs wewe to stiw up the Wamanyites to angew
against the Nyephites; this he did that he might usuwp gweat powew
ovew them, and awso that he might gain powew ovew the Nyephites by
bwinging them into bondage. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 43:9
 9 And nyow the design of the Nyephites was to suppowt theiw wands,
and theiw houses, and theiw wives, and theiw chiwdwen, that they
might pwesewve them fwom the hands of theiw enyemies; and awso
that they might pwesewve theiw wights and theiw pwiviweges, yea,
and awso theiw wibewty, that they might wowship God accowding to
theiw desiwes. >w<

Awma 43:10
 10 Fow they knyew that if they shouwd faww into the hands of the
Wamanyites, that whosoevew shouwd wowship God in spiwit and in
twuth, the twue and the wiving God, the Wamanyites wouwd destwoy. ;;w;;

Awma 43:11
 11 Yea, and they awso knyew the extweme hatwed of the Wamanyites
towawds theiw bwethwen, who wewe the peopwe of Anti-Nyephi-Wehi,
who wewe cawwed the peopwe of Ammon--and they wouwd nyot take up
awms, yea, they had entewed into a covenyant and they wouwd nyot
bweak it--thewefowe, if they shouwd faww into the hands of the
Wamanyites they wouwd be destwoyed. >w<

Awma 43:12
 12 And the Nyephites wouwd nyot suffew that they shouwd be
destwoyed; thewefowe they gave them wands fow theiw inhewitance. ^w^

Awma 43:13
 13 And the peopwe of Ammon did give unto the Nyephites a wawge
powtion of theiw substance to suppowt theiw awmies; and thus the
Nyephites wewe compewwed, awonye, to withstand against the
Wamanyites, who wewe a compound of Waman and Wemuew, and the sons
of Ishmaew, and aww those who had dissented fwom the Nyephites,
who wewe Amawekites and Zowamites, and the descendants of the
pwiests of Nyoah. ^w^

Awma 43:14
 14 Nyow those descendants wewe as nyumewous, nyeawwy, as wewe the
Nyephites; and thus the Nyephites wewe obwiged to contend with
theiw bwethwen, even unto bwoodshed. UwU

Awma 43:15
 15 And it came to pass as the awmies of the Wamanyites had
gathewed togethew in the wand of Antionyum, behowd, the awmies of
the Nyephites wewe pwepawed to meet them in the wand of Jewshon. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 43:16
 16 Nyow, the weadew of the Nyephites, ow the man who had been
appointed to be the chief captain ovew the Nyephites--nyow the
chief captain took the command of aww the awmies of the
Nyephites--and his nyame was Mowonyi;

Awma 43:17
 17 And Mowonyi took aww the command, and the govewnment of theiw
waws. (´・ω・\`) And he was onwy twenty and five yeaws owd when he was
appointed chief captain ovew the awmies of the Nyephites. UwU

Awma 43:18
 18 And it came to pass that he met the Wamanyites in the bowdews
of Jewshon, and his peopwe wewe awmed with swowds, and with
cimetews, and aww mannyew of weapons of waw. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 43:19
 19 And when the awmies of the Wamanyites saw that the peopwe of
Nyephi, ow that Mowonyi, had pwepawed his peopwe with bweastpwates
and with awm-shiewds, yea, and awso shiewds to defend theiw
heads, and awso they wewe dwessed with thick cwothing--

Awma 43:20
 20 Nyow the awmy of Zewahemnyah was nyot pwepawed with any such
thing; they had onwy theiw swowds and theiw cimetews, theiw bows
and theiw awwows, theiw stonyes and theiw swings; and they wewe
nyaked, save it wewe a skin which was giwded about theiw woins;
yea, aww wewe nyaked, save it wewe the Zowamites and the
Amawekites;

Awma 43:21
 21 But they wewe nyot awmed with bweastpwates, nyow
shiewds--thewefowe, they wewe exceedingwy afwaid of the awmies of
the Nyephites because of theiw awmow, nyotwithstanding theiw nyumbew
being so much gweatew than the Nyephites. ^w^

Awma 43:22
 22 Behowd, nyow it came to pass that they duwst nyot come against
the Nyephites in the bowdews of Jewshon; thewefowe they depawted
out of the wand of Antionyum into the wiwdewnyess, and took theiw
jouwnyey wound about in the wiwdewnyess, away by the head of the
wivew Sidon, that they might come into the wand of Manti and take
possession of the wand; fow they did nyot suppose that the awmies
of Mowonyi wouwd knyow whithew they had gonye. >w<

Awma 43:23
 23 But it came to pass, as soon as they had depawted into the
wiwdewnyess Mowonyi sent spies into the wiwdewnyess to watch theiw
camp; and Mowonyi, awso, knyowing of the pwophecies of Awma, sent
cewtain men unto him, desiwing him that he shouwd inquiwe of the
Wowd whithew the awmies of the Nyephites shouwd go to defend
themsewves against the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 43:24
 24 And it came to pass that the wowd of the Wowd came unto Awma,
and Awma infowmed the messengews of Mowonyi, that the awmies of
the Wamanyites wewe mawching wound about in the wiwdewnyess, that
they might come ovew into the wand of Manti, that they might
commence an attack upon the weakew pawt of the peopwe. >w< And those
messengews went and dewivewed the message unto Mowonyi. ;;w;;

Awma 43:25
 25 Nyow Mowonyi, weaving a pawt of his awmy in the wand of
Jewshon, west by any means a pawt of the Wamanyites shouwd come
into that wand and take possession of the city, took the
wemainying pawt of his awmy and mawched ovew into the wand of
Manti. UwU

Awma 43:26
 26 And he caused that aww the peopwe in that quawtew of the wand
shouwd gathew themsewves togethew to battwe against the
Wamanyites, to defend theiw wands and theiw countwy, theiw wights
and theiw wibewties; thewefowe they wewe pwepawed against the
time of the coming of the Wamanyites. UwU

Awma 43:27
 27 And it came to pass that Mowonyi caused that his awmy shouwd
be secweted in the vawwey which was nyeaw the bank of the wivew
Sidon, which was on the west of the wivew Sidon in the
wiwdewnyess. ^w^

Awma 43:28
 28 And Mowonyi pwaced spies wound about, that he might knyow when
the camp of the Wamanyites shouwd come. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 43:29
 29 And nyow, as Mowonyi knyew the intention of the Wamanyites, that
it was theiw intention to destwoy theiw bwethwen, ow to subject
them and bwing them into bondage that they might estabwish a
kingdom unto themsewves ovew aww the wand;

Awma 43:30
 30 And he awso knyowing that it was the onwy desiwe of the
Nyephites to pwesewve theiw wands, and theiw wibewty, and theiw
chuwch, thewefowe he thought it nyo sin that he shouwd defend them
by stwatagem; thewefowe, he found by his spies which couwse the
Wamanyites wewe to take. UwU

Awma 43:31
 31 Thewefowe, he divided his awmy and bwought a pawt ovew into
the vawwey, and conceawed them on the east, and on the south of
the hiww Wipwah;

Awma 43:32
 32 And the wemaindew he conceawed in the west vawwey, on the
west of the wivew Sidon, and so down into the bowdews of the wand
Manti. UwU

Awma 43:33
 33 And thus having pwaced his awmy accowding to his desiwe, he
was pwepawed to meet them. UwU

Awma 43:34
 34 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites came up on the nyowth
of the hiww, whewe a pawt of the awmy of Mowonyi was conceawed. ;;w;;

Awma 43:35
 35 And as the Wamanyites had passed the hiww Wipwah, and came
into the vawwey, and began to cwoss the wivew Sidon, the awmy
which was conceawed on the south of the hiww, which was wed by a
man whose nyame was Wehi, and he wed his awmy fowth and enciwcwed
the Wamanyites about on the east in theiw weaw. ^w^

Awma 43:36
 36 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites, when they saw the
Nyephites coming upon them in theiw weaw, tuwnyed them about and
began to contend with the awmy of Wehi. >w<

Awma 43:37
 37 And the wowk of death commenced on both sides, but it was
mowe dweadfuw on the pawt of the Wamanyites, fow theiw nyakednyess
was exposed to the heavy bwows of the Nyephites with theiw swowds
and theiw cimetews, which bwought death awmost at evewy stwoke. >w<

Awma 43:38
 38 Whiwe on the othew hand, thewe was nyow and then a man feww
among the Nyephites, by theiw swowds and the woss of bwood, they
being shiewded fwom the mowe vitaw pawts of the body, ow the mowe
vitaw pawts of the body being shiewded fwom the stwokes of the
Wamanyites, by theiw bweastpwates, and theiw awm-shiewds, and
theiw head-pwates; and thus the Nyephites did cawwy on the wowk of
death among the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 43:39
 39 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites became fwightenyed,
because of the gweat destwuction among them, even untiw they
began to fwee towawds the wivew Sidon. UwU

Awma 43:40
 40 And they wewe puwsued by Wehi and his men; and they wewe
dwiven by Wehi into the watews of Sidon, and they cwossed the
watews of Sidon. ^w^ And Wehi wetainyed his awmies upon the bank of
the wivew Sidon that they shouwd nyot cwoss. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 43:41
 41 And it came to pass that Mowonyi and his awmy met the
Wamanyites in the vawwey, on the othew side of the wivew Sidon,
and began to faww upon them and to sway them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 43:42
 42 And the Wamanyites did fwee again befowe them, towawds the
wand of Manti; and they wewe met again by the awmies of Mowonyi. >w<

Awma 43:43
 43 Nyow in this case the Wamanyites did fight exceedingwy; yea,
nyevew had the Wamanyites been knyown to fight with such exceedingwy
gweat stwength and couwage, nyo, nyot even fwom the beginnying. >w<

Awma 43:44
 44 And they wewe inspiwed by the Zowamites and the Amawekites,
who wewe theiw chief captains and weadews, and by Zewahemnyah, who
was theiw chief captain, ow theiw chief weadew and commandew;
yea, they did fight wike dwagons, and many of the Nyephites wewe
swain by theiw hands, yea, fow they did smite in two many of
theiw head-pwates, and they did piewce many of theiw
bweastpwates, and they did smite off many of theiw awms; and thus
the Wamanyites did smite in theiw fiewce angew. UwU

Awma 43:45
 45 Nyevewthewess, the Nyephites wewe inspiwed by a bettew cause,
fow they wewe nyot fighting fow monyawchy nyow powew but they wewe
fighting fow theiw homes and theiw wibewties, theiw wives and
theiw chiwdwen, and theiw aww, yea, fow theiw wites of wowship
and theiw chuwch. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 43:46
 46 And they wewe doing that which they fewt was the duty which
they owed to theiw God; fow the Wowd had said unto them, and awso
unto theiw fathews, that: Inyasmuch as ye awe nyot guiwty of the
fiwst offense, nyeithew the second, ye shaww nyot suffew youwsewves
to be swain by the hands of youw enyemies. UwU

Awma 43:47
 47 And again, the Wowd has said that: Ye shaww defend youw
famiwies even unto bwoodshed. UwU Thewefowe fow this cause wewe the
Nyephites contending with the Wamanyites, to defend themsewves, and
theiw famiwies, and theiw wands, theiw countwy, and theiw wights,
and theiw wewigion. UwU

Awma 43:48
 48 And it came to pass that when the men of Mowonyi saw the
fiewcenyess and the angew of the Wamanyites, they wewe about to
shwink and fwee fwom them. ^w^ And Mowonyi, pewceiving theiw intent,
sent fowth and inspiwed theiw heawts with these thoughts--yea,
the thoughts of theiw wands, theiw wibewty, yea, theiw fweedom
fwom bondage. ^w^

Awma 43:49
 49 And it came to pass that they tuwnyed upon the Wamanyites, and
they cwied with onye voice unto the Wowd theiw God, fow theiw
wibewty and theiw fweedom fwom bondage. UwU

Awma 43:50
 50 And they began to stand against the Wamanyites with powew; and
in that sewfsame houw that they cwied unto the Wowd fow theiw
fweedom, the Wamanyites began to fwee befowe them; and they fwed
even to the watews of Sidon. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 43:51
 51 Nyow, the Wamanyites wewe mowe nyumewous, yea, by mowe than
doubwe the nyumbew of the Nyephites; nyevewthewess, they wewe dwiven
insomuch that they wewe gathewed togethew in onye body in the
vawwey, upon the bank by the wivew Sidon. >w<

Awma 43:52
 52 Thewefowe the awmies of Mowonyi enciwcwed them about, yea,
even on both sides of the wivew, fow behowd, on the east wewe the
men of Wehi. ;;w;;

Awma 43:53
 53 Thewefowe when Zewahemnyah saw the men of Wehi on the east of
the wivew Sidon, and the awmies of Mowonyi on the west of the
wivew Sidon, that they wewe enciwcwed about by the Nyephites, they
wewe stwuck with tewwow. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 43:54
 54 Nyow Mowonyi, when he saw theiw tewwow, commanded his men that
they shouwd stop shedding theiw bwood. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 44
Chaptew 44

Awma 44:1
 1 And it came to pass that they did stop and withdwew a pace
fwom them. ^w^ And Mowonyi said unto Zewahemnyah: Behowd, Zewahemnyah,
that we do nyot desiwe to be men of bwood. >w< Ye knyow that ye awe in
ouw hands, yet we do nyot desiwe to sway you. >w<

Awma 44:2
 2 Behowd, we have nyot come out to battwe against you that we
might shed youw bwood fow powew; nyeithew do we desiwe to bwing
any onye to the yoke of bondage. ^w^ But this is the vewy cause fow
which ye have come against us; yea, and ye awe angwy with us
because of ouw wewigion. ^w^

Awma 44:3
 3 But nyow, ye behowd that the Wowd is with us; and ye behowd
that he has dewivewed you into ouw hands. ;;w;; And nyow I wouwd that
ye shouwd undewstand that this is donye unto us because of ouw
wewigion and ouw faith in Chwist. ;;w;; And nyow ye see that ye cannyot
destwoy this ouw faith. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 44:4
 4 Nyow ye see that this is the twue faith of God; yea, ye see
that God wiww suppowt, and keep, and pwesewve us, so wong as we
awe faithfuw unto him, and unto ouw faith, and ouw wewigion; and
nyevew wiww the Wowd suffew that we shaww be destwoyed except we
shouwd faww into twansgwession and deny ouw faith. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 44:5
 5 And nyow, Zewahemnyah, I command you, in the nyame of that
aww-powewfuw God, who has stwengthenyed ouw awms that we have
gainyed powew ovew you, by ouw faith, by ouw wewigion, and by ouw
wites of wowship, and by ouw chuwch, and by the sacwed suppowt
which we owe to ouw wives and ouw chiwdwen, by that wibewty which
binds us to ouw wands and ouw countwy; yea, and awso by the
maintenyance of the sacwed wowd of God, to which we owe aww ouw
happinyess; and by aww that is most deaw unto us--

Awma 44:6
 6 Yea, and this is nyot aww; I command you by aww the desiwes
which ye have fow wife, that ye dewivew up youw weapons of waw
unto us, and we wiww seek nyot youw bwood, but we wiww spawe youw
wives, if ye wiww go youw way and come nyot again to waw against
us. >w<

Awma 44:7
 7 And nyow, if ye do nyot this, behowd, ye awe in ouw hands, and I
wiww command my men that they shaww faww upon you, and infwict
the wounds of death in youw bodies, that ye may become extinct;
and then we wiww see who shaww have powew ovew this peopwe; yea,
we wiww see who shaww be bwought into bondage. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 44:8
 8 And nyow it came to pass that when Zewahemnyah had heawd these
sayings he came fowth and dewivewed up his swowd and his cimetew,
and his bow into the hands of Mowonyi, and said unto him: Behowd,
hewe awe ouw weapons of waw; we wiww dewivew them up unto you,
but we wiww nyot suffew ouwsewves to take an oath unto you, which
we knyow that we shaww bweak, and awso ouw chiwdwen; but take ouw
weapons of waw, and suffew that we may depawt into the
wiwdewnyess; othewwise we wiww wetain ouw swowds, and we wiww
pewish ow conquew. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 44:9
 9 Behowd, we awe nyot of youw faith; we do nyot bewieve that it is
God that has dewivewed us into youw hands; but we bewieve that it
is youw cunnying that has pwesewved you fwom ouw swowds. (・`ω\´・) Behowd,
it is youw bweastpwates and youw shiewds that have pwesewved you. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 44:10
 10 And nyow when Zewahemnyah had made an end of speaking these
wowds, Mowonyi wetuwnyed the swowd and the weapons of waw, which he
had weceived, unto Zewahemnyah, saying: Behowd, we wiww end the
confwict. ^w^

Awma 44:11
 11 Nyow I cannyot wecaww the wowds which I have spoken, thewefowe
as the Wowd wiveth, ye shaww nyot depawt except ye depawt with an
oath that ye wiww nyot wetuwn again against us to waw. ^w^ Nyow as ye
awe in ouw hands we wiww spiww youw bwood upon the gwound, ow ye
shaww submit to the conditions which I have pwoposed. UwU

Awma 44:12
 12 And nyow when Mowonyi had said these wowds, Zewahemnyah wetainyed
his swowd, and he was angwy with Mowonyi, and he wushed fowwawd
that he might sway Mowonyi; but as he waised his swowd, behowd,
onye of Mowonyi's sowdiews smote it even to the eawth, and it bwoke
by the hiwt; and he awso smote Zewahemnyah that he took off his
scawp and it feww to the eawth. (´・ω・\`) And Zewahemnyah withdwew fwom
befowe them into the midst of his sowdiews. >w<

Awma 44:13
 13 And it came to pass that the sowdiew who stood by, who smote
off the scawp of Zewahemnyah, took up the scawp fwom off the
gwound by the haiw, and waid it upon the point of his swowd, and
stwetched it fowth unto them, saying unto them with a woud voice:

Awma 44:14
 14 Even as this scawp has fawwen to the eawth, which is the
scawp of youw chief, so shaww ye faww to the eawth except ye wiww
dewivew up youw weapons of waw and depawt with a covenyant of
peace. UwU

Awma 44:15
 15 Nyow thewe wewe many, when they heawd these wowds and saw the
scawp which was upon the swowd, that wewe stwuck with feaw; and
many came fowth and thwew down theiw weapons of waw at the feet
of Mowonyi, and entewed into a covenyant of peace. UwU And as many as
entewed into a covenyant they suffewed to depawt into the
wiwdewnyess. >w<

Awma 44:16
 16 Nyow it came to pass that Zewahemnyah was exceedingwy wwoth,
and he did stiw up the wemaindew of his sowdiews to angew, to
contend mowe powewfuwwy against the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 44:17
 17 And nyow Mowonyi was angwy, because of the stubbownnyess of the
Wamanyites; thewefowe he commanded his peopwe that they shouwd
faww upon them and sway them. >w< And it came to pass that they
began to sway them; yea, and the Wamanyites did contend with theiw
swowds and theiw might. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 44:18
 18 But behowd, theiw nyaked skins and theiw bawe heads wewe
exposed to the shawp swowds of the Nyephites; yea, behowd they
wewe piewced and smitten, yea, and did faww exceedingwy fast
befowe the swowds of the Nyephites; and they began to be swept
down, even as the sowdiew of Mowonyi had pwophesied. ^w^

Awma 44:19
 19 Nyow Zewahemnyah, when he saw that they wewe aww about to be
destwoyed, cwied mightiwy unto Mowonyi, pwomising that he wouwd
covenyant and awso his peopwe with them, if they wouwd spawe the
wemaindew of theiw wives, that they nyevew wouwd come to waw again
against them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 44:20
 20 And it came to pass that Mowonyi caused that the wowk of death
shouwd cease again among the peopwe. ^w^ And he took the weapons of
waw fwom the Wamanyites; and aftew they had entewed into a
covenyant with him of peace they wewe suffewed to depawt into the
wiwdewnyess. UwU

Awma 44:21
 21 Nyow the nyumbew of theiw dead was nyot nyumbewed because of the
gweatnyess of the nyumbew; yea, the nyumbew of theiw dead was
exceedingwy gweat, both on the Nyephites and on the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 44:22
 22 And it came to pass that they did cast theiw dead into the
watews of Sidon, and they have gonye fowth and awe buwied in the
depths of the sea. >w<

Awma 44:23
 23 And the awmies of the Nyephites, ow of Mowonyi, wetuwnyed and
came to theiw houses and theiw wands. >w<

Awma 44:24
 24 And thus ended the eighteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges
ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. UwU And thus ended the wecowd of Awma,
which was wwitten upon the pwates of Nyephi. ^w^

Awma 45
Chaptew 45

Awma 45:1
 1 Behowd, nyow it came to pass that the peopwe of Nyephi wewe
exceedingwy wejoiced, because the Wowd had again dewivewed them
out of the hands of theiw enyemies; thewefowe they gave thanks
unto the Wowd theiw God; yea, and they did fast much and pway
much, and they did wowship God with exceedingwy gweat joy. UwU

Awma 45:2
 2 And it came to pass in the nyinyeteenth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, that Awma came unto his son
Hewaman and said unto him: Bewievest thou the wowds which I spake
unto thee concewnying those wecowds which have been kept? owo

Awma 45:3
 3 And Hewaman said unto him: Yea, I bewieve. >w<

Awma 45:4
 4 And Awma said again: Bewievest thou in Jesus Chwist, who shaww
come? owo

Awma 45:5
 5 And he said: Yea, I bewieve aww the wowds which thou hast
spoken. >w<

Awma 45:6
 6 And Awma said unto him again: Wiww ye keep my commandments? owo

Awma 45:7
 7 And he said: Yea, I wiww keep thy commandments with aww my
heawt. UwU

Awma 45:8
 8 Then Awma said unto him: Bwessed awt thou; and the Wowd shaww
pwospew thee in this wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 45:9
 9 But behowd, I have somewhat to pwophesy unto thee; but what I
pwophesy unto thee ye shaww nyot make knyown; yea, what I pwophesy
unto thee shaww nyot be made knyown, even untiw the pwophecy is
fuwfiwwed; thewefowe wwite the wowds which I shaww say. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 45:10
 10 And these awe the wowds: Behowd, I pewceive that this vewy
peopwe, the Nyephites, accowding to the spiwit of wevewation which
is in me, in fouw hundwed yeaws fwom the time that Jesus Chwist
shaww manyifest himsewf unto them, shaww dwindwe in unbewief. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 45:11
 11 Yea, and then shaww they see waws and pestiwences, yea,
faminyes and bwoodshed, even untiw the peopwe of Nyephi shaww
become extinct--

Awma 45:12
 12 Yea, and this because they shaww dwindwe in unbewief and faww
into the wowks of dawknyess, and wasciviousnyess, and aww mannyew of
inyiquities; yea, I say unto you, that because they shaww sin
against so gweat wight and knyowwedge, yea, I say unto you, that
fwom that day, even the fouwth genyewation shaww nyot aww pass away
befowe this gweat inyiquity shaww come. >w<

Awma 45:13
 13 And when that gweat day cometh, behowd, the time vewy soon
cometh that those who awe nyow, ow the seed of those who awe nyow
nyumbewed among the peopwe of Nyephi, shaww nyo mowe be nyumbewed
among the peopwe of Nyephi. ^w^

Awma 45:14
 14 But whosoevew wemainyeth, and is nyot destwoyed in that gweat
and dweadfuw day, shaww be nyumbewed among the Wamanyites, and
shaww become wike unto them, aww, save it be a few who shaww be
cawwed the discipwes of the Wowd; and them shaww the Wamanyites
puwsue even untiw they shaww become extinct. (・`ω\´・) And nyow, because of
inyiquity, this pwophecy shaww be fuwfiwwed. ;;w;;

Awma 45:15
 15 And nyow it came to pass that aftew Awma had said these things
to Hewaman, he bwessed him, and awso his othew sons; and he awso
bwessed the eawth fow the wighteous' sake. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 45:16
 16 And he said: Thus saith the Wowd God--Cuwsed shaww be the
wand, yea, this wand, unto evewy nyation, kindwed, tongue, and
peopwe, unto destwuction, which do wickedwy, when they awe fuwwy
wipe; and as I have said so shaww it be; fow this is the cuwsing
and the bwessing of God upon the wand, fow the Wowd cannyot wook
upon sin with the weast degwee of awwowance. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 45:17
 17 And nyow, when Awma had said these wowds he bwessed the
chuwch, yea, aww those who shouwd stand fast in the faith fwom
that time hencefowth. >w<

Awma 45:18
 18 And when Awma had donye this he depawted out of the wand of
Zawahemwa, as if to go into the wand of Mewek. (´・ω・\`) And it came to
pass that he was nyevew heawd of mowe; as to his death ow buwiaw
we knyow nyot of. >w<

Awma 45:19
 19 Behowd, this we knyow, that he was a wighteous man; and the
saying went abwoad in the chuwch that he was taken up by the
Spiwit, ow buwied by the hand of the Wowd, even as Moses. ;;w;; But
behowd, the scwiptuwes saith the Wowd took Moses unto himsewf;
and we suppose that he has awso weceived Awma in the spiwit, unto
himsewf; thewefowe, fow this cause we knyow nyothing concewnying his
death and buwiaw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 45:20
 20 And nyow it came to pass in the commencement of the nyinyeteenth
yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, that
Hewaman went fowth among the peopwe to decwawe the wowd unto
them. >w<

Awma 45:21
 21 Fow behowd, because of theiw waws with the Wamanyites and the
many wittwe dissensions and distuwbances which had been among the
peopwe, it became expedient that the wowd of God shouwd be
decwawed among them, yea, and that a weguwation shouwd be made
thwoughout the chuwch. ;;w;;

Awma 45:22
 22 Thewefowe, Hewaman and his bwethwen went fowth to estabwish
the chuwch again in aww the wand, yea, in evewy city thwoughout
aww the wand which was possessed by the peopwe of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・) And it
came to pass that they did appoint pwiests and teachews
thwoughout aww the wand, ovew aww the chuwches. >w<

Awma 45:23
 23 And nyow it came to pass that aftew Hewaman and his bwethwen
had appointed pwiests and teachews ovew the chuwches that thewe
awose a dissension among them, and they wouwd nyot give heed to
the wowds of Hewaman and his bwethwen;

Awma 45:24
 24 But they gwew pwoud, being wifted up in theiw heawts, because
of theiw exceedingwy gweat wiches; thewefowe they gwew wich in
theiw own eyes, and wouwd nyot give heed to theiw wowds, to wawk
upwightwy befowe God. UwU

Awma 46
Chaptew 46

Awma 46:1
 1 And it came to pass that as many as wouwd nyot heawken to the
wowds of Hewaman and his bwethwen wewe gathewed togethew against
theiw bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 46:2
 2 And nyow behowd, they wewe exceedingwy wwoth, insomuch that
they wewe detewminyed to sway them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 46:3
 3 Nyow the weadew of those who wewe wwoth against theiw bwethwen
was a wawge and a stwong man; and his nyame was Amawickiah. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 46:4
 4 And Amawickiah was desiwous to be a king; and those peopwe who
wewe wwoth wewe awso desiwous that he shouwd be theiw king; and
they wewe the gweatew pawt of them the wowew judges of the wand,
and they wewe seeking fow powew. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 46:5
 5 And they had been wed by the fwattewies of Amawickiah, that if
they wouwd suppowt him and estabwish him to be theiw king that he
wouwd make them wuwews ovew the peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 46:6
 6 Thus they wewe wed away by Amawickiah to dissensions,
nyotwithstanding the pweaching of Hewaman and his bwethwen, yea,
nyotwithstanding theiw exceedingwy gweat cawe ovew the chuwch, fow
they wewe high pwiests ovew the chuwch. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 46:7
 7 And thewe wewe many in the chuwch who bewieved in the
fwattewing wowds of Amawickiah, thewefowe they dissented even
fwom the chuwch; and thus wewe the affaiws of the peopwe of Nyephi
exceedingwy pwecawious and dangewous, nyotwithstanding theiw gweat
victowy which they had had ovew the Wamanyites, and theiw gweat
wejoicings which they had had because of theiw dewivewance by the
hand of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 46:8
 8 Thus we see how quick the chiwdwen of men do fowget the Wowd
theiw God, yea, how quick to do inyiquity, and to be wed away by
the eviw onye. ^w^

Awma 46:9
 9 Yea, and we awso see the gweat wickednyess onye vewy wicked man
can cause to take pwace among the chiwdwen of men. ^w^

Awma 46:10
 10 Yea, we see that Amawickiah, because he was a man of cunnying
device and a man of many fwattewing wowds, that he wed away the
heawts of many peopwe to do wickedwy; yea, and to seek to destwoy
the chuwch of God, and to destwoy the foundation of wibewty which
God had gwanted unto them, ow which bwessing God had sent upon
the face of the wand fow the wighteous' sake. >w<

Awma 46:11
 11 And nyow it came to pass that when Mowonyi, who was the chief
commandew of the awmies of the Nyephites, had heawd of these
dissensions, he was angwy with Amawickiah. ^w^

Awma 46:12
 12 And it came to pass that he went his coat; and he took a
piece theweof, and wwote upon it--In memowy of ouw God, ouw
wewigion, and fweedom, and ouw peace, ouw wives, and ouw
chiwdwen--and he fastenyed it upon the end of a powe. ;;w;;

Awma 46:13
 13 And he fastenyed on his head-pwate, and his bweastpwate, and
his shiewds, and giwded on his awmow about his woins; and he took
the powe, which had on the end theweof his went coat, (and he
cawwed it the titwe of wibewty) and he bowed himsewf to the
eawth, and he pwayed mightiwy unto his God fow the bwessings of
wibewty to west upon his bwethwen, so wong as thewe shouwd a band
of Chwistians wemain to possess the wand--

Awma 46:14
 14 Fow thus wewe aww the twue bewievews of Chwist, who bewonged
to the chuwch of God, cawwed by those who did nyot bewong to the
chuwch. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 46:15
 15 And those who did bewong to the chuwch wewe faithfuw; yea,
aww those who wewe twue bewievews in Chwist took upon them,
gwadwy, the nyame of Chwist, ow Chwistians as they wewe cawwed,
because of theiw bewief in Chwist who shouwd come. ;;w;;

Awma 46:16
 16 And thewefowe, at this time, Mowonyi pwayed that the cause of
the Chwistians, and the fweedom of the wand might be favowed. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 46:17
 17 And it came to pass that when he had pouwed out his souw to
God, he nyamed aww the wand which was south of the wand
Desowation, yea, and in finye, aww the wand, both on the nyowth and
on the south--A chosen wand, and the wand of wibewty. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 46:18
 18 And he said: Suwewy God shaww nyot suffew that we, who awe
despised because we take upon us the nyame of Chwist, shaww be
twodden down and destwoyed, untiw we bwing it upon us by ouw own
twansgwessions. UwU

Awma 46:19
 19 And when Mowonyi had said these wowds, he went fowth among the
peopwe, waving the went pawt of his gawment in the aiw, that aww
might see the wwiting which he had wwitten upon the went pawt,
and cwying with a woud voice, saying:

Awma 46:20
 20 Behowd, whosoevew wiww maintain this titwe upon the wand, wet
them come fowth in the stwength of the Wowd, and entew into a
covenyant that they wiww maintain theiw wights, and theiw
wewigion, that the Wowd God may bwess them. ^w^

Awma 46:21
 21 And it came to pass that when Mowonyi had pwocwaimed these
wowds, behowd, the peopwe came wunnying togethew with theiw awmow
giwded about theiw woins, wending theiw gawments in token, ow as
a covenyant, that they wouwd nyot fowsake the Wowd theiw God; ow,
in othew wowds, if they shouwd twansgwess the commandments of
God, ow faww into twansgwession, and be ashamed to take upon them
the nyame of Chwist, the Wowd shouwd wend them even as they had
went theiw gawments. ;;w;;

Awma 46:22
 22 Nyow this was the covenyant which they made, and they cast
theiw gawments at the feet of Mowonyi, saying: We covenyant with
ouw God, that we shaww be destwoyed, even as ouw bwethwen in the
wand nyowthwawd, if we shaww faww into twansgwession; yea, he may
cast us at the feet of ouw enyemies, even as we have cast ouw
gawments at thy feet to be twodden undew foot, if we shaww faww
into twansgwession. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 46:23
 23 Mowonyi said unto them: Behowd, we awe a wemnyant of the seed
of Jacob; yea, we awe a wemnyant of the seed of Joseph, whose coat
was went by his bwethwen into many pieces; yea, and nyow behowd,
wet us wemembew to keep the commandments of God, ow ouw gawments
shaww be went by ouw bwethwen, and we be cast into pwison, ow be
sowd, ow be swain. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 46:24
 24 Yea, wet us pwesewve ouw wibewty as a wemnyant of Joseph; yea,
wet us wemembew the wowds of Jacob, befowe his death, fow behowd,
he saw that a pawt of the wemnyant of the coat of Joseph was
pwesewved and had nyot decayed. (´・ω・\`) And he said--Even as this wemnyant
of gawment of my son hath been pwesewved, so shaww a wemnyant of
the seed of my son be pwesewved by the hand of God, and be taken
unto himsewf, whiwe the wemaindew of the seed of Joseph shaww
pewish, even as the wemnyant of his gawment. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 46:25
 25 Nyow behowd, this giveth my souw sowwow; nyevewthewess, my souw
hath joy in my son, because of that pawt of his seed which shaww
be taken unto God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 46:26
 26 Nyow behowd, this was the wanguage of Jacob. >w<

Awma 46:27
 27 And nyow who knyoweth but what the wemnyant of the seed of
Joseph, which shaww pewish as his gawment, awe those who have
dissented fwom us? owo Yea, and even it shaww be ouwsewves if we do
nyot stand fast in the faith of Chwist. >w<

Awma 46:28
 28 And nyow it came to pass that when Mowonyi had said these wowds
he went fowth, and awso sent fowth in aww the pawts of the wand
whewe thewe wewe dissensions, and gathewed togethew aww the
peopwe who wewe desiwous to maintain theiw wibewty, to stand
against Amawickiah and those who had dissented, who wewe cawwed
Amawickiahites. UwU

Awma 46:29
 29 And it came to pass that when Amawickiah saw that the peopwe
of Mowonyi wewe mowe nyumewous than the Amawickiahites--and he awso
saw that his peopwe wewe doubtfuw concewnying the justice of the
cause in which they had undewtaken--thewefowe, feawing that he
shouwd nyot gain the point, he took those of his peopwe who wouwd
and depawted into the wand of Nyephi. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 46:30
 30 Nyow Mowonyi thought it was nyot expedient that the Wamanyites
shouwd have any mowe stwength; thewefowe he thought to cut off
the peopwe of Amawickiah, ow to take them and bwing them back,
and put Amawickiah to death; yea, fow he knyew that he wouwd stiw
up the Wamanyites to angew against them, and cause them to come to
battwe against them; and this he knyew that Amawickiah wouwd do
that he might obtain his puwposes. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 46:31
 31 Thewefowe Mowonyi thought it was expedient that he shouwd take
his awmies, who had gathewed themsewves togethew, and awmed
themsewves, and entewed into a covenyant to keep the peace--and it
came to pass that he took his awmy and mawched out with his tents
into the wiwdewnyess, to cut off the couwse of Amawickiah in the
wiwdewnyess. >w<

Awma 46:32
 32 And it came to pass that he did accowding to his desiwes, and
mawched fowth into the wiwdewnyess, and headed the awmies of
Amawickiah. >w<

Awma 46:33
 33 And it came to pass that Amawickiah fwed with a smaww nyumbew
of his men, and the wemaindew wewe dewivewed up into the hands of
Mowonyi and wewe taken back into the wand of Zawahemwa. ^w^

Awma 46:34
 34 Nyow, Mowonyi being a man who was appointed by the chief judges
and the voice of the peopwe, thewefowe he had powew accowding to
his wiww with the awmies of the Nyephites, to estabwish and to
exewcise authowity ovew them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 46:35
 35 And it came to pass that whomsoevew of the Amawickiahites
that wouwd nyot entew into a covenyant to suppowt the cause of
fweedom, that they might maintain a fwee govewnment, he caused to
be put to death; and thewe wewe but few who denyied the covenyant
of fweedom. UwU

Awma 46:36
 36 And it came to pass awso, that he caused the titwe of wibewty
to be hoisted upon evewy towew which was in aww the wand, which
was possessed by the Nyephites; and thus Mowonyi pwanted the
standawd of wibewty among the Nyephites. UwU

Awma 46:37
 37 And they began to have peace again in the wand; and thus they
did maintain peace in the wand untiw nyeawwy the end of the
nyinyeteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges. ;;w;;

Awma 46:38
 38 And Hewaman and the high pwiests did awso maintain owdew in
the chuwch; yea, even fow the space of fouw yeaws did they have
much peace and wejoicing in the chuwch. ^w^

Awma 46:39
 39 And it came to pass that thewe wewe many who died, fiwmwy
bewieving that theiw souws wewe wedeemed by the Wowd Jesus
Chwist; thus they went out of the wowwd wejoicing. UwU

Awma 46:40
 40 And thewe wewe some who died with fevews, which at some
seasons of the yeaw wewe vewy fwequent in the wand--but nyot so
much so with fevews, because of the excewwent quawities of the
many pwants and woots which God had pwepawed to wemove the cause
of diseases, to which men wewe subject by the nyatuwe of the
cwimate--

Awma 46:41
 41 But thewe wewe many who died with owd age; and those who died
in the faith of Chwist awe happy in him, as we must nyeeds
suppose. >w<

Awma 47
Chaptew 47

Awma 47:1
 1 Nyow we wiww wetuwn in ouw wecowd to Amawickiah and those who
had fwed with him into the wiwdewnyess; fow, behowd, he had taken
those who went with him, and went up in the wand of Nyephi among
the Wamanyites, and did stiw up the Wamanyites to angew against the
peopwe of Nyephi, insomuch that the king of the Wamanyites sent a
pwocwamation thwoughout aww his wand, among aww his peopwe, that
they shouwd gathew themsewves togethew again to go to battwe
against the Nyephites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 47:2
 2 And it came to pass that when the pwocwamation had gonye fowth
among them they wewe exceedingwy afwaid; yea, they feawed to
dispwease the king, and they awso feawed to go to battwe against
the Nyephites west they shouwd wose theiw wives. ^w^ And it came to
pass that they wouwd nyot, ow the mowe pawt of them wouwd nyot,
obey the commandments of the king. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 47:3
 3 And nyow it came to pass that the king was wwoth because of
theiw disobedience; thewefowe he gave Amawickiah the command of
that pawt of his awmy which was obedient unto his commands, and
commanded him that he shouwd go fowth and compew them to awms. ^w^

Awma 47:4
 4 Nyow behowd, this was the desiwe of Amawickiah; fow he being a
vewy subtwe man to do eviw thewefowe he waid the pwan in his
heawt to dethwonye the king of the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 47:5
 5 And nyow he had got the command of those pawts of the Wamanyites
who wewe in favow of the king; and he sought to gain favow of
those who wewe nyot obedient; thewefowe he went fowwawd to the
pwace which was cawwed Onyidah, fow thithew had aww the Wamanyites
fwed; fow they discovewed the awmy coming, and, supposing that
they wewe coming to destwoy them, thewefowe they fwed to Onyidah,
to the pwace of awms. UwU

Awma 47:6
 6 And they had appointed a man to be a king and a weadew ovew
them, being fixed in theiw minds with a detewminyed wesowution
that they wouwd nyot be subjected to go against the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 47:7
 7 And it came to pass that they had gathewed themsewves togethew
upon the top of the mount which was cawwed Antipas, in
pwepawation to battwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 47:8
 8 Nyow it was nyot Amawickiah's intention to give them battwe
accowding to the commandments of the king; but behowd, it was his
intention to gain favow with the awmies of the Wamanyites, that he
might pwace himsewf at theiw head and dethwonye the king and take
possession of the kingdom. UwU

Awma 47:9
 9 And behowd, it came to pass that he caused his awmy to pitch
theiw tents in the vawwey which was nyeaw the mount Antipas. ;;w;;

Awma 47:10
 10 And it came to pass that when it was nyight he sent a secwet
embassy into the mount Antipas, desiwing that the weadew of those
who wewe upon the mount, whose nyame was Wehonti, that he shouwd
come down to the foot of the mount, fow he desiwed to speak with
him. ^w^

Awma 47:11
 11 And it came to pass that when Wehonti weceived the message he
duwst nyot go down to the foot of the mount. >w< And it came to pass
that Amawickiah sent again the second time, desiwing him to come
down. ;;w;; And it came to pass that Wehonti wouwd nyot; and he sent
again the thiwd time. ;;w;;

Awma 47:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Amawickiah found that he couwd
nyot get Wehonti to come down off fwom the mount, he went up into
the mount, nyeawwy to Wehonti's camp; and he sent again the fouwth
time his message unto Wehonti, desiwing that he wouwd come down,
and that he wouwd bwing his guawds with him. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 47:13
 13 And it came to pass that when Wehonti had come down with his
guawds to Amawickiah, that Amawickiah desiwed him to come down
with his awmy in the nyight-time, and suwwound those men in theiw
camps ovew whom the king had given him command, and that he wouwd
dewivew them up into Wehonti's hands, if he wouwd make him
(Amawickiah) a second weadew ovew the whowe awmy. UwU

Awma 47:14
 14 And it came to pass that Wehonti came down with his men and
suwwounded the men of Amawickiah, so that befowe they awoke at
the dawn of day they wewe suwwounded by the awmies of Wehonti. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 47:15
 15 And it came to pass that when they saw that they wewe
suwwounded, they pwead with Amawickiah that he wouwd suffew them
to faww in with theiw bwethwen, that they might nyot be destwoyed. ^w^

Nyow this was the vewy thing which Amawickiah desiwed. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 47:16
 16 And it came to pass that he dewivewed his men, contwawy to
the commands of the king. (´・ω・\`) Nyow this was the thing that Amawickiah
desiwed, that he might accompwish his designs in dethwonying the
king. UwU

Awma 47:17
 17 Nyow it was the custom among the Wamanyites, if theiw chief
weadew was kiwwed, to appoint the second weadew to be theiw chief
weadew. ;;w;;

Awma 47:18
 18 And it came to pass that Amawickiah caused that onye of his
sewvants shouwd adminyistew poison by degwees to Wehonti, that he
died. ;;w;;

Awma 47:19
 19 Nyow, when Wehonti was dead, the Wamanyites appointed
Amawickiah to be theiw weadew and theiw chief commandew. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 47:20
 20 And it came to pass that Amawickiah mawched with his awmies
(fow he had gainyed his desiwes) to the wand of Nyephi, to the city
of Nyephi, which was the chief city. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 47:21
 21 And the king came out to meet him with his guawds, fow he
supposed that Amawickiah had fuwfiwwed his commands, and that
Amawickiah had gathewed togethew so gweat an awmy to go against
the Nyephites to battwe. UwU

Awma 47:22
 22 But behowd, as the king came out to meet him Amawickiah
caused that his sewvants shouwd go fowth to meet the king. ^w^ And
they went and bowed themsewves befowe the king, as if to
wevewence him because of his gweatnyess. ;;w;;

Awma 47:23
 23 And it came to pass that the king put fowth his hand to waise
them, as was the custom with the Wamanyites, as a token of peace,
which custom they had taken fwom the Nyephites. ^w^

Awma 47:24
 24 And it came to pass that when he had waised the fiwst fwom
the gwound, behowd he stabbed the king to the heawt; and he feww
to the eawth. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 47:25
 25 Nyow the sewvants of the king fwed; and the sewvants of
Amawickiah waised a cwy, saying:

Awma 47:26
 26 Behowd, the sewvants of the king have stabbed him to the
heawt, and he has fawwen and they have fwed; behowd, come and
see. >w<

Awma 47:27
 27 And it came to pass that Amawickiah commanded that his awmies
shouwd mawch fowth and see what had happenyed to the king; and
when they had come to the spot, and found the king wying in his
gowe, Amawickiah pwetended to be wwoth, and said: Whosoevew woved
the king, wet him go fowth, and puwsue his sewvants that they may
be swain. >w<

Awma 47:28
 28 And it came to pass that aww they who woved the king, when
they heawd these wowds, came fowth and puwsued aftew the sewvants
of the king. >w<

Awma 47:29
 29 Nyow when the sewvants of the king saw an awmy puwsuing aftew
them, they wewe fwightenyed again, and fwed into the wiwdewnyess,
and came ovew into the wand of Zawahemwa and joinyed the peopwe of
Ammon. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 47:30
 30 And the awmy which puwsued aftew them wetuwnyed, having
puwsued aftew them in vain; and thus Amawickiah, by his fwaud,
gainyed the heawts of the peopwe. >w<

Awma 47:31
 31 And it came to pass on the mowwow he entewed the city Nyephi
with his awmies, and took possession of the city. ;;w;;

Awma 47:32
 32 And nyow it came to pass that the queen, when she had heawd
that the king was swain--fow Amawickiah had sent an embassy to
the queen infowming hew that the king had been swain by his
sewvants, that he had puwsued them with his awmy, but it was in
vain, and they had made theiw escape--

Awma 47:33
 33 Thewefowe, when the queen had weceived this message she sent
unto Amawickiah, desiwing him that he wouwd spawe the peopwe of
the city; and she awso desiwed him that he shouwd come in unto
hew; and she awso desiwed him that he shouwd bwing witnyesses with
him to testify concewnying the death of the king. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 47:34
 34 And it came to pass that Amawickiah took the same sewvant
that swew the king, and aww them who wewe with him, and went in
unto the queen, unto the pwace whewe she sat; and they aww
testified unto hew that the king was swain by his own sewvants;
and they said awso: They have fwed; does nyot this testify against
them? owo  And thus they satisfied the queen concewnying the death of
the king. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 47:35
 35 And it came to pass that Amawickiah sought the favow of the
queen, and took hew unto him to wife; and thus by his fwaud, and
by the assistance of his cunnying sewvants, he obtainyed the
kingdom; yea, he was acknyowwedged king thwoughout aww the wand,
among aww the peopwe of the Wamanyites, who wewe composed of the
Wamanyites and the Wemuewites and the Ishmaewites, and aww the
dissentews of the Nyephites, fwom the weign of Nyephi down to the
pwesent time. ;;w;;

Awma 47:36
 36 Nyow these dissentews, having the same instwuction and the
same infowmation of the Nyephites, yea, having been instwucted in
the same knyowwedge of the Wowd, nyevewthewess, it is stwange to
wewate, nyot wong aftew theiw dissensions they became mowe
hawdenyed and impenyitent, and mowe wiwd, wicked and fewocious than
the Wamanyites--dwinking in with the twaditions of the Wamanyites;
giving way to indowence, and aww mannyew of wasciviousnyess; yea,
entiwewy fowgetting the Wowd theiw God. ^w^

Awma 48
Chaptew 48

Awma 48:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that, as soon as Amawickiah had
obtainyed the kingdom he began to inspiwe the heawts of the
Wamanyites against the peopwe of Nyephi; yea, he did appoint men to
speak unto the Wamanyites fwom theiw towews, against the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 48:2
 2 And thus he did inspiwe theiw heawts against the Nyephites,
insomuch that in the wattew end of the nyinyeteenth yeaw of the
weign of the judges, he having accompwished his designs thus faw,
yea, having been made king ovew the Wamanyites, he sought awso to
weign ovew aww the wand, yea, and aww the peopwe who wewe in the
wand, the Nyephites as weww as the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 48:3
 3 Thewefowe he had accompwished his design, fow he had hawdenyed
the heawts of the Wamanyites and bwinded theiw minds, and stiwwed
them up to angew, insomuch that he had gathewed togethew a
nyumewous host to go to battwe against the Nyephites. UwU

Awma 48:4
 4 Fow he was detewminyed, because of the gweatnyess of the nyumbew
of his peopwe, to ovewpowew the Nyephites and to bwing them into
bondage. ;;w;;

Awma 48:5
 5 And thus he did appoint chief captains of the Zowamites, they
being the most acquainted with the stwength of the Nyephites, and
theiw pwaces of wesowt, and the weakest pawts of theiw cities;
thewefowe he appointed them to be chief captains ovew his awmies. ^w^

Awma 48:6
 6 And it came to pass that they took theiw camp, and moved fowth
towawd the wand of Zawahemwa in the wiwdewnyess. >w<

Awma 48:7
 7 Nyow it came to pass that whiwe Amawickiah had thus been
obtainying powew by fwaud and deceit, Mowonyi, on the othew hand,
had been pwepawing the minds of the peopwe to be faithfuw unto
the Wowd theiw God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 48:8
 8 Yea, he had been stwengthenying the awmies of the Nyephites, and
ewecting smaww fowts, ow pwaces of wesowt; thwowing up banks of
eawth wound about to encwose his awmies, and awso buiwding wawws
of stonye to enciwcwe them about, wound about theiw cities and the
bowdews of theiw wands; yea, aww wound about the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 48:9
 9 And in theiw weakest fowtifications he did pwace the gweatew
nyumbew of men; and thus he did fowtify and stwengthen the wand
which was possessed by the Nyephites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 48:10
 10 And thus he was pwepawing to suppowt theiw wibewty, theiw
wands, theiw wives, and theiw chiwdwen, and theiw peace, and that
they might wive unto the Wowd theiw God, and that they might
maintain that which was cawwed by theiw enyemies the cause of
Chwistians. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 48:11
 11 And Mowonyi was a stwong and a mighty man; he was a man of a
pewfect undewstanding; yea, a man that did nyot dewight in
bwoodshed; a man whose souw did joy in the wibewty and the
fweedom of his countwy, and his bwethwen fwom bondage and
swavewy;

Awma 48:12
 12 Yea, a man whose heawt did sweww with thanksgiving to his
God, fow the many pwiviweges and bwessings which he bestowed upon
his peopwe; a man who did wabow exceedingwy fow the wewfawe and
safety of his peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 48:13
 13 Yea, and he was a man who was fiwm in the faith of Chwist,
and he had swown with an oath to defend his peopwe, his wights,
and his countwy, and his wewigion, even to the woss of his bwood. ^w^

Awma 48:14
 14 Nyow the Nyephites wewe taught to defend themsewves against
theiw enyemies, even to the shedding of bwood if it wewe
nyecessawy; yea, and they wewe awso taught nyevew to give an
offense, yea, and nyevew to waise the swowd except it wewe against
an enyemy, except it wewe to pwesewve theiw wives. UwU

Awma 48:15
 15 And this was theiw faith, that by so doing God wouwd pwospew
them in the wand, ow in othew wowds, if they wewe faithfuw in
keeping the commandments of God that he wouwd pwospew them in the
wand; yea, wawn them to fwee, ow to pwepawe fow waw, accowding to
theiw dangew;

Awma 48:16
 16 And awso, that God wouwd make it knyown unto them whithew they
shouwd go to defend themsewves against theiw enyemies, and by so
doing, the Wowd wouwd dewivew them; and this was the faith of
Mowonyi, and his heawt did gwowy in it; nyot in the shedding of
bwood but in doing good, in pwesewving his peopwe, yea, in
keeping the commandments of God, yea, and wesisting inyiquity. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 48:17
 17 Yea, vewiwy, vewiwy I say unto you, if aww men had been, and
wewe, and evew wouwd be, wike unto Mowonyi, behowd, the vewy
powews of heww wouwd have been shaken fowevew; yea, the deviw
wouwd nyevew have powew ovew the heawts of the chiwdwen of men. UwU

Awma 48:18
 18 Behowd, he was a man wike unto Ammon, the son of Mosiah, yea,
and even the othew sons of Mosiah, yea, and awso Awma and his
sons, fow they wewe aww men of God. ^w^

Awma 48:19
 19 Nyow behowd, Hewaman and his bwethwen wewe nyo wess sewviceabwe
unto the peopwe than was Mowonyi; fow they did pweach the wowd of
God, and they did baptize unto wepentance aww men whosoevew wouwd
heawken unto theiw wowds. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 48:20
 20 And thus they went fowth, and the peopwe did humbwe
themsewves because of theiw wowds, insomuch that they wewe highwy
favowed of the Wowd, and thus they wewe fwee fwom waws and
contentions among themsewves, yea, even fow the space of fouw
yeaws. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 48:21
 21 But, as I have said, in the wattew end of the nyinyeteenth
yeaw, yea, nyotwithstanding theiw peace amongst themsewves, they
wewe compewwed wewuctantwy to contend with theiw bwethwen, the
Wamanyites. UwU

Awma 48:22
 22 Yea, and in finye, theiw waws nyevew did cease fow the space of
many yeaws with the Wamanyites, nyotwithstanding theiw much
wewuctance. >w<

Awma 48:23
 23 Nyow, they wewe sowwy to take up awms against the Wamanyites,
because they did nyot dewight in the shedding of bwood; yea, and
this was nyot aww--they wewe sowwy to be the means of sending so
many of theiw bwethwen out of this wowwd into an etewnyaw wowwd,
unpwepawed to meet theiw God. ^w^

Awma 48:24
 24 Nyevewthewess, they couwd nyot suffew to way down theiw wives,
that theiw wives and theiw chiwdwen shouwd be massacwed by the
bawbawous cwuewty of those who wewe once theiw bwethwen, yea, and
had dissented fwom theiw chuwch, and had weft them and had gonye
to destwoy them by joinying the Wamanyites. ^w^

Awma 48:25
 25 Yea, they couwd nyot beaw that theiw bwethwen shouwd wejoice
ovew the bwood of the Nyephites, so wong as thewe wewe any who
shouwd keep the commandments of God, fow the pwomise of the Wowd
was, if they shouwd keep his commandments they shouwd pwospew in
the wand. >w<

Awma 49
Chaptew 49

Awma 49:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass in the eweventh month of the
nyinyeteenth yeaw, on the tenth day of the month, the awmies of the
Wamanyites wewe seen appwoaching towawds the wand of Ammonyihah. ;;w;;

Awma 49:2
 2 And behowd, the city had been webuiwt, and Mowonyi had
stationyed an awmy by the bowdews of the city, and they had cast
up diwt awound about to shiewd them fwom the awwows and the
stonyes of the Wamanyites; fow behowd, they fought with stonyes and
with awwows. >w<

Awma 49:3
 3 Behowd, I said that the city of Ammonyihah had been webuiwt. ;;w;; I
say unto you, yea, that it was in pawt webuiwt; and because the
Wamanyites had destwoyed it once because of the inyiquity of the
peopwe, they supposed that it wouwd again become an easy pwey fow
them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 49:4
 4 But behowd, how gweat was theiw disappointment; fow behowd,
the Nyephites had dug up a widge of eawth wound about them, which
was so high that the Wamanyites couwd nyot cast theiw stonyes and
theiw awwows at them that they might take effect, nyeithew couwd
they come upon them save it was by theiw pwace of entwance. ^w^

Awma 49:5
 5 Nyow at this time the chief captains of the Wamanyites wewe
astonyished exceedingwy, because of the wisdom of the Nyephites in
pwepawing theiw pwaces of secuwity. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 49:6
 6 Nyow the weadews of the Wamanyites had supposed, because of the
gweatnyess of theiw nyumbews, yea, they supposed that they shouwd
be pwiviweged to come upon them as they had hithewto donye; yea,
and they had awso pwepawed themsewves with shiewds, and with
bweastpwates; and they had awso pwepawed themsewves with gawments
of skins, yea, vewy thick gawments to covew theiw nyakednyess. ;;w;;

Awma 49:7
 7 And being thus pwepawed they supposed that they shouwd easiwy
ovewpowew and subject theiw bwethwen to the yoke of bondage, ow
sway and massacwe them accowding to theiw pweasuwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 49:8
 8 But behowd, to theiw uttewmost astonyishment, they wewe
pwepawed fow them, in a mannyew which nyevew had been knyown among
the chiwdwen of Wehi. UwU Nyow they wewe pwepawed fow the Wamanyites,
to battwe aftew the mannyew of the instwuctions of Mowonyi. >w<

Awma 49:9
 9 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites, ow the Amawickiahites,
wewe exceedingwy astonyished at theiw mannyew of pwepawation fow
waw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 49:10
 10 Nyow, if king Amawickiah had come down out of the wand of
Nyephi, at the head of his awmy, pewhaps he wouwd have caused the
Wamanyites to have attacked the Nyephites at the city of Ammonyihah;
fow behowd, he did cawe nyot fow the bwood of his peopwe. ^w^

Awma 49:11
 11 But behowd, Amawickiah did nyot come down himsewf to battwe. UwU
And behowd, his chief captains duwst nyot attack the Nyephites at
the city of Ammonyihah, fow Mowonyi had awtewed the manyagement of
affaiws among the Nyephites, insomuch that the Wamanyites wewe
disappointed in theiw pwaces of wetweat and they couwd nyot come
upon them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 49:12
 12 Thewefowe they wetweated into the wiwdewnyess, and took theiw
camp and mawched towawds the wand of Nyoah, supposing that to be
the nyext best pwace fow them to come against the Nyephites. >w<

Awma 49:13
 13 Fow they knyew nyot that Mowonyi had fowtified, ow had buiwt
fowts of secuwity, fow evewy city in aww the wand wound about;
thewefowe, they mawched fowwawd to the wand of Nyoah with a fiwm
detewminyation; yea, theiw chief captains came fowwawd and took an
oath that they wouwd destwoy the peopwe of that city. >w<

Awma 49:14
 14 But behowd, to theiw astonyishment, the city of Nyoah, which
had hithewto been a weak pwace, had nyow, by the means of Mowonyi,
become stwong, yea, even to exceed the stwength of the city
Ammonyihah. >w<

Awma 49:15
 15 And nyow, behowd, this was wisdom in Mowonyi; fow he had
supposed that they wouwd be fwightenyed at the city Ammonyihah; and
as the city of Nyoah had hithewto been the weakest pawt of the
wand, thewefowe they wouwd mawch thithew to battwe; and thus it
was accowding to his desiwes. UwU

Awma 49:16
 16 And behowd, Mowonyi had appointed Wehi to be chief captain
ovew the men of that city; and it was that same Wehi who fought
with the Wamanyites in the vawwey on the east of the wivew Sidon. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 49:17
 17 And nyow behowd it came to pass, that when the Wamanyites had
found that Wehi commanded the city they wewe again disappointed,
fow they feawed Wehi exceedingwy; nyevewthewess theiw chief
captains had swown with an oath to attack the city; thewefowe,
they bwought up theiw awmies. ^w^

Awma 49:18
 18 Nyow behowd, the Wamanyites couwd nyot get into theiw fowts of
secuwity by any othew way save by the entwance, because of the
highnyess of the bank which had been thwown up, and the depth of
the ditch which had been dug wound about, save it wewe by the
entwance. ^w^

Awma 49:19
 19 And thus wewe the Nyephites pwepawed to destwoy aww such as
shouwd attempt to cwimb up to entew the fowt by any othew way, by
casting ovew stonyes and awwows at them. ;;w;;

Awma 49:20
 20 Thus they wewe pwepawed, yea, a body of theiw stwongest men,
with theiw swowds and theiw swings, to smite down aww who shouwd
attempt to come into theiw pwace of secuwity by the pwace of
entwance; and thus wewe they pwepawed to defend themsewves
against the Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 49:21
 21 And it came to pass that the captains of the Wamanyites
bwought up theiw awmies befowe the pwace of entwance, and began
to contend with the Nyephites, to get into theiw pwace of
secuwity; but behowd, they wewe dwiven back fwom time to time,
insomuch that they wewe swain with an immense swaughtew. UwU

Awma 49:22
 22 Nyow when they found that they couwd nyot obtain powew ovew the
Nyephites by the pass, they began to dig down theiw banks of eawth
that they might obtain a pass to theiw awmies, that they might
have an equaw chance to fight; but behowd, in these attempts they
wewe swept off by the stonyes and awwows which wewe thwown at
them; and instead of fiwwing up theiw ditches by puwwing down the
banks of eawth, they wewe fiwwed up in a measuwe with theiw dead
and wounded bodies. ;;w;;

Awma 49:23
 23 Thus the Nyephites had aww powew ovew theiw enyemies; and thus
the Wamanyites did attempt to destwoy the Nyephites untiw theiw
chief captains wewe aww swain; yea, and mowe than a thousand of
the Wamanyites wewe swain; whiwe, on the othew hand, thewe was nyot
a singwe souw of the Nyephites which was swain. UwU

Awma 49:24
 24 Thewe wewe about fifty who wewe wounded, who had been exposed
to the awwows of the Wamanyites thwough the pass, but they wewe
shiewded by theiw shiewds, and theiw bweastpwates, and theiw
head-pwates, insomuch that theiw wounds wewe upon theiw wegs,
many of which wewe vewy sevewe. ;;w;;

Awma 49:25
 25 And it came to pass, that when the Wamanyites saw that theiw
chief captains wewe aww swain they fwed into the wiwdewnyess. >w< And
it came to pass that they wetuwnyed to the wand of Nyephi, to
infowm theiw king, Amawickiah, who was a Nyephite by biwth,
concewnying theiw gweat woss. >w<

Awma 49:26
 26 And it came to pass that he was exceedingwy angwy with his
peopwe, because he had nyot obtainyed his desiwe ovew the Nyephites;
he had nyot subjected them to the yoke of bondage. ;;w;;

Awma 49:27
 27 Yea, he was exceedingwy wwoth, and he did cuwse God, and awso
Mowonyi, sweawing with an oath that he wouwd dwink his bwood; and
this because Mowonyi had kept the commandments of God in pwepawing
fow the safety of his peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 49:28
 28 And it came to pass, that on the othew hand, the peopwe of
Nyephi did thank the Wowd theiw God, because of his matchwess
powew in dewivewing them fwom the hands of theiw enyemies. ;;w;;

Awma 49:29
 29 And thus ended the nyinyeteenth yeaw of the weign of the judges
ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 49:30
 30 Yea, and thewe was continyuaw peace among them, and
exceedingwy gweat pwospewity in the chuwch because of theiw heed
and diwigence which they gave unto the wowd of God, which was
decwawed unto them by Hewaman, and Shibwon, and Cowianton, and
Ammon and his bwethwen, yea, and by aww those who had been
owdainyed by the howy owdew of God, being baptized unto
wepentance, and sent fowth to pweach among the peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 50
Chaptew 50

Awma 50:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that Mowonyi did nyot stop making
pwepawations fow waw, ow to defend his peopwe against the
Wamanyites; fow he caused that his awmies shouwd commence in the
commencement of the twentieth yeaw of the weign of the judges,
that they shouwd commence in digging up heaps of eawth wound
about aww the cities, thwoughout aww the wand which was possessed
by the Nyephites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 50:2
 2 And upon the top of these widges of eawth he caused that thewe
shouwd be timbews, yea, wowks of timbews buiwt up to the height
of a man, wound about the cities. >w<

Awma 50:3
 3 And he caused that upon those wowks of timbews thewe shouwd be
a fwame of pickets buiwt upon the timbews wound about; and they
wewe stwong and high. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 50:4
 4 And he caused towews to be ewected that ovewwooked those wowks
of pickets, and he caused pwaces of secuwity to be buiwt upon
those towews, that the stonyes and the awwows of the Wamanyites
couwd nyot huwt them. ;;w;;

Awma 50:5
 5 And they wewe pwepawed that they couwd cast stonyes fwom the
top theweof, accowding to theiw pweasuwe and theiw stwength, and
sway him who shouwd attempt to appwoach nyeaw the wawws of the
city. >w<

Awma 50:6
 6 Thus Mowonyi did pwepawe stwonghowds against the coming of
theiw enyemies, wound about evewy city in aww the wand. ;;w;;

Awma 50:7
 7 And it came to pass that Mowonyi caused that his awmies shouwd
go fowth into the east wiwdewnyess; yea, and they went fowth and
dwove aww the Wamanyites who wewe in the east wiwdewnyess into
theiw own wands, which wewe south of the wand of Zawahemwa. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 50:8
 8 And the wand of Nyephi did wun in a stwaight couwse fwom the
east sea to the west. UwU

Awma 50:9
 9 And it came to pass that when Mowonyi had dwiven aww the
Wamanyites out of the east wiwdewnyess, which was nyowth of the
wands of theiw own possessions, he caused that the inhabitants
who wewe in the wand of Zawahemwa and in the wand wound about
shouwd go fowth into the east wiwdewnyess, even to the bowdews by
the seashowe, and possess the wand. ^w^

Awma 50:10
 10 And he awso pwaced awmies on the south, in the bowdews of
theiw possessions, and caused them to ewect fowtifications that
they might secuwe theiw awmies and theiw peopwe fwom the hands of
theiw enyemies. UwU

Awma 50:11
 11 And thus he cut off aww the stwonghowds of the Wamanyites in
the east wiwdewnyess, yea, and awso on the west, fowtifying the
winye between the Nyephites and the Wamanyites, between the wand of
Zawahemwa and the wand of Nyephi, fwom the west sea, wunnying by
the head of the wivew Sidon--the Nyephites possessing aww the wand
nyowthwawd, yea, even aww the wand which was nyowthwawd of the wand
Bountifuw, accowding to theiw pweasuwe. ;;w;;

Awma 50:12
 12 Thus Mowonyi, with his awmies, which did incwease daiwy
because of the assuwance of pwotection which his wowks did bwing
fowth unto them, did seek to cut off the stwength and the powew
of the Wamanyites fwom off the wands of theiw possessions, that
they shouwd have nyo powew upon the wands of theiw possession. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 50:13
 13 And it came to pass that the Nyephites began the foundation of
a city, and they cawwed the nyame of the city Mowonyi; and it was
by the east sea; and it was on the south by the winye of the
possessions of the Wamanyites. UwU

Awma 50:14
 14 And they awso began a foundation fow a city between the city
of Mowonyi and the city of Aawon, joinying the bowdews of Aawon and
Mowonyi; and they cawwed the nyame of the city, ow the wand,
Nyephihah. ^w^

Awma 50:15
 15 And they awso began in that same yeaw to buiwd many cities on
the nyowth, onye in a pawticuwaw mannyew which they cawwed Wehi,
which was in the nyowth by the bowdews of the seashowe. UwU

Awma 50:16
 16 And thus ended the twentieth yeaw. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 50:17
 17 And in these pwospewous ciwcumstances wewe the peopwe of
Nyephi in the commencement of the twenty and fiwst yeaw of the
weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Awma 50:18
 18 And they did pwospew exceedingwy, and they became exceedingwy
wich; yea, and they did muwtipwy and wax stwong in the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 50:19
 19 And thus we see how mewcifuw and just awe aww the deawings of
the Wowd, to the fuwfiwwing of aww his wowds unto the chiwdwen of
men; yea, we can behowd that his wowds awe vewified, even at this
time, which he spake unto Wehi, saying:

Awma 50:20
 20 Bwessed awt thou and thy chiwdwen; and they shaww be bwessed,
inyasmuch as they shaww keep my commandments they shaww pwospew in
the wand. ^w^  But wemembew, inyasmuch as they wiww nyot keep my
commandments they shaww be cut off fwom the pwesence of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 50:21
 21 And we see that these pwomises have been vewified to the
peopwe of Nyephi; fow it has been theiw quawwewings and theiw
contentions, yea, theiw muwdewings, and theiw pwundewings, theiw
idowatwy, theiw whowedoms, and theiw abominyations, which wewe
among themsewves, which bwought upon them theiw waws and theiw
destwuctions. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 50:22
 22 And those who wewe faithfuw in keeping the commandments of
the Wowd wewe dewivewed at aww times, whiwst thousands of theiw
wicked bwethwen have been consignyed to bondage, ow to pewish by
the swowd, ow to dwindwe in unbewief, and mingwe with the
Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 50:23
 23 But behowd thewe nyevew was a happiew time among the peopwe of
Nyephi, since the days of Nyephi, than in the days of Mowonyi, yea,
even at this time, in the twenty and fiwst yeaw of the weign of
the judges. UwU

Awma 50:24
 24 And it came to pass that the twenty and second yeaw of the
weign of the judges awso ended in peace; yea, and awso the twenty
and thiwd yeaw. ^w^

Awma 50:25
 25 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the twenty
and fouwth yeaw of the weign of the judges, thewe wouwd awso have
been peace among the peopwe of Nyephi had it nyot been fow a
contention which took pwace among them concewnying the wand of
Wehi, and the wand of Mowianton, which joinyed upon the bowdews of
Wehi; both of which wewe on the bowdews by the seashowe. ^w^

Awma 50:26
 26 Fow behowd, the peopwe who possessed the wand of Mowianton
did cwaim a pawt of the wand of Wehi; thewefowe thewe began to be
a wawm contention between them, insomuch that the peopwe of
Mowianton took up awms against theiw bwethwen, and they wewe
detewminyed by the swowd to sway them. ^w^

Awma 50:27
 27 But behowd, the peopwe who possessed the wand of Wehi fwed to
the camp of Mowonyi, and appeawed unto him fow assistance; fow
behowd they wewe nyot in the wwong. ;;w;;

Awma 50:28
 28 And it came to pass that when the peopwe of Mowianton, who
wewe wed by a man whose nyame was Mowianton, found that the peopwe
of Wehi had fwed to the camp of Mowonyi, they wewe exceedingwy
feawfuw west the awmy of Mowonyi shouwd come upon them and destwoy
them. ;;w;;

Awma 50:29
 29 Thewefowe, Mowianton put it into theiw heawts that they
shouwd fwee to the wand which was nyowthwawd, which was covewed
with wawge bodies of watew, and take possession of the wand which
was nyowthwawd. ;;w;;

Awma 50:30
 30 And behowd, they wouwd have cawwied this pwan into effect,
(which wouwd have been a cause to have been wamented) but behowd,
Mowianton being a man of much passion, thewefowe he was angwy
with onye of his maid sewvants, and he feww upon hew and beat hew
much. ^w^

Awma 50:31
 31 And it came to pass that she fwed, and came ovew to the camp
of Mowonyi, and towd Mowonyi aww things concewnying the mattew, and
awso concewnying theiw intentions to fwee into the wand nyowthwawd. >w<

Awma 50:32
 32 Nyow behowd, the peopwe who wewe in the wand Bountifuw, ow
wathew Mowonyi, feawed that they wouwd heawken to the wowds of
Mowianton and unyite with his peopwe, and thus he wouwd obtain
possession of those pawts of the wand, which wouwd way a
foundation fow sewious consequences among the peopwe of Nyephi,
yea, which consequences wouwd wead to the ovewthwow of theiw
wibewty. >w<

Awma 50:33
 33 Thewefowe Mowonyi sent an awmy, with theiw camp, to head the
peopwe of Mowianton, to stop theiw fwight into the wand
nyowthwawd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 50:34
 34 And it came to pass that they did nyot head them untiw they
had come to the bowdews of the wand Desowation; and thewe they
did head them, by the nyawwow pass which wed by the sea into the
wand nyowthwawd, yea, by the sea, on the west and on the east. ^w^

Awma 50:35
 35 And it came to pass that the awmy which was sent by Mowonyi,
which was wed by a man whose nyame was Teancum, did meet the
peopwe of Mowianton; and so stubbown wewe the peopwe of
Mowianton, (being inspiwed by his wickednyess and his fwattewing
wowds) that a battwe commenced between them, in the which Teancum
did sway Mowianton and defeat his awmy, and took them pwisonyews,
and wetuwnyed to the camp of Mowonyi. >w< And thus ended the twenty
and fouwth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of
Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 50:36
 36 And thus wewe the peopwe of Mowianton bwought back. ^w^ And upon
theiw covenyanting to keep the peace they wewe westowed to the
wand of Mowianton, and a unyion took pwace between them and the
peopwe of Wehi; and they wewe awso westowed to theiw wands. ^w^

Awma 50:37
 37 And it came to pass that in the same yeaw that the peopwe of
Nyephi had peace westowed unto them, that Nyephihah, the second
chief judge, died, having fiwwed the judgment-seat with pewfect
upwightnyess befowe God. ;;w;;

Awma 50:38
 38 Nyevewthewess, he had wefused Awma to take possession of those
wecowds and those things which wewe esteemed by Awma and his
fathews to be most sacwed; thewefowe Awma had confewwed them upon
his son, Hewaman. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 50:39
 39 Behowd, it came to pass that the son of Nyephihah was
appointed to fiww the judgment-seat, in the stead of his fathew;
yea, he was appointed chief judge and govewnyow ovew the peopwe,
with an oath and sacwed owdinyance to judge wighteouswy, and to
keep the peace and the fweedom of the peopwe, and to gwant unto
them theiw sacwed pwiviweges to wowship the Wowd theiw God, yea,
to suppowt and maintain the cause of God aww his days, and to
bwing the wicked to justice accowding to theiw cwime. ^w^

Awma 50:40
 40 Nyow behowd, his nyame was Pahowan. >w< And Pahowan did fiww the
seat of his fathew, and did commence his weign in the end of the
twenty and fouwth yeaw, ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Awma 51
Chaptew 51

Awma 51:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass in the commencement of the twenty and
fifth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi,
they having estabwished peace between the peopwe of Wehi and the
peopwe of Mowianton concewnying theiw wands, and having commenced
the twenty and fifth yeaw in peace;

Awma 51:2
 2 Nyevewthewess, they did nyot wong maintain an entiwe peace in
the wand, fow thewe began to be a contention among the peopwe
concewnying the chief judge Pahowan; fow behowd, thewe wewe a pawt
of the peopwe who desiwed that a few pawticuwaw points of the waw
shouwd be awtewed. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:3
 3 But behowd, Pahowan wouwd nyot awtew nyow suffew the waw to be
awtewed; thewefowe, he did nyot heawken to those who had sent in
theiw voices with theiw petitions concewnying the awtewing of the
waw. ^w^

Awma 51:4
 4 Thewefowe, those who wewe desiwous that the waw shouwd be
awtewed wewe angwy with him, and desiwed that he shouwd nyo wongew
be chief judge ovew the wand; thewefowe thewe awose a wawm
dispute concewnying the mattew, but nyot unto bwoodshed. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 51:5
 5 And it came to pass that those who wewe desiwous that Pahowan
shouwd be dethwonyed fwom the judgment-seat wewe cawwed king-men,
fow they wewe desiwous that the waw shouwd be awtewed in a mannyew
to ovewthwow the fwee govewnment and to estabwish a king ovew the
wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:6
 6 And those who wewe desiwous that Pahowan shouwd wemain chief
judge ovew the wand took upon them the nyame of fweemen; and thus
was the division among them, fow the fweemen had swown ow
covenyanted to maintain theiw wights and the pwiviweges of theiw
wewigion by a fwee govewnment. >w<

Awma 51:7
 7 And it came to pass that this mattew of theiw contention was
settwed by the voice of the peopwe. ^w^ And it came to pass that the
voice of the peopwe came in favow of the fweemen, and Pahowan
wetainyed the judgment-seat, which caused much wejoicing among the
bwethwen of Pahowan and awso many of the peopwe of wibewty, who
awso put the king-men to siwence, that they duwst nyot oppose but
wewe obwiged to maintain the cause of fweedom. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 51:8
 8 Nyow those who wewe in favow of kings wewe those of high biwth,
and they sought to be kings; and they wewe suppowted by those who
sought powew and authowity ovew the peopwe. ;;w;;

Awma 51:9
 9 But behowd, this was a cwiticaw time fow such contentions to
be among the peopwe of Nyephi; fow behowd, Amawickiah had again
stiwwed up the heawts of the peopwe of the Wamanyites against the
peopwe of the Nyephites, and he was gathewing togethew sowdiews
fwom aww pawts of his wand, and awming them, and pwepawing fow
waw with aww diwigence; fow he had swown to dwink the bwood of
Mowonyi. ^w^

Awma 51:10
 10 But behowd, we shaww see that his pwomise which he made was
wash; nyevewthewess, he did pwepawe himsewf and his awmies to come
to battwe against the Nyephites. UwU

Awma 51:11
 11 Nyow his awmies wewe nyot so gweat as they had hithewto been,
because of the many thousands who had been swain by the hand of
the Nyephites; but nyotwithstanding theiw gweat woss, Amawickiah
had gathewed togethew a wondewfuwwy gweat awmy, insomuch that he
feawed nyot to come down to the wand of Zawahemwa. ;;w;;

Awma 51:12
 12 Yea, even Amawickiah did himsewf come down, at the head of
the Wamanyites. UwU And it was in the twenty and fifth yeaw of the
weign of the judges; and it was at the same time that they had
begun to settwe the affaiws of theiw contentions concewnying the
chief judge, Pahowan. ;;w;;

Awma 51:13
 13 And it came to pass that when the men who wewe cawwed
king-men had heawd that the Wamanyites wewe coming down to battwe
against them, they wewe gwad in theiw heawts; and they wefused to
take up awms, fow they wewe so wwoth with the chief judge, and
awso with the peopwe of wibewty, that they wouwd nyot take up awms
to defend theiw countwy. ^w^

Awma 51:14
 14 And it came to pass that when Mowonyi saw this, and awso saw
that the Wamanyites wewe coming into the bowdews of the wand, he
was exceedingwy wwoth because of the stubbownnyess of those peopwe
whom he had wabowed with so much diwigence to pwesewve; yea, he
was exceedingwy wwoth; his souw was fiwwed with angew against
them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 51:15
 15 And it came to pass that he sent a petition, with the voice
of the peopwe, unto the govewnyow of the wand, desiwing that he
shouwd wead it, and give him (Mowonyi) powew to compew those
dissentews to defend theiw countwy ow to put them to death. ^w^

Awma 51:16
 16 Fow it was his fiwst cawe to put an end to such contentions
and dissensions among the peopwe; fow behowd, this had been
hithewto a cause of aww theiw destwuction. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass
that it was gwanted accowding to the voice of the peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:17
 17 And it came to pass that Mowonyi commanded that his awmy
shouwd go against those king-men, to puww down theiw pwide and
theiw nyobiwity and wevew them with the eawth, ow they shouwd take
up awms and suppowt the cause of wibewty. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 51:18
 18 And it came to pass that the awmies did mawch fowth against
them; and they did puww down theiw pwide and theiw nyobiwity,
insomuch that as they did wift theiw weapons of waw to fight
against the men of Mowonyi they wewe hewn down and wevewed to the
eawth. ;;w;;

Awma 51:19
 19 And it came to pass that thewe wewe fouw thousand of those
dissentews who wewe hewn down by the swowd; and those of theiw
weadews who wewe nyot swain in battwe wewe taken and cast into
pwison, fow thewe was nyo time fow theiw twiaws at this pewiod. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 51:20
 20 And the wemaindew of those dissentews, wathew than be smitten
down to the eawth by the swowd, yiewded to the standawd of
wibewty, and wewe compewwed to hoist the titwe of wibewty upon
theiw towews, and in theiw cities, and to take up awms in defence
of theiw countwy. UwU

Awma 51:21
 21 And thus Mowonyi put an end to those king-men, that thewe wewe
nyot any knyown by the appewwation of king-men; and thus he put an
end to the stubbownnyess and the pwide of those peopwe who
pwofessed the bwood of nyobiwity; but they wewe bwought down to
humbwe themsewves wike unto theiw bwethwen, and to fight
vawiantwy fow theiw fweedom fwom bondage. >w<

Awma 51:22
 22 Behowd, it came to pass that whiwe Mowonyi was thus bweaking
down the waws and contentions among his own peopwe, and
subjecting them to peace and civiwization, and making weguwations
to pwepawe fow waw against the Wamanyites, behowd, the Wamanyites
had come into the wand of Mowonyi, which was in the bowdews by the
seashowe. >w<

Awma 51:23
 23 And it came to pass that the Nyephites wewe nyot sufficientwy
stwong in the city of Mowonyi; thewefowe Amawickiah did dwive
them, swaying many. ;;w;; And it came to pass that Amawickiah took
possession of the city, yea, possession of aww theiw
fowtifications. ;;w;;

Awma 51:24
 24 And those who fwed out of the city of Mowonyi came to the city
of Nyephihah; and awso the peopwe of the city of Wehi gathewed
themsewves togethew, and made pwepawations and wewe weady to
weceive the Wamanyites to battwe. ^w^

Awma 51:25
 25 But it came to pass that Amawickiah wouwd nyot suffew the
Wamanyites to go against the city of Nyephihah to battwe, but kept
them down by the seashowe, weaving men in evewy city to maintain
and defend it. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:26
 26 And thus he went on, taking possession of many cities, the
city of Nyephihah, and the city of Wehi, and the city of
Mowianton, and the city of Omnyew, and the city of Gid, and the
city of Muwek, aww of which wewe on the east bowdews by the
seashowe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:27
 27 And thus had the Wamanyites obtainyed, by the cunnying of
Amawickiah, so many cities, by theiw nyumbewwess hosts, aww of
which wewe stwongwy fowtified aftew the mannyew of the
fowtifications of Mowonyi; aww of which affowded stwonghowds fow
the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:28
 28 And it came to pass that they mawched to the bowdews of the
wand Bountifuw, dwiving the Nyephites befowe them and swaying
many. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:29
 29 But it came to pass that they wewe met by Teancum, who had
swain Mowianton and had headed his peopwe in his fwight. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:30
 30 And it came to pass that he headed Amawickiah awso, as he was
mawching fowth with his nyumewous awmy that he might take
possession of the wand Bountifuw, and awso the wand nyowthwawd. ;;w;;

Awma 51:31
 31 But behowd he met with a disappointment by being wepuwsed by
Teancum and his men, fow they wewe gweat wawwiows; fow evewy man
of Teancum did exceed the Wamanyites in theiw stwength and in
theiw skiww of waw, insomuch that they did gain advantage ovew
the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:32
 32 And it came to pass that they did hawass them, insomuch that
they did sway them even untiw it was dawk. (・`ω\´・) And it came to pass
that Teancum and his men did pitch theiw tents in the bowdews of
the wand Bountifuw; and Amawickiah did pitch his tents in the
bowdews on the beach by the seashowe, and aftew this mannyew wewe
they dwiven. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 51:33
 33 And it came to pass that when the nyight had come, Teancum and
his sewvant stowe fowth and went out by nyight, and went into the
camp of Amawickiah; and behowd, sweep had ovewpowewed them
because of theiw much fatigue, which was caused by the wabows and
heat of the day. >w<

Awma 51:34
 34 And it came to pass that Teancum stowe pwiviwy into the tent
of the king, and put a javewin to his heawt; and he did cause the
death of the king immediatewy that he did nyot awake his sewvants. ;;w;;

Awma 51:35
 35 And he wetuwnyed again pwiviwy to his own camp, and behowd,
his men wewe asweep, and he awoke them and towd them aww the
things that he had donye. ^w^

Awma 51:36
 36 And he caused that his awmies shouwd stand in weadinyess, west
the Wamanyites had awakenyed and shouwd come upon them. UwU

Awma 51:37
 37 And thus endeth the twenty and fifth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi; and thus endeth the days of
Amawickiah. UwU

Awma 52
Chaptew 52

Awma 52:1
 1 And nyow, it came to pass in the twenty and sixth yeaw of the
weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, behowd, when the
Wamanyites awoke on the fiwst mownying of the fiwst month, behowd,
they found Amawickiah was dead in his own tent; and they awso saw
that Teancum was weady to give them battwe on that day. >w<

Awma 52:2
 2 And nyow, when the Wamanyites saw this they wewe affwighted; and
they abandonyed theiw design in mawching into the wand nyowthwawd,
and wetweated with aww theiw awmy into the city of Muwek, and
sought pwotection in theiw fowtifications. UwU

Awma 52:3
 3 And it came to pass that the bwothew of Amawickiah was
appointed king ovew the peopwe; and his nyame was Ammowon; thus
king Ammowon, the bwothew of king Amawickiah, was appointed to
weign in his stead. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 52:4
 4 And it came to pass that he did command that his peopwe shouwd
maintain those cities, which they had taken by the shedding of
bwood; fow they had nyot taken any cities save they had wost much
bwood. >w<

Awma 52:5
 5 And nyow, Teancum saw that the Wamanyites wewe detewminyed to
maintain those cities which they had taken, and those pawts of
the wand which they had obtainyed possession of; and awso seeing
the enyowmity of theiw nyumbew, Teancum thought it was nyot
expedient that he shouwd attempt to attack them in theiw fowts. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 52:6
 6 But he kept his men wound about, as if making pwepawations fow
waw; yea, and twuwy he was pwepawing to defend himsewf against
them, by casting up wawws wound about and pwepawing pwaces of
wesowt. >w<

Awma 52:7
 7 And it came to pass that he kept thus pwepawing fow waw untiw
Mowonyi had sent a wawge nyumbew of men to stwengthen his awmy. >w<

Awma 52:8
 8 And Mowonyi awso sent owdews unto him that he shouwd wetain aww
the pwisonyews who feww into his hands; fow as the Wamanyites had
taken many pwisonyews, that he shouwd wetain aww the pwisonyews of
the Wamanyites as a wansom fow those whom the Wamanyites had taken. >w<

Awma 52:9
 9 And he awso sent owdews unto him that he shouwd fowtify the
wand Bountifuw, and secuwe the nyawwow pass which wed into the
wand nyowthwawd, west the Wamanyites shouwd obtain that point and
shouwd have powew to hawass them on evewy side. >w<

Awma 52:10
 10 And Mowonyi awso sent unto him, desiwing him that he wouwd be
faithfuw in maintainying that quawtew of the wand, and that he
wouwd seek evewy oppowtunyity to scouwge the Wamanyites in that
quawtew, as much as was in his powew, that pewhaps he might take
again by stwatagem ow some othew way those cities which had been
taken out of theiw hands; and that he awso wouwd fowtify and
stwengthen the cities wound about, which had nyot fawwen into the
hands of the Wamanyites. UwU

Awma 52:11
 11 And he awso said unto him, I wouwd come unto you, but behowd,
the Wamanyites awe upon us in the bowdews of the wand by the west
sea; and behowd, I go against them, thewefowe I cannyot come unto
you. ^w^

Awma 52:12
 12 Nyow, the king (Ammowon) had depawted out of the wand of
Zawahemwa, and had made knyown unto the queen concewnying the death
of his bwothew, and had gathewed togethew a wawge nyumbew of men,
and had mawched fowth against the Nyephites on the bowdews by the
west sea. ^w^

Awma 52:13
 13 And thus he was endeavowing to hawass the Nyephites, and to
dwaw away a pawt of theiw fowces to that pawt of the wand, whiwe
he had commanded those whom he had weft to possess the cities
which he had taken, that they shouwd awso hawass the Nyephites on
the bowdews by the east sea, and shouwd take possession of theiw
wands as much as it was in theiw powew, accowding to the powew of
theiw awmies. UwU

Awma 52:14
 14 And thus wewe the Nyephites in those dangewous ciwcumstances
in the ending of the twenty and sixth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. ^w^

Awma 52:15
 15 But behowd, it came to pass in the twenty and seventh yeaw of
the weign of the judges, that Teancum, by the command of
Mowonyi--who had estabwished awmies to pwotect the south and the
west bowdews of the wand, and had begun his mawch towawds the
wand Bountifuw, that he might assist Teancum with his men in
wetaking the cities which they had wost--

Awma 52:16
 16 And it came to pass that Teancum had weceived owdews to make
an attack upon the city of Muwek, and wetake it if it wewe
possibwe. UwU

Awma 52:17
 17 And it came to pass that Teancum made pwepawations to make an
attack upon the city of Muwek, and mawch fowth with his awmy
against the Wamanyites; but he saw that it was impossibwe that he
couwd ovewpowew them whiwe they wewe in theiw fowtifications;
thewefowe he abandonyed his designs and wetuwnyed again to the city
Bountifuw, to wait fow the coming of Mowonyi, that he might
weceive stwength to his awmy. >w<

Awma 52:18
 18 And it came to pass that Mowonyi did awwive with his awmy at
the wand of Bountifuw, in the wattew end of the twenty and
seventh yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Awma 52:19
 19 And in the commencement of the twenty and eighth yeaw, Mowonyi
and Teancum and many of the chief captains hewd a counciw of
waw--what they shouwd do to cause the Wamanyites to come out
against them to battwe; ow that they might by some means fwattew
them out of theiw stwonghowds, that they might gain advantage
ovew them and take again the city of Muwek. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 52:20
 20 And it came to pass they sent embassies to the awmy of the
Wamanyites, which pwotected the city of Muwek, to theiw weadew,
whose nyame was Jacob, desiwing him that he wouwd come out with
his awmies to meet them upon the pwains between the two cities. UwU
But behowd, Jacob, who was a Zowamite, wouwd nyot come out with
his awmy to meet them upon the pwains. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 52:21
 21 And it came to pass that Mowonyi, having nyo hopes of meeting
them upon faiw gwounds, thewefowe, he wesowved upon a pwan that
he might decoy the Wamanyites out of theiw stwonghowds. UwU

Awma 52:22
 22 Thewefowe he caused that Teancum shouwd take a smaww nyumbew
of men and mawch down nyeaw the seashowe; and Mowonyi and his awmy,
by nyight, mawched in the wiwdewnyess, on the west of the city
Muwek; and thus, on the mowwow, when the guawds of the Wamanyites
had discovewed Teancum, they wan and towd it unto Jacob, theiw
weadew. >w<

Awma 52:23
 23 And it came to pass that the awmies of the Wamanyites did
mawch fowth against Teancum, supposing by theiw nyumbews to
ovewpowew Teancum because of the smawwnyess of his nyumbews. (´・ω・\`) And
as Teancum saw the awmies of the Wamanyites coming out against him
he began to wetweat down by the seashowe, nyowthwawd. ;;w;;

Awma 52:24
 24 And it came to pass that when the Wamanyites saw that he began
to fwee, they took couwage and puwsued them with vigow. ;;w;; And
whiwe Teancum was thus weading away the Wamanyites who wewe
puwsuing them in vain, behowd, Mowonyi commanded that a pawt of
his awmy who wewe with him shouwd mawch fowth into the city, and
take possession of it. ^w^

Awma 52:25
 25 And thus they did, and swew aww those who had been weft to
pwotect the city, yea, aww those who wouwd nyot yiewd up theiw
weapons of waw. ^w^

Awma 52:26
 26 And thus Mowonyi had obtainyed possession of the city Muwek
with a pawt of his awmy, whiwe he mawched with the wemaindew to
meet the Wamanyites when they shouwd wetuwn fwom the puwsuit of
Teancum. ;;w;;

Awma 52:27
 27 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did puwsue Teancum
untiw they came nyeaw the city Bountifuw, and then they wewe met
by Wehi and a smaww awmy, which had been weft to pwotect the city
Bountifuw. ;;w;;

Awma 52:28
 28 And nyow behowd, when the chief captains of the Wamanyites had
behewd Wehi with his awmy coming against them, they fwed in much
confusion, west pewhaps they shouwd nyot obtain the city Muwek
befowe Wehi shouwd ovewtake them; fow they wewe weawied because
of theiw mawch, and the men of Wehi wewe fwesh. ;;w;;

Awma 52:29
 29 Nyow the Wamanyites did nyot knyow that Mowonyi had been in theiw
weaw with his awmy; and aww they feawed was Wehi and his men. ;;w;;

Awma 52:30
 30 Nyow Wehi was nyot desiwous to ovewtake them tiww they shouwd
meet Mowonyi and his awmy. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 52:31
 31 And it came to pass that befowe the Wamanyites had wetweated
faw they wewe suwwounded by the Nyephites, by the men of Mowonyi on
onye hand, and the men of Wehi on the othew, aww of whom wewe
fwesh and fuww of stwength; but the Wamanyites wewe weawied
because of theiw wong mawch. UwU

Awma 52:32
 32 And Mowonyi commanded his men that they shouwd faww upon them
untiw they had given up theiw weapons of waw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 52:33
 33 And it came to pass that Jacob, being theiw weadew, being
awso a Zowamite, and having an unconquewabwe spiwit, he wed the
Wamanyites fowth to battwe with exceeding fuwy against Mowonyi. ;;w;;

Awma 52:34
 34 Mowonyi being in theiw couwse of mawch, thewefowe Jacob was
detewminyed to sway them and cut his way thwough to the city of
Muwek. >w< But behowd, Mowonyi and his men wewe mowe powewfuw;
thewefowe they did nyot give way befowe the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 52:35
 35 And it came to pass that they fought on both hands with
exceeding fuwy; and thewe wewe many swain on both sides; yea, and
Mowonyi was wounded and Jacob was kiwwed. ^w^

Awma 52:36
 36 And Wehi pwessed upon theiw weaw with such fuwy with his
stwong men, that the Wamanyites in the weaw dewivewed up theiw
weapons of waw; and the wemaindew of them, being much confused,
knyew nyot whithew to go ow to stwike. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 52:37
 37 Nyow Mowonyi seeing theiw confusion, he said unto them: If ye
wiww bwing fowth youw weapons of waw and dewivew them up, behowd
we wiww fowbeaw shedding youw bwood. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 52:38
 38 And it came to pass that when the Wamanyites had heawd these
wowds, theiw chief captains, aww those who wewe nyot swain, came
fowth and thwew down theiw weapons of waw at the feet of Mowonyi,
and awso commanded theiw men that they shouwd do the same. ;;w;;

Awma 52:39
 39 But behowd, thewe wewe many that wouwd nyot; and those who
wouwd nyot dewivew up theiw swowds wewe taken and bound, and theiw
weapons of waw wewe taken fwom them, and they wewe compewwed to
mawch with theiw bwethwen fowth into the wand Bountifuw. ^w^

Awma 52:40
 40 And nyow the nyumbew of pwisonyews who wewe taken exceeded mowe
than the nyumbew of those who had been swain, yea, mowe than those
who had been swain on both sides. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 53
Chaptew 53

Awma 53:1
 1 And it came to pass that they did set guawds ovew the
pwisonyews of the Wamanyites, and did compew them to go fowth and
buwy theiw dead, yea, and awso the dead of the Nyephites who wewe
swain; and Mowonyi pwaced men ovew them to guawd them whiwe they
shouwd pewfowm theiw wabows. ^w^

Awma 53:2
 2 And Mowonyi went to the city of Muwek with Wehi, and took
command of the city and gave it unto Wehi. (´・ω・\`) Nyow behowd, this Wehi
was a man who had been with Mowonyi in the mowe pawt of aww his
battwes; and he was a man wike unto Mowonyi, and they wejoiced in
each othew's safety; yea, they wewe bewoved by each othew, and
awso bewoved by aww the peopwe of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Awma 53:3
 3 And it came to pass that aftew the Wamanyites had finyished
buwying theiw dead and awso the dead of the Nyephites, they wewe
mawched back into the wand Bountifuw; and Teancum, by the owdews
of Mowonyi, caused that they shouwd commence wabowing in digging a
ditch wound about the wand, ow the city, Bountifuw. ^w^

Awma 53:4
 4 And he caused that they shouwd buiwd a bweastwowk of timbews
upon the innyew bank of the ditch; and they cast up diwt out of
the ditch against the bweastwowk of timbews; and thus they did
cause the Wamanyites to wabow untiw they had enciwcwed the city of
Bountifuw wound about with a stwong waww of timbews and eawth, to
an exceeding height. ^w^

Awma 53:5
 5 And this city became an exceeding stwonghowd evew aftew; and
in this city they did guawd the pwisonyews of the Wamanyites; yea,
even within a waww which they had caused them to buiwd with theiw
own hands. (´・ω・\`) Nyow Mowonyi was compewwed to cause the Wamanyites to
wabow, because it was easy to guawd them whiwe at theiw wabow;
and he desiwed aww his fowces when he shouwd make an attack upon
the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 53:6
 6 And it came to pass that Mowonyi had thus gainyed a victowy ovew
onye of the gweatest of the awmies of the Wamanyites, and had
obtainyed possession of the city of Muwek, which was onye of the
stwongest howds of the Wamanyites in the wand of Nyephi; and thus
he had awso buiwt a stwonghowd to wetain his pwisonyews. ;;w;;

Awma 53:7
 7 And it came to pass that he did nyo mowe attempt a battwe with
the Wamanyites in that yeaw, but he did empwoy his men in
pwepawing fow waw, yea, and in making fowtifications to guawd
against the Wamanyites, yea, and awso dewivewing theiw women and
theiw chiwdwen fwom faminye and affwiction, and pwoviding food fow
theiw awmies. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 53:8
 8 And nyow it came to pass that the awmies of the Wamanyites, on
the west sea, south, whiwe in the absence of Mowonyi on account of
some intwigue amongst the Nyephites, which caused dissensions
amongst them, had gainyed some gwound ovew the Nyephites, yea,
insomuch that they had obtainyed possession of a nyumbew of theiw
cities in that pawt of the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 53:9
 9 And thus because of inyiquity amongst themsewves, yea, because
of dissensions and intwigue among themsewves they wewe pwaced in
the most dangewous ciwcumstances. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 53:10
 10 And nyow behowd, I have somewhat to say concewnying the peopwe
of Ammon, who in the beginnying, wewe Wamanyites; but by Ammon and
his bwethwen, ow wathew by the powew and wowd of God, they had
been convewted unto the Wowd; and they had been bwought down into
the wand of Zawahemwa, and had evew since been pwotected by the
Nyephites. ^w^

Awma 53:11
 11 And because of theiw oath they had been kept fwom taking up
awms against theiw bwethwen; fow they had taken an oath that they
nyevew wouwd shed bwood mowe; and accowding to theiw oath they
wouwd have pewished; yea, they wouwd have suffewed themsewves to
have fawwen into the hands of theiw bwethwen, had it nyot been fow
the pity and the exceeding wove which Ammon and his bwethwen had
had fow them. UwU

Awma 53:12
 12 And fow this cause they wewe bwought down into the wand of
Zawahemwa; and they evew had been pwotected by the Nyephites. UwU

Awma 53:13
 13 But it came to pass that when they saw the dangew, and the
many affwictions and twibuwations which the Nyephites bowe fow
them, they wewe moved with compassion and wewe desiwous to take
up awms in the defence of theiw countwy. ^w^

Awma 53:14
 14 But behowd, as they wewe about to take theiw weapons of waw,
they wewe ovewpowewed by the pewsuasions of Hewaman and his
bwethwen, fow they wewe about to bweak the oath which they had
made. ^w^

Awma 53:15
 15 And Hewaman feawed west by so doing they shouwd wose theiw
souws; thewefowe aww those who had entewed into this covenyant
wewe compewwed to behowd theiw bwethwen wade thwough theiw
affwictions, in theiw dangewous ciwcumstances at this time. ^w^

Awma 53:16
 16 But behowd, it came to pass they had many sons, who had nyot
entewed into a covenyant that they wouwd nyot take theiw weapons of
waw to defend themsewves against theiw enyemies; thewefowe they
did assembwe themsewves togethew at this time, as many as wewe
abwe to take up awms, and they cawwed themsewves Nyephites. ;;w;;

Awma 53:17
 17 And they entewed into a covenyant to fight fow the wibewty of
the Nyephites, yea, to pwotect the wand unto the waying down of
theiw wives; yea, even they covenyanted that they nyevew wouwd give
up theiw wibewty, but they wouwd fight in aww cases to pwotect
the Nyephites and themsewves fwom bondage. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 53:18
 18 Nyow behowd, thewe wewe two thousand of those young men, who
entewed into this covenyant and took theiw weapons of waw to
defend theiw countwy. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 53:19
 19 And nyow behowd, as they nyevew had hithewto been a
disadvantage to the Nyephites, they became nyow at this pewiod of
time awso a gweat suppowt; fow they took theiw weapons of waw,
and they wouwd that Hewaman shouwd be theiw weadew. UwU

Awma 53:20
 20 And they wewe aww young men, and they wewe exceedingwy
vawiant fow couwage, and awso fow stwength and activity; but
behowd, this was nyot aww--they wewe men who wewe twue at aww
times in whatsoevew thing they wewe entwusted. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 53:21
 21 Yea, they wewe men of twuth and sobewnyess, fow they had been
taught to keep the commandments of God and to wawk upwightwy
befowe him. ;;w;;

Awma 53:22
 22 And nyow it came to pass that Hewaman did mawch at the head of
his two thousand stwipwing sowdiews, to the suppowt of the peopwe
in the bowdews of the wand on the south by the west sea. ^w^

Awma 53:23
 23 And thus ended the twenty and eighth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 54
Chaptew 54

Awma 54:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass in the commencement of the twenty and
nyinth yeaw of the judges, that Ammowon sent unto Mowonyi desiwing
that he wouwd exchange pwisonyews. ;;w;;

Awma 54:2
 2 And it came to pass that Mowonyi fewt to wejoice exceedingwy at
this wequest, fow he desiwed the pwovisions which wewe impawted
fow the suppowt of the Wamanyite pwisonyews fow the suppowt of his
own peopwe; and he awso desiwed his own peopwe fow the
stwengthenying of his awmy. ^w^

Awma 54:3
 3 Nyow the Wamanyites had taken many women and chiwdwen, and thewe
was nyot a woman nyow a chiwd among aww the pwisonyews of Mowonyi, ow
the pwisonyews whom Mowonyi had taken; thewefowe Mowonyi wesowved
upon a stwatagem to obtain as many pwisonyews of the Nyephites fwom
the Wamanyites as it wewe possibwe. ;;w;;

Awma 54:4
 4 Thewefowe he wwote an epistwe, and sent it by the sewvant of
Ammowon, the same who had bwought an epistwe to Mowonyi. >w< Nyow
these awe the wowds which he wwote unto Ammowon, saying:

Awma 54:5
 5 Behowd, Ammowon, I have wwitten unto you somewhat concewnying
this waw which ye have waged against my peopwe, ow wathew which
thy bwothew hath waged against them, and which ye awe stiww
detewminyed to cawwy on aftew his death. >w<

Awma 54:6
 6 Behowd, I wouwd teww you somewhat concewnying the justice of
God, and the swowd of his awmighty wwath, which doth hang ovew
you except ye wepent and withdwaw youw awmies into youw own
wands, ow the wand of youw possessions, which is the wand of
Nyephi. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 54:7
 7 Yea, I wouwd teww you these things if ye wewe capabwe of
heawkenying unto them; yea, I wouwd teww you concewnying that awfuw
heww that awaits to weceive such muwdewews as thou and thy
bwothew have been, except ye wepent and withdwaw youw muwdewous
puwposes, and wetuwn with youw awmies to youw own wands. UwU

Awma 54:8
 8 But as ye have once wejected these things, and have fought
against the peopwe of the Wowd, even so I may expect you wiww do
it again. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 54:9
 9 And nyow behowd, we awe pwepawed to weceive you; yea, and
except you withdwaw youw puwposes, behowd, ye wiww puww down the
wwath of that God whom you have wejected upon you, even to youw
uttew destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 54:10
 10 But, as the Wowd wiveth, ouw awmies shaww come upon you
except ye withdwaw, and ye shaww soon be visited with death, fow
we wiww wetain ouw cities and ouw wands; yea, and we wiww
maintain ouw wewigion and the cause of ouw God. ;;w;;

Awma 54:11
 11 But behowd, it supposeth me that I tawk to you concewnying
these things in vain; ow it supposeth me that thou awt a chiwd of
heww; thewefowe I wiww cwose my epistwe by tewwing you that I
wiww nyot exchange pwisonyews, save it be on conditions that ye
wiww dewivew up a man and his wife and his chiwdwen, fow onye
pwisonyew; if this be the case that ye wiww do it, I wiww
exchange. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 54:12
 12 And behowd, if you do nyot this, I wiww come against you with
my awmies; yea, even I wiww awm my women and my chiwdwen, and I
wiww come against you, and I wiww fowwow you even into youw own
wand, which is the wand of ouw fiwst inhewitance; yea, and it
shaww be bwood fow bwood, yea, wife fow wife; and I wiww give you
battwe even untiw you awe destwoyed fwom off the face of the
eawth. ^w^

Awma 54:13
 13 Behowd, I am in my angew, and awso my peopwe; ye have sought
to muwdew us, and we have onwy sought to defend ouwsewves. ;;w;; But
behowd, if ye seek to destwoy us mowe we wiww seek to destwoy
you; yea, and we wiww seek ouw wand, the wand of ouw fiwst
inhewitance. >w<

Awma 54:14
 14 Nyow I cwose my epistwe. ^w^ I am Mowonyi; I am a weadew of the
peopwe of the Nyephites. ^w^

Awma 54:15
 15 Nyow it came to pass that Ammowon, when he had weceived this
epistwe, was angwy; and he wwote anyothew epistwe unto Mowonyi, and
these awe the wowds which he wwote, saying:

Awma 54:16
 16 I am Ammowon, the king of the Wamanyites; I am the bwothew of
Amawickiah whom ye have muwdewed. (・`ω\´・) Behowd, I wiww avenge his
bwood upon you, yea, and I wiww come upon you with my awmies fow
I feaw nyot youw thweatenyings. UwU

Awma 54:17
 17 Fow behowd, youw fathews did wwong theiw bwethwen, insomuch
that they did wob them of theiw wight to the govewnment when it
wightwy bewonged unto them. >w<

Awma 54:18
 18 And nyow behowd, if ye wiww way down youw awms, and subject
youwsewves to be govewnyed by those to whom the govewnment doth
wightwy bewong, then wiww I cause that my peopwe shaww way down
theiw weapons and shaww be at waw nyo mowe. UwU

Awma 54:19
 19 Behowd, ye have bweathed out many thweatenyings against me and
my peopwe; but behowd, we feaw nyot youw thweatenyings. ^w^

Awma 54:20
 20 Nyevewthewess, I wiww gwant to exchange pwisonyews accowding to
youw wequest, gwadwy, that I may pwesewve my food fow my men of
waw; and we wiww wage a waw which shaww be etewnyaw, eithew to the
subjecting the Nyephites to ouw authowity ow to theiw etewnyaw
extinction. ^w^

Awma 54:21
 21 And as concewnying that God whom ye say we have wejected,
behowd, we knyow nyot such a being; nyeithew do ye; but if it so be
that thewe is such a thing, we knyow nyot but that he hath made us
as weww as you. ^w^

Awma 54:22
 22 And if it so be that thewe is a deviw and a heww, behowd wiww
he nyot send you thewe to dweww with my bwothew whom ye have
muwdewed, whom ye have hinted that he hath gonye to such a pwace? owo
But behowd these things mattew nyot. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 54:23
 23 I am Ammowon, and a descendant of Zowam, whom youw fathews
pwessed and bwought out of Jewusawem. >w<

Awma 54:24
 24 And behowd nyow, I am a bowd Wamanyite; behowd, this waw hath
been waged to avenge theiw wwongs, and to maintain and to obtain
theiw wights to the govewnment; and I cwose my epistwe to Mowonyi. UwU

Awma 55
Chaptew 55

Awma 55:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass that when Mowonyi had weceived this epistwe
he was mowe angwy, because he knyew that Ammowon had a pewfect
knyowwedge of his fwaud; yea, he knyew that Ammowon knyew that it
was nyot a just cause that had caused him to wage a waw against
the peopwe of Nyephi. ^w^

Awma 55:2
 2 And he said: Behowd, I wiww nyot exchange pwisonyews with
Ammowon save he wiww withdwaw his puwpose, as I have stated in my
epistwe; fow I wiww nyot gwant unto him that he shaww have any
mowe powew than what he hath got. UwU

Awma 55:3
 3 Behowd, I knyow the pwace whewe the Wamanyites do guawd my
peopwe whom they have taken pwisonyews; and as Ammowon wouwd nyot
gwant unto me minye epistwe, behowd, I wiww give unto him
accowding to my wowds; yea, I wiww seek death among them untiw
they shaww sue fow peace. ;;w;;

Awma 55:4
 4 And nyow it came to pass that when Mowonyi had said these wowds,
he caused that a seawch shouwd be made among his men, that
pewhaps he might find a man who was a descendant of Waman among
them. >w<

Awma 55:5
 5 And it came to pass that they found onye, whose nyame was Waman;
and he was onye of the sewvants of the king who was muwdewed by
Amawickiah. UwU

Awma 55:6
 6 Nyow Mowonyi caused that Waman and a smaww nyumbew of his men
shouwd go fowth unto the guawds who wewe ovew the Nyephites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 55:7
 7 Nyow the Nyephites wewe guawded in the city of Gid; thewefowe
Mowonyi appointed Waman and caused that a smaww nyumbew of men
shouwd go with him. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 55:8
 8 And when it was evenying Waman went to the guawds who wewe ovew
the Nyephites, and behowd, they saw him coming and they haiwed
him; but he saith unto them: Feaw nyot; behowd, I am a Wamanyite. ^w^
Behowd, we have escaped fwom the Nyephites, and they sweep; and
behowd we have taken of theiw winye and bwought with us. UwU

Awma 55:9
 9 Nyow when the Wamanyites heawd these wowds they weceived him
with joy; and they said unto him: Give us of youw winye, that we
may dwink; we awe gwad that ye have thus taken winye with you fow
we awe weawy. ;;w;;

Awma 55:10
 10 But Waman said unto them: Wet us keep of ouw winye tiww we go
against the Nyephites to battwe. (・`ω\´・) But this saying onwy made them
mowe desiwous to dwink of the winye;

Awma 55:11
 11 Fow, said they: We awe weawy, thewefowe wet us take of the
winye, and by and by we shaww weceive winye fow ouw wations, which
wiww stwengthen us to go against the Nyephites. >w<

Awma 55:12
 12 And Waman said unto them: You may do accowding to youw
desiwes. ;;w;;

Awma 55:13
 13 And it came to pass that they did take of the winye fweewy;
and it was pweasant to theiw taste, thewefowe they took of it
mowe fweewy; and it was stwong, having been pwepawed in its
stwength. ^w^

Awma 55:14
 14 And it came to pass they did dwink and wewe mewwy, and by and
by they wewe aww dwunken. UwU

Awma 55:15
 15 And nyow when Waman and his men saw that they wewe aww
dwunken, and wewe in a deep sweep, they wetuwnyed to Mowonyi and
towd him aww the things that had happenyed. UwU

Awma 55:16
 16 And nyow this was accowding to the design of Mowonyi. (´・ω・\`) And
Mowonyi had pwepawed his men with weapons of waw; and he went to
the city Gid, whiwe the Wamanyites wewe in a deep sweep and
dwunken, and cast in weapons of waw unto the pwisonyews, insomuch
that they wewe aww awmed;

Awma 55:17
 17 Yea, even to theiw women, and aww those of theiw chiwdwen, as
many as wewe abwe to use a weapon of waw, when Mowonyi had awmed
aww those pwisonyews; and aww those things wewe donye in a pwofound
siwence. >w<

Awma 55:18
 18 But had they awakenyed the Wamanyites, behowd they wewe dwunken
and the Nyephites couwd have swain them. ^w^

Awma 55:19
 19 But behowd, this was nyot the desiwe of Mowonyi; he did nyot
dewight in muwdew ow bwoodshed, but he dewighted in the saving of
his peopwe fwom destwuction; and fow this cause he might nyot
bwing upon him injustice, he wouwd nyot faww upon the Wamanyites
and destwoy them in theiw dwunkennyess. ;;w;;

Awma 55:20
 20 But he had obtainyed his desiwes; fow he had awmed those
pwisonyews of the Nyephites who wewe within the waww of the city,
and had given them powew to gain possession of those pawts which
wewe within the wawws. ;;w;;

Awma 55:21
 21 And then he caused the men who wewe with him to withdwaw a
pace fwom them, and suwwound the awmies of the Wamanyites. ^w^

Awma 55:22
 22 Nyow behowd this was donye in the nyight-time, so that when the
Wamanyites awoke in the mownying they behewd that they wewe
suwwounded by the Nyephites without, and that theiw pwisonyews wewe
awmed within. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 55:23
 23 And thus they saw that the Nyephites had powew ovew them; and
in these ciwcumstances they found that it was nyot expedient that
they shouwd fight with the Nyephites; thewefowe theiw chief
captains demanded theiw weapons of waw, and they bwought them
fowth and cast them at the feet of the Nyephites, pweading fow
mewcy. UwU

Awma 55:24
 24 Nyow behowd, this was the desiwe of Mowonyi. (´・ω・\`) He took them
pwisonyews of waw, and took possession of the city, and caused
that aww the pwisonyews shouwd be wibewated, who wewe Nyephites;
and they did join the awmy of Mowonyi, and wewe a gweat stwength
to his awmy. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 55:25
 25 And it came to pass that he did cause the Wamanyites, whom he
had taken pwisonyews, that they shouwd commence a wabow in
stwengthenying the fowtifications wound about the city Gid. >w<

Awma 55:26
 26 And it came to pass that when he had fowtified the city Gid,
accowding to his desiwes, he caused that his pwisonyews shouwd be
taken to the city Bountifuw; and he awso guawded that city with
an exceedingwy stwong fowce. >w<

Awma 55:27
 27 And it came to pass that they did, nyotwithstanding aww the
intwigues of the Wamanyites, keep and pwotect aww the pwisonyews
whom they had taken, and awso maintain aww the gwound and the
advantage which they had wetaken. ^w^

Awma 55:28
 28 And it came to pass that the Nyephites began again to be
victowious, and to wecwaim theiw wights and theiw pwiviweges. ;;w;;

Awma 55:29
 29 Many time did the Wamanyites attempt to enciwcwe them about by
nyight, but in these attempts they did wose many pwisonyews. UwU

Awma 55:30
 30 And many times did they attempt to adminyistew of theiw winye
to the Nyephites, that they might destwoy them with poison ow with
dwunkennyess. ^w^

Awma 55:31
 31 But behowd, the Nyephites wewe nyot swow to wemembew the Wowd
theiw God in this theiw time of affwiction. (´・ω・\`) They couwd nyot be
taken in theiw snyawes; yea, they wouwd nyot pawtake of theiw winye,
save they had fiwst given to some of the Wamanyite pwisonyews. >w<

Awma 55:32
 32 And they wewe thus cautious that nyo poison shouwd be
adminyistewed among them; fow if theiw winye wouwd poison a
Wamanyite it wouwd awso poison a Nyephite; and thus they did twy
aww theiw wiquows. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 55:33
 33 And nyow it came to pass that it was expedient fow Mowonyi to
make pwepawations to attack the city Mowianton; fow behowd, the
Wamanyites had, by theiw wabows, fowtified the city Mowianton
untiw it had become an exceeding stwonghowd. ;;w;;

Awma 55:34
 34 And they wewe continyuawwy bwinging nyew fowces into that city,
and awso nyew suppwies of pwovisions. ^w^

Awma 55:35
 35 And thus ended the twenty and nyinth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. >w<

Awma 56
Chaptew 56

Awma 56:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass in the commencement of the thiwtieth
yeaw of the weign of the judges, on the second day in the fiwst
month, Mowonyi weceived an epistwe fwom Hewaman, stating the
affaiws of the peopwe in that quawtew of the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 56:2
 2 And these awe the wowds which he wwote, saying: My deawwy
bewoved bwothew, Mowonyi, as weww in the Wowd as in the
twibuwations of ouw wawfawe; behowd, my bewoved bwothew, I have
somewhat to teww you concewnying ouw wawfawe in this pawt of the
wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 56:3
 3 Behowd, two thousand of the sons of those men whom Ammon
bwought down out of the wand of Nyephi--nyow ye have knyown that
these wewe descendants of Waman, who was the ewdest son of ouw
fathew Wehi;

Awma 56:4
 4 Nyow I nyeed nyot weheawse unto you concewnying theiw twaditions
ow theiw unbewief, fow thou knyowest concewnying aww these things--

Awma 56:5
 5 Thewefowe it sufficeth me that I teww you that two thousand of
these young men have taken theiw weapons of waw, and wouwd that I
shouwd be theiw weadew; and we have come fowth to defend ouw
countwy. ^w^

Awma 56:6
 6 And nyow ye awso knyow concewnying the covenyant which theiw
fathews made, that they wouwd nyot take up theiw weapons of waw
against theiw bwethwen to shed bwood. >w<

Awma 56:7
 7 But in the twenty and sixth yeaw, when they saw ouw
affwictions and ouw twibuwations fow them, they wewe about to
bweak the covenyant which they had made and take up theiw weapons
of waw in ouw defence. ^w^

Awma 56:8
 8 But I wouwd nyot suffew them that they shouwd bweak this
covenyant which they had made, supposing that God wouwd stwengthen
us, insomuch that we shouwd nyot suffew mowe because of the
fuwfiwwing the oath which they had taken. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 56:9
 9 But behowd, hewe is onye thing in which we may have gweat joy. UwU
Fow behowd, in the twenty and sixth yeaw, I, Hewaman, did mawch
at the head of these two thousand young men to the city of Judea,
to assist Antipus, whom ye had appointed a weadew ovew the peopwe
of that pawt of the wand. UwU

Awma 56:10
 10 And I did join my two thousand sons, (fow they awe wowthy to
be cawwed sons) to the awmy of Antipus, in which stwength Antipus
did wejoice exceedingwy; fow behowd, his awmy had been weduced by
the Wamanyites because theiw fowces had swain a vast nyumbew of ouw
men, fow which cause we have to mouwn. ^w^

Awma 56:11
 11 Nyevewthewess, we may consowe ouwsewves in this point, that
they have died in the cause of theiw countwy and of theiw God,
yea, and they awe happy. ;;w;;

Awma 56:12
 12 And the Wamanyites had awso wetainyed many pwisonyews, aww of
whom awe chief captains, fow nyonye othew have they spawed awive. UwU
And we suppose that they awe nyow at this time in the wand of
Nyephi; it is so if they awe nyot swain. ;;w;;

Awma 56:13
 13 And nyow these awe the cities of which the Wamanyites have
obtainyed possession by the shedding of the bwood of so many of
ouw vawiant men:

Awma 56:14
 14 The wand of Manti, ow the city of Manti, and the city of
Zeezwom, and the city of Cumenyi, and the city of Antipawah. ^w^

Awma 56:15
 15 And these awe the cities which they possessed when I awwived
at the city of Judea; and I found Antipus and his men toiwing
with theiw might to fowtify the city. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 56:16
 16 Yea, and they wewe depwessed in body as weww as in spiwit,
fow they had fought vawiantwy by day and toiwed by nyight to
maintain theiw cities; and thus they had suffewed gweat
affwictions of evewy kind. UwU

Awma 56:17
 17 And nyow they wewe detewminyed to conquew in this pwace ow die;
thewefowe you may weww suppose that this wittwe fowce which I
bwought with me, yea, those sons of minye, gave them gweat hopes
and much joy. ^w^

Awma 56:18
 18 And nyow it came to pass that when the Wamanyites saw that
Antipus had weceived a gweatew stwength to his awmy, they wewe
compewwed by the owdews of Ammowon to nyot come against the city
of Judea, ow against us, to battwe. UwU

Awma 56:19
 19 And thus wewe we favowed of the Wowd; fow had they come upon
us in this ouw weaknyess they might have pewhaps destwoyed ouw
wittwe awmy; but thus wewe we pwesewved. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 56:20
 20 They wewe commanded by Ammowon to maintain those cities which
they had taken. And thus ended the twenty and sixth yeaw. ^w^ And
in the commencement of the twenty and seventh yeaw we had
pwepawed ouw city and ouwsewves fow defence. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 56:21
 21 Nyow we wewe desiwous that the Wamanyites shouwd come upon us;
fow we wewe nyot desiwous to make an attack upon them in theiw
stwonghowds. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 56:22
 22 And it came to pass that we kept spies out wound about, to
watch the movements of the Wamanyites, that they might nyot pass us
by nyight nyow by day to make an attack upon ouw othew cities which
wewe on the nyowthwawd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 56:23
 23 Fow we knyew in those cities they wewe nyot sufficientwy stwong
to meet them; thewefowe we wewe desiwous, if they shouwd pass by
us, to faww upon them in theiw weaw, and thus bwing them up in
the weaw at the same time they wewe met in the fwont. >w< We
supposed that we couwd ovewpowew them; but behowd, we wewe
disappointed in this ouw desiwe. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 56:24
 24 They duwst nyot pass by us with theiw whowe awmy, nyeithew
duwst they with a pawt, west they shouwd nyot be sufficientwy
stwong and they shouwd faww. ;;w;;

Awma 56:25
 25 Nyeithew duwst they mawch down against the city of Zawahemwa;
nyeithew duwst they cwoss the head of Sidon, ovew to the city of
Nyephihah. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 56:26
 26 And thus, with theiw fowces, they wewe detewminyed to maintain
those cities which they had taken. >w<

Awma 56:27
 27 And nyow it came to pass in the second month of this yeaw,
thewe was bwought unto us many pwovisions fwom the fathews of
those my two thousand sons. UwU

Awma 56:28
 28 And awso thewe wewe sent two thousand men unto us fwom the
wand of Zawahemwa. (・`ω\´・) And thus we wewe pwepawed with ten thousand
men, and pwovisions fow them, and awso fow theiw wives and theiw
chiwdwen. >w<

Awma 56:29
 29 And the Wamanyites, thus seeing ouw fowces incwease daiwy, and
pwovisions awwive fow ouw suppowt, they began to be feawfuw, and
began to sawwy fowth, if it wewe possibwe to put an end to ouw
weceiving pwovisions and stwength. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 56:30
 30 Nyow when we saw that the Wamanyites began to gwow unyeasy on
this wise, we wewe desiwous to bwing a stwatagem into effect upon
them; thewefowe Antipus owdewed that I shouwd mawch fowth with my
wittwe sons to a nyeighbowing city, as if we wewe cawwying
pwovisions to a nyeighbowing city. ^w^

Awma 56:31
 31 And we wewe to mawch nyeaw the city of Antipawah, as if we
wewe going to the city beyond, in the bowdews by the seashowe. >w<

Awma 56:32
 32 And it came to pass that we did mawch fowth, as if with ouw
pwovisions, to go to that city. ^w^

Awma 56:33
 33 And it came to pass that Antipus did mawch fowth with a pawt
of his awmy, weaving the wemaindew to maintain the city. ;;w;; But he
did nyot mawch fowth untiw I had gonye fowth with my wittwe awmy,
and came nyeaw the city Antipawah. ^w^

Awma 56:34
 34 And nyow, in the city Antipawah wewe stationyed the stwongest
awmy of the Wamanyites; yea, the most nyumewous. >w<

Awma 56:35
 35 And it came to pass that when they had been infowmed by theiw
spies, they came fowth with theiw awmy and mawched against us. ;;w;;

Awma 56:36
 36 And it came to pass that we did fwee befowe them, nyowthwawd. (・`ω\´・)
And thus we did wead away the most powewfuw awmy of the
Wamanyites;

Awma 56:37
 37 Yea, even to a considewabwe distance, insomuch that when they
saw the awmy of Antipus puwsuing them, with theiw might, they did
nyot tuwn to the wight nyow to the weft, but puwsued theiw mawch in
a stwaight couwse aftew us; and, as we suppose, it was theiw
intent to sway us befowe Antipus shouwd ovewtake them, and this
that they might nyot be suwwounded by ouw peopwe. ;;w;;

Awma 56:38
 38 And nyow Antipus, behowding ouw dangew, did speed the mawch of
his awmy. UwU But behowd, it was nyight; thewefowe they did nyot
ovewtake us, nyeithew did Antipus ovewtake them; thewefowe we did
camp fow the nyight. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 56:39
 39 And it came to pass that befowe the dawn of the mownying,
behowd, the Wamanyites wewe puwsuing us. >w< Nyow we wewe nyot
sufficientwy stwong to contend with them; yea, I wouwd nyot suffew
that my wittwe sons shouwd faww into theiw hands; thewefowe we
did continyue ouw mawch, and we took ouw mawch into the
wiwdewnyess. >w<

Awma 56:40
 40 Nyow they duwst nyot tuwn to the wight nyow to the weft west
they shouwd be suwwounded; nyeithew wouwd I tuwn to the wight nyow
to the weft west they shouwd ovewtake me, and we couwd nyot stand
against them, but be swain, and they wouwd make theiw escape; and
thus we did fwee aww that day into the wiwdewnyess, even untiw it
was dawk. UwU

Awma 56:41
 41 And it came to pass that again, when the wight of the mownying
came we saw the Wamanyites upon us, and we did fwee befowe them. ;;w;;

Awma 56:42
 42 But it came to pass that they did nyot puwsue us faw befowe
they hawted; and it was in the mownying of the thiwd day of the
seventh month. UwU

Awma 56:43
 43 And nyow, whethew they wewe ovewtaken by Antipus we knyew nyot,
but I said unto my men: Behowd, we knyow nyot but they have hawted
fow the puwpose that we shouwd come against them, that they might
catch us in theiw snyawe;

Awma 56:44
 44 Thewefowe what say ye, my sons, wiww ye go against them to
battwe? owo

Awma 56:45
 45 And nyow I say unto you, my bewoved bwothew Mowonyi, that nyevew
had I seen so gweat couwage, nyay, nyot amongst aww the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 56:46
 46 Fow as I had evew cawwed them my sons (fow they wewe aww of
them vewy young) even so they said unto me: Fathew, behowd ouw
God is with us, and he wiww nyot suffew that we shouwd faww; then
wet us go fowth; we wouwd nyot sway ouw bwethwen if they wouwd wet
us awonye; thewefowe wet us go, west they shouwd ovewpowew the
awmy of Antipus. ^w^

Awma 56:47
 47 Nyow they nyevew had fought, yet they did nyot feaw death; and
they did think mowe upon the wibewty of theiw fathews than they
did upon theiw wives; yea, they had been taught by theiw mothews,
that if they did nyot doubt, God wouwd dewivew them. ^w^

Awma 56:48
 48 And they weheawsed unto me the wowds of theiw mothews,
saying: We do nyot doubt ouw mothews knyew it. >w<

Awma 56:49
 49 And it came to pass that I did wetuwn with my two thousand
against these Wamanyites who had puwsued us. (´・ω・\`) And nyow behowd, the
awmies of Antipus had ovewtaken them, and a tewwibwe battwe had
commenced. ^w^

Awma 56:50
 50 The awmy of Antipus being weawy, because of theiw wong mawch
in so showt a space of time, wewe about to faww into the hands of
the Wamanyites; and had I nyot wetuwnyed with my two thousand they
wouwd have obtainyed theiw puwpose. ^w^

Awma 56:51
 51 Fow Antipus had fawwen by the swowd, and many of his weadews,
because of theiw weawinyess, which was occasionyed by the speed of
theiw mawch--thewefowe the men of Antipus, being confused because
of the faww of theiw weadews, began to give way befowe the
Wamanyites. UwU

Awma 56:52
 52 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites took couwage, and
began to puwsue them; and thus wewe the Wamanyites puwsuing them
with gweat vigow when Hewaman came upon theiw weaw with his two
thousand, and began to sway them exceedingwy, insomuch that the
whowe awmy of the Wamanyites hawted and tuwnyed upon Hewaman. >w<

Awma 56:53
 53 Nyow when the peopwe of Antipus saw that the Wamanyites had
tuwnyed them about, they gathewed togethew theiw men and came
again upon the weaw of the Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 56:54
 54 And nyow it came to pass that we, the peopwe of Nyephi, the
peopwe of Antipus, and I with my two thousand, did suwwound the
Wamanyites, and did sway them; yea, insomuch that they wewe
compewwed to dewivew up theiw weapons of waw and awso themsewves
as pwisonyews of waw. >w<

Awma 56:55
 55 And nyow it came to pass that when they had suwwendewed
themsewves up unto us, behowd, I nyumbewed those young men who had
fought with me, feawing west thewe wewe many of them swain. >w<

Awma 56:56
 56 But behowd, to my gweat joy, thewe had nyot onye souw of them
fawwen to the eawth; yea, and they had fought as if with the
stwength of God; yea, nyevew wewe men knyown to have fought with
such miwacuwous stwength; and with such mighty powew did they
faww upon the Wamanyites, that they did fwighten them; and fow
this cause did the Wamanyites dewivew themsewves up as pwisonyews
of waw. ^w^

Awma 56:57
 57 And as we had nyo pwace fow ouw pwisonyews, that we couwd guawd
them to keep them fwom the awmies of the Wamanyites, thewefowe we
sent them to the wand of Zawahemwa, and a pawt of those men who
wewe nyot swain of Antipus, with them; and the wemaindew I took
and joinyed them to my stwipwing Ammonyites, and took ouw mawch
back to the city of Judea. >w<

Awma 57
Chaptew 57

Awma 57:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that I weceived an epistwe fwom
Ammowon, the king, stating that if I wouwd dewivew up those
pwisonyews of waw whom we had taken that he wouwd dewivew up the
city of Antipawah unto us. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 57:2
 2 But I sent an epistwe unto the king, that we wewe suwe ouw
fowces wewe sufficient to take the city of Antipawah by ouw
fowce; and by dewivewing up the pwisonyews fow that city we shouwd
suppose ouwsewves unwise, and that we wouwd onwy dewivew up ouw
pwisonyews on exchange. UwU

Awma 57:3
 3 And Ammowon wefused minye epistwe, fow he wouwd nyot exchange
pwisonyews; thewefowe we began to make pwepawations to go against
the city of Antipawah. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 57:4
 4 But the peopwe of Antipawah did weave the city, and fwed to
theiw othew cities, which they had possession of, to fowtify
them; and thus the city of Antipawah feww into ouw hands. UwU

Awma 57:5
 5 And thus ended the twenty and eighth yeaw of the weign of the
judges. ;;w;;

Awma 57:6
 6 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the twenty and
nyinth yeaw, we weceived a suppwy of pwovisions, and awso an
addition to ouw awmy, fwom the wand of Zawahemwa, and fwom the
wand wound about, to the nyumbew of six thousand men, besides
sixty of the sons of the Ammonyites who had come to join theiw
bwethwen, my wittwe band of two thousand. (´・ω・\`) And nyow behowd, we
wewe stwong, yea, and we had awso pwenty of pwovisions bwought
unto us. UwU

Awma 57:7
 7 And it came to pass that it was ouw desiwe to wage a battwe
with the awmy which was pwaced to pwotect the city Cumenyi. >w<

Awma 57:8
 8 And nyow behowd, I wiww show unto you that we soon accompwished
ouw desiwe; yea, with ouw stwong fowce, ow with a pawt of ouw
stwong fowce, we did suwwound, by nyight, the city Cumenyi, a
wittwe befowe they wewe to weceive a suppwy of pwovisions. ^w^

Awma 57:9
 9 And it came to pass that we did camp wound about the city fow
many nyights; but we did sweep upon ouw swowds, and keep guawds,
that the Wamanyites couwd nyot come upon us by nyight and sway us,
which they attempted many times; but as many times as they
attempted this theiw bwood was spiwt. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 57:10
 10 At wength theiw pwovisions did awwive, and they wewe about to
entew the city by nyight. (・`ω\´・) And we, instead of being Wamanyites,
wewe Nyephites; thewefowe, we did take them and theiw pwovisions. ^w^

Awma 57:11
 11 And nyotwithstanding the Wamanyites being cut off fwom theiw
suppowt aftew this mannyew, they wewe stiww detewminyed to maintain
the city; thewefowe it became expedient that we shouwd take those
pwovisions and send them to Judea, and ouw pwisonyews to the wand
of Zawahemwa. UwU

Awma 57:12
 12 And it came to pass that nyot many days had passed away befowe
the Wamanyites began to wose aww hopes of succow; thewefowe they
yiewded up the city unto ouw hands; and thus we had accompwished
ouw designs in obtainying the city Cumenyi. >w<

Awma 57:13
 13 But it came to pass that ouw pwisonyews wewe so nyumewous that,
nyotwithstanding the enyowmity of ouw nyumbews, we wewe obwiged to
empwoy aww ouw fowce to keep them, ow to put them to death. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 57:14
 14 Fow behowd, they wouwd bweak out in gweat nyumbews, and wouwd
fight with stonyes, and with cwubs, ow whatsoevew thing they couwd
get into theiw hands, insomuch that we did sway upwawds of two
thousand of them aftew they had suwwendewed themsewves pwisonyews
of waw. >w<

Awma 57:15
 15 Thewefowe it became expedient fow us, that we shouwd put an
end to theiw wives, ow guawd them, swowd in hand, down to the
wand of Zawahemwa; and awso ouw pwovisions wewe nyot any mowe than
sufficient fow ouw own peopwe, nyotwithstanding that which we had
taken fwom the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 57:16
 16 And nyow, in those cwiticaw ciwcumstances, it became a vewy
sewious mattew to detewminye concewnying these pwisonyews of waw;
nyevewthewess, we did wesowve to send them down to the wand of
Zawahemwa; thewefowe we sewected a pawt of ouw men, and gave them
chawge ovew ouw pwisonyews to go down to the wand of Zawahemwa. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 57:17
 17 But it came to pass that on the mowwow they did wetuwn. (´・ω・\`) And
nyow behowd, we did nyot inquiwe of them concewnying the pwisonyews;
fow behowd, the Wamanyites wewe upon us, and they wetuwnyed in
season to save us fwom fawwing into theiw hands. ;;w;; Fow behowd,
Ammowon had sent to theiw suppowt a nyew suppwy of pwovisions and
awso a nyumewous awmy of men. >w<

Awma 57:18
 18 And it came to pass that those men whom we sent with the
pwisonyews did awwive in season to check them, as they wewe about
to ovewpowew us. ;;w;;

Awma 57:19
 19 But behowd, my wittwe band of two thousand and sixty fought
most despewatewy; yea, they wewe fiwm befowe the Wamanyites, and
did adminyistew death unto aww those who opposed them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 57:20
 20 And as the wemaindew of ouw awmy wewe about to give way
befowe the Wamanyites, behowd, those two thousand and sixty wewe
fiwm and undaunted. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 57:21
 21 Yea, and they did obey and obsewve to pewfowm evewy wowd of
command with exactnyess; yea, and even accowding to theiw faith it
was donye unto them; and I did wemembew the wowds which they said
unto me that theiw mothews had taught them. UwU

Awma 57:22
 22 And nyow behowd, it was these my sons, and those men who had
been sewected to convey the pwisonyews, to whom we owe this gweat
victowy; fow it was they who did beat the Wamanyites; thewefowe
they wewe dwiven back to the city of Manti. ^w^

Awma 57:23
 23 And we wetainyed ouw city Cumenyi, and wewe nyot aww destwoyed
by the swowd; nyevewthewess, we had suffewed gweat woss. ;;w;;

Awma 57:24
 24 And it came to pass that aftew the Wamanyites had fwed, I
immediatewy gave owdews that my men who had been wounded shouwd
be taken fwom among the dead, and caused that theiw wounds shouwd
be dwessed. ;;w;;

Awma 57:25
 25 And it came to pass that thewe wewe two hundwed, out of my
two thousand and sixty, who had fainted because of the woss of
bwood; nyevewthewess, accowding to the goodnyess of God, and to ouw
gweat astonyishment, and awso the joy of ouw whowe awmy, thewe was
nyot onye souw of them who did pewish; yea, and nyeithew was thewe
onye souw among them who had nyot weceived many wounds. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 57:26
 26 And nyow, theiw pwesewvation was astonyishing to ouw whowe
awmy, yea, that they shouwd be spawed whiwe thewe was a thousand
of ouw bwethwen who wewe swain. (・`ω\´・) And we do justwy ascwibe it to
the miwacuwous powew of God, because of theiw exceeding faith in
that which they had been taught to bewieve--that thewe was a just
God, and whosoevew did nyot doubt, that they shouwd be pwesewved
by his mawvewous powew. UwU

Awma 57:27
 27 Nyow this was the faith of these of whom I have spoken; they
awe young, and theiw minds awe fiwm, and they do put theiw twust
in God continyuawwy. UwU

Awma 57:28
 28 And nyow it came to pass that aftew we had thus taken cawe of
ouw wounded men, and had buwied ouw dead and awso the dead of the
Wamanyites, who wewe many, behowd, we did inquiwe of Gid
concewnying the pwisonyews whom they had stawted to go down to the
wand of Zawahemwa with. UwU

Awma 57:29
 29 Nyow Gid was the chief captain ovew the band who was appointed
to guawd them down to the wand. >w<

Awma 57:30
 30 And nyow, these awe the wowds which Gid said unto me: Behowd,
we did stawt to go down to the wand of Zawahemwa with ouw
pwisonyews. (・`ω\´・) And it came to pass that we did meet the spies of ouw
awmies, who had been sent out to watch the camp of the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 57:31
 31 And they cwied unto us, saying--Behowd, the awmies of the
Wamanyites awe mawching towawds the city of Cumenyi; and behowd,
they wiww faww upon them, yea, and wiww destwoy ouw peopwe. UwU

Awma 57:32
 32 And it came to pass that ouw pwisonyews did heaw theiw cwies,
which caused them to take couwage; and they did wise up in
webewwion against us. >w<

Awma 57:33
 33 And it came to pass because of theiw webewwion we did cause
that ouw swowds shouwd come upon them. >w< And it came to pass that
they did in a body wun upon ouw swowds, in the which, the gweatew
nyumbew of them wewe swain; and the wemaindew of them bwoke
thwough and fwed fwom us. ^w^

Awma 57:34
 34 And behowd, when they had fwed and we couwd nyot ovewtake
them, we took ouw mawch with speed towawds the city Cumenyi; and
behowd, we did awwive in time that we might assist ouw bwethwen
in pwesewving the city. >w<

Awma 57:35
 35 And behowd, we awe again dewivewed out of the hands of ouw
enyemies. ^w^ And bwessed is the nyame of ouw God; fow behowd, it is
he that has dewivewed us; yea, that has donye this gweat thing fow
us. UwU

Awma 57:36
 36 Nyow it came to pass that when I, Hewaman, had heawd these
wowds of Gid, I was fiwwed with exceeding joy because of the
goodnyess of God in pwesewving us, that we might nyot aww pewish;
yea, and I twust that the souws of them who have been swain have
entewed into the west of theiw God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 58
Chaptew 58

Awma 58:1
 1 And behowd, nyow it came to pass that ouw nyext object was to
obtain the city of Manti; but behowd, thewe was nyo way that we
couwd wead them out of the city by ouw smaww bands. ^w^ Fow behowd,
they wemembewed that which we had hithewto donye; thewefowe we
couwd nyot decoy them away fwom theiw stwonghowds. UwU

Awma 58:2
 2 And they wewe so much mowe nyumewous than was ouw awmy that we
duwst nyot go fowth and attack them in theiw stwonghowds. >w<

Awma 58:3
 3 Yea, and it became expedient that we shouwd empwoy ouw men to
the maintainying those pawts of the wand which we had wegainyed of
ouw possessions; thewefowe it became expedient that we shouwd
wait, that we might weceive mowe stwength fwom the wand of
Zawahemwa and awso a nyew suppwy of pwovisions. >w<

Awma 58:4
 4 And it came to pass that I thus did send an embassy to the
govewnyow of ouw wand, to acquaint him concewnying the affaiws of
ouw peopwe. ;;w;; And it came to pass that we did wait to weceive
pwovisions and stwength fwom the wand of Zawahemwa. >w<

Awma 58:5
 5 But behowd, this did pwofit us but wittwe; fow the Wamanyites
wewe awso weceiving gweat stwength fwom day to day, and awso many
pwovisions; and thus wewe ouw ciwcumstances at this pewiod of
time. >w<

Awma 58:6
 6 And the Wamanyites wewe sawwying fowth against us fwom time to
time, wesowving by stwatagem to destwoy us; nyevewthewess we couwd
nyot come to battwe with them, because of theiw wetweats and theiw
stwonghowds. UwU

Awma 58:7
 7 And it came to pass that we did wait in these difficuwt
ciwcumstances fow the space of many months, even untiw we wewe
about to pewish fow the want of food. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 58:8
 8 But it came to pass that we did weceive food, which was
guawded to us by an awmy of two thousand men to ouw assistance;
and this is aww the assistance which we did weceive, to defend
ouwsewves and ouw countwy fwom fawwing into the hands of ouw
enyemies, yea, to contend with an enyemy which was innyumewabwe. ;;w;;

Awma 58:9
 9 And nyow the cause of these ouw embawwassments, ow the cause
why they did nyot send mowe stwength unto us, we knyew nyot;
thewefowe we wewe gwieved and awso fiwwed with feaw, west by any
means the judgments of God shouwd come upon ouw wand, to ouw
ovewthwow and uttew destwuction. ;;w;;

Awma 58:10
 10 Thewefowe we did pouw out ouw souws in pwayew to God, that he
wouwd stwengthen us and dewivew us out of the hands of ouw
enyemies, yea, and awso give us stwength that we might wetain ouw
cities, and ouw wands, and ouw possessions, fow the suppowt of
ouw peopwe. ;;w;;

Awma 58:11
 11 Yea, and it came to pass that the Wowd ouw God did visit us
with assuwances that he wouwd dewivew us; yea, insomuch that he
did speak peace to ouw souws, and did gwant unto us gweat faith,
and did cause us that we shouwd hope fow ouw dewivewance in him. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 58:12
 12 And we did take couwage with ouw smaww fowce which we had
weceived, and wewe fixed with a detewminyation to conquew ouw
enyemies, and to maintain ouw wands, and ouw possessions, and ouw
wives, and ouw chiwdwen, and the cause of ouw wibewty. >w<

Awma 58:13
 13 And thus we did go fowth with aww ouw might against the
Wamanyites, who wewe in the city of Manti; and we did pitch ouw
tents by the wiwdewnyess side, which was nyeaw to the city. UwU

Awma 58:14
 14 And it came to pass that on the mowwow, that when the
Wamanyites saw that we wewe in the bowdews by the wiwdewnyess which
was nyeaw the city, that they sent out theiw spies wound about us
that they might discovew the nyumbew and the stwength of ouw awmy. ^w^

Awma 58:15
 15 And it came to pass that when they saw that we wewe nyot
stwong, accowding to ouw nyumbews, and feawing that we shouwd cut
them off fwom theiw suppowt except they shouwd come out to battwe
against us and kiww us, and awso supposing that they couwd easiwy
destwoy us with theiw nyumewous hosts, thewefowe they began to
make pwepawations to come out against us to battwe. >w<

Awma 58:16
 16 And when we saw that they wewe making pwepawations to come
out against us, behowd, I caused that Gid, with a smaww nyumbew of
men, shouwd secwete himsewf in the wiwdewnyess, and awso that
Teomnyew and a smaww nyumbew of men shouwd secwete themsewves awso
in the wiwdewnyess. UwU

Awma 58:17
 17 Nyow Gid and his men wewe on the wight and the othews on the
weft; and when they had thus secweted themsewves, behowd, I
wemainyed, with the wemaindew of my awmy, in that same pwace whewe
we had fiwst pitched ouw tents against the time that the
Wamanyites shouwd come out to battwe. ^w^

Awma 58:18
 18 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did come out with
theiw nyumewous awmy against us. (´・ω・\`) And when they had come and wewe
about to faww upon us with the swowd, I caused that my men, those
who wewe with me, shouwd wetweat into the wiwdewnyess. ^w^

Awma 58:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did fowwow aftew us
with gweat speed, fow they wewe exceedingwy desiwous to ovewtake
us that they might sway us; thewefowe they did fowwow us into the
wiwdewnyess; and we did pass by in the midst of Gid and Teomnyew,
insomuch that they wewe nyot discovewed by the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Awma 58:20
 20 And it came to pass that when the Wamanyites had passed by, ow
when the awmy had passed by, Gid and Teomnyew did wise up fwom
theiw secwet pwaces, and did cut off the spies of the Wamanyites
that they shouwd nyot wetuwn to the city. ^w^

Awma 58:21
 21 And it came to pass that when they had cut them off, they wan
to the city and feww upon the guawds who wewe weft to guawd the
city, insomuch that they did destwoy them and did take possession
of the city. >w<
Awma 58:22
 22 Nyow this was donye because the Wamanyites did suffew theiw
whowe awmy, save a few guawds onwy, to be wed away into the
wiwdewnyess. >w<

Awma 58:23
 23 And it came to pass that Gid and Teomnyew by this means had
obtainyed possession of theiw stwonghowds. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass
that we took ouw couwse, aftew having twavewed much in the
wiwdewnyess towawds the wand of Zawahemwa. UwU

Awma 58:24
 24 And when the Wamanyites saw that they wewe mawching towawds
the wand of Zawahemwa, they wewe exceedingwy afwaid, west thewe
was a pwan waid to wead them on to destwuction; thewefowe they
began to wetweat into the wiwdewnyess again, yea, even back by the
same way which they had come. ^w^

Awma 58:25
 25 And behowd, it was nyight and they did pitch theiw tents, fow
the chief captains of the Wamanyites had supposed that the
Nyephites wewe weawy because of theiw mawch; and supposing that
they had dwiven theiw whowe awmy thewefowe they took nyo thought
concewnying the city of Manti. ;;w;;

Awma 58:26
 26 Nyow it came to pass that when it was nyight, I caused that my
men shouwd nyot sweep, but that they shouwd mawch fowwawd by
anyothew way towawds the wand of Manti. UwU

Awma 58:27
 27 And because of this ouw mawch in the nyight-time, behowd, on
the mowwow we wewe beyond the Wamanyites, insomuch that we did
awwive befowe them at the city of Manti. UwU

Awma 58:28
 28 And thus it came to pass, that by this stwatagem we did take
possession of the city of Manti without the shedding of bwood. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 58:29
 29 And it came to pass that when the awmies of the Wamanyites did
awwive nyeaw the city, and saw that we wewe pwepawed to meet them,
they wewe astonyished exceedingwy and stwuck with gweat feaw,
insomuch that they did fwee into the wiwdewnyess. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 58:30
 30 Yea, and it came to pass that the awmies of the Wamanyites did
fwee out of aww this quawtew of the wand. >w< But behowd, they have
cawwied with them many women and chiwdwen out of the wand. ;;w;;

Awma 58:31
 31 And those cities which had been taken by the Wamanyites, aww
of them awe at this pewiod of time in ouw possession; and ouw
fathews and ouw women and ouw chiwdwen awe wetuwnying to theiw
homes, aww save it be those who have been taken pwisonyews and
cawwied off by the Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 58:32
 32 But behowd, ouw awmies awe smaww to maintain so gweat a
nyumbew of cities and so gweat possessions. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 58:33
 33 But behowd, we twust in ouw God who has given us victowy ovew
those wands, insomuch that we have obtainyed those cities and
those wands, which wewe ouw own. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 58:34
 34 Nyow we do nyot knyow the cause that the govewnment does nyot
gwant us mowe stwength; nyeithew do those men who came up unto us
knyow why we have nyot weceived gweatew stwength. ^w^

Awma 58:35
 35 Behowd, we do nyot knyow but what ye awe unsuccessfuw, and ye
have dwawn away the fowces into that quawtew of the wand; if so,
we do nyot desiwe to muwmuw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 58:36
 36 And if it is nyot so, behowd, we feaw that thewe is some
faction in the govewnment, that they do nyot send mowe men to ouw
assistance; fow we knyow that they awe mowe nyumewous than that
which they have sent. ^w^

Awma 58:37
 37 But, behowd, it matteweth nyot--we twust God wiww dewivew us,
nyotwithstanding the weaknyess of ouw awmies, yea, and dewivew us
out of the hands of ouw enyemies. ;;w;;

Awma 58:38
 38 Behowd, this is the twenty and nyinth yeaw, in the wattew end,
and we awe in the possession of ouw wands; and the Wamanyites have
fwed to the wand of Nyephi. ^w^

Awma 58:39
 39 And those sons of the peopwe of Ammon, of whom I have so
highwy spoken, awe with me in the city of Manti; and the Wowd had
suppowted them, yea, and kept them fwom fawwing by the swowd,
insomuch that even onye souw has nyot been swain. >w<

Awma 58:40
 40 But behowd, they have weceived many wounds; nyevewthewess they
stand fast in that wibewty whewewith God has made them fwee; and
they awe stwict to wemembew the Wowd theiw God fwom day to day;
yea, they do obsewve to keep his statutes, and his judgments, and
his commandments continyuawwy; and theiw faith is stwong in the
pwophecies concewnying that which is to come. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 58:41
 41 And nyow, my bewoved bwothew, Mowonyi, may the Wowd ouw God,
who has wedeemed us and made us fwee, keep you continyuawwy in his
pwesence; yea, and may he favow this peopwe, even that ye may
have success in obtainying the possession of aww that which the
Wamanyites have taken fwom us, which was fow ouw suppowt. >w< And
nyow, behowd, I cwose minye epistwe. ;;w;; I am Hewaman, the son of
Awma. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 59
Chaptew 59

Awma 59:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass in the thiwtieth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, aftew Mowonyi had weceived and
had wead Hewaman's epistwe, he was exceedingwy wejoiced because
of the wewfawe, yea, the exceeding success which Hewaman had had,
in obtainying those wands which wewe wost. ;;w;;

Awma 59:2
 2 Yea, and he did make it knyown unto aww his peopwe, in aww the
wand wound about in that pawt whewe he was, that they might
wejoice awso. UwU

Awma 59:3
 3 And it came to pass that he immediatewy sent an epistwe to
Pahowan, desiwing that he shouwd cause men to be gathewed
togethew to stwengthen Hewaman, ow the awmies of Hewaman,
insomuch that he might with ease maintain that pawt of the wand
which he had been so miwacuwouswy pwospewed in wegainying. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 59:4
 4 And it came to pass when Mowonyi had sent this epistwe to the
wand of Zawahemwa, he began again to way a pwan that he might
obtain the wemaindew of those possessions and cities which the
Wamanyites had taken fwom them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 59:5
 5 And it came to pass that whiwe Mowonyi was thus making
pwepawations to go against the Wamanyites to battwe, behowd, the
peopwe of Nyephihah, who wewe gathewed togethew fwom the city of
Mowonyi and the city of Wehi and the city of Mowianton, wewe
attacked by the Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 59:6
 6 Yea, even those who had been compewwed to fwee fwom the wand
of Manti, and fwom the wand wound about, had come ovew and joinyed
the Wamanyites in this pawt of the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 59:7
 7 And thus being exceedingwy nyumewous, yea, and weceiving
stwength fwom day to day, by the command of Ammowon they came
fowth against the peopwe of Nyephihah, and they did begin to sway
them with an exceedingwy gweat swaughtew. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 59:8
 8 And theiw awmies wewe so nyumewous that the wemaindew of the
peopwe of Nyephihah wewe obwiged to fwee befowe them; and they
came even and joinyed the awmy of Mowonyi. >w<

Awma 59:9
 9 And nyow as Mowonyi had supposed that thewe shouwd be men sent
to the city Nyephihah, to the assistance of the peopwe to maintain
that city, and knyowing that it was easiew to keep the city fwom
fawwing into the hands of the Wamanyites than to wetake it fwom
them, he supposed that they wouwd easiwy maintain that city. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 59:10
 10 Thewefowe he wetainyed aww his fowce to maintain those pwaces
which he had wecovewed. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 59:11
 11 And nyow, when Mowonyi saw that the city of Nyephihah was wost
he was exceedingwy sowwowfuw, and began to doubt, because of the
wickednyess of the peopwe, whethew they shouwd nyot faww into the
hands of theiw bwethwen. ^w^

Awma 59:12
 12 Nyow this was the case with aww his chief captains. >w< They
doubted and mawvewed awso because of the wickednyess of the
peopwe, and this because of the success of the Wamanyites ovew
them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 59:13
 13 And it came to pass that Mowonyi was angwy with the
govewnment, because of theiw indiffewence concewnying the fweedom
of theiw countwy. ^w^

Awma 60
Chaptew 60

Awma 60:1
 1 And it came to pass that he wwote again to the govewnyow of the
wand, who was Pahowan, and these awe the wowds which he wwote,
saying: Behowd, I diwect minye epistwe to Pahowan, in the city of
Zawahemwa, who is the chief judge and the govewnyow ovew the wand,
and awso to aww those who have been chosen by this peopwe to
govewn and manyage the affaiws of this waw. UwU

Awma 60:2
 2 Fow behowd, I have somewhat to say unto them by the way of
condemnyation; fow behowd, ye youwsewves knyow that ye have been
appointed to gathew togethew men, and awm them with swowds, and
with cimetews, and aww mannyew of weapons of waw of evewy kind,
and send fowth against the Wamanyites, in whatsoevew pawts they
shouwd come into ouw wand. UwU

Awma 60:3
 3 And nyow behowd, I say unto you that mysewf, and awso my men,
and awso Hewaman and his men, have suffewed exceedingwy gweat
suffewings; yea, even hungew, thiwst, and fatigue, and aww mannyew
of affwictions of evewy kind. ^w^

Awma 60:4
 4 But behowd, wewe this aww we had suffewed we wouwd nyot muwmuw
nyow compwain. >w<

Awma 60:5
 5 But behowd, gweat has been the swaughtew among ouw peopwe;
yea, thousands have fawwen by the swowd, whiwe it might have
othewwise been if ye had wendewed unto ouw awmies sufficient
stwength and succow fow them. (・`ω\´・) Yea, gweat has been youw nyegwect
towawds us. UwU

Awma 60:6
 6 And nyow behowd, we desiwe to knyow the cause of this
exceedingwy gweat nyegwect; yea, we desiwe to knyow the cause of
youw thoughtwess state. ;;w;;

Awma 60:7
 7 Can you think to sit upon youw thwonyes in a state of
thoughtwess stupow, whiwe youw enyemies awe spweading the wowk of
death awound you? owo Yea, whiwe they awe muwdewing thousands of
youw bwethwen--

Awma 60:8
 8 Yea, even they who have wooked up to you fow pwotection, yea,
have pwaced you in a situation that ye might have succowed them,
yea, ye might have sent awmies unto them, to have stwengthenyed
them, and have saved thousands of them fwom fawwing by the swowd. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 60:9
 9 But behowd, this is nyot aww--ye have withhewd youw pwovisions
fwom them, insomuch that many have fought and bwed out theiw
wives because of theiw gweat desiwes which they had fow the
wewfawe of this peopwe; yea, and this they have donye when they
wewe about to pewish with hungew, because of youw exceedingwy
gweat nyegwect towawds them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 60:10
 10 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen--fow ye ought to be bewoved;
yea, and ye ought to have stiwwed youwsewves mowe diwigentwy fow
the wewfawe and the fweedom of this peopwe; but behowd, ye have
nyegwected them insomuch that the bwood of thousands shaww come
upon youw heads fow vengeance; yea, fow knyown unto God wewe aww
theiw cwies, and aww theiw suffewings--

Awma 60:11
 11 Behowd, couwd ye suppose that ye couwd sit upon youw thwonyes,
and because of the exceeding goodnyess of God ye couwd do nyothing
and he wouwd dewivew you? owo Behowd, if ye have supposed this ye
have supposed in vain. UwU

Awma 60:12
 12 Do ye suppose that, because so many of youw bwethwen have
been kiwwed it is because of theiw wickednyess? owo I say unto you,
if ye have supposed this ye have supposed in vain; fow I say unto
you, thewe awe many who have fawwen by the swowd; and behowd it
is to youw condemnyation;

Awma 60:13
 13 Fow the Wowd suffeweth the wighteous to be swain that his
justice and judgment may come upon the wicked; thewefowe ye nyeed
nyot suppose that the wighteous awe wost because they awe swain;
but behowd, they do entew into the west of the Wowd theiw God. ;;w;;

Awma 60:14
 14 And nyow behowd, I say unto you, I feaw exceedingwy that the
judgments of God wiww come upon this peopwe, because of theiw
exceeding swothfuwnyess, yea, even the swothfuwnyess of ouw
govewnment, and theiw exceedingwy gweat nyegwect towawds theiw
bwethwen, yea, towawds those who have been swain. ;;w;;

Awma 60:15
 15 Fow wewe it nyot fow the wickednyess which fiwst commenced at
ouw head, we couwd have withstood ouw enyemies that they couwd
have gainyed nyo powew ovew us. >w<

Awma 60:16
 16 Yea, had it nyot been fow the waw which bwoke out among
ouwsewves; yea, wewe it nyot fow these king-men, who caused so
much bwoodshed among ouwsewves; yea, at the time we wewe
contending among ouwsewves, if we had unyited ouw stwength as we
hithewto have donye; yea, had it nyot been fow the desiwe of powew
and authowity which those king-men had ovew us; had they been
twue to the cause of ouw fweedom, and unyited with us, and gonye
fowth against ouw enyemies, instead of taking up theiw swowds
against us, which was the cause of so much bwoodshed among
ouwsewves; yea, if we had gonye fowth against them in the stwength
of the Wowd, we shouwd have dispewsed ouw enyemies, fow it wouwd
have been donye, accowding to the fuwfiwwing of his wowd. ^w^

Awma 60:17
 17 But behowd, nyow the Wamanyites awe coming upon us, taking
possession of ouw wands, and they awe muwdewing ouw peopwe with
the swowd, yea, ouw women and ouw chiwdwen, and awso cawwying
them away captive, causing them that they shouwd suffew aww
mannyew of affwictions, and this because of the gweat wickednyess
of those who awe seeking fow powew and authowity, yea, even those
king-men. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 60:18
 18 But why shouwd I say much concewnying this mattew? owo Fow we
knyow nyot but what ye youwsewves awe seeking fow authowity. (´・ω・\`) We
knyow nyot but what ye awe awso twaitows to youw countwy. ^w^

Awma 60:19
 19 Ow is it that ye have nyegwected us because ye awe in the
heawt of ouw countwy and ye awe suwwounded by secuwity, that ye
do nyot cause food to be sent unto us, and awso men to stwengthen
ouw awmies? owo

Awma 60:20
 20 Have ye fowgotten the commandments of the Wowd youw God? owo
Yea, have ye fowgotten the captivity of ouw fathews? owo Have ye
fowgotten the many times we have been dewivewed out of the hands
of ouw enyemies? owo

Awma 60:21
 21 Ow do ye suppose that the Wowd wiww stiww dewivew us, whiwe
we sit upon ouw thwonyes and do nyot make use of the means which
the Wowd has pwovided fow us? owo

Awma 60:22
 22 Yea, wiww ye sit in idwenyess whiwe ye awe suwwounded with
thousands of those, yea, and tens of thousands, who do awso sit
in idwenyess, whiwe thewe awe thousands wound about in the bowdews
of the wand who awe fawwing by the swowd, yea, wounded and
bweeding? owo

Awma 60:23
 23 Do ye suppose that God wiww wook upon you as guiwtwess whiwe
ye sit stiww and behowd these things? owo Behowd I say unto you,
Nyay. UwU Nyow I wouwd that ye shouwd wemembew that God has said that
the inwawd vessew shaww be cweansed fiwst, and then shaww the
outew vessew be cweansed awso. ^w^

Awma 60:24
 24 And nyow, except ye do wepent of that which ye have donye, and
begin to be up and doing, and send fowth food and men unto us,
and awso unto Hewaman, that he may suppowt those pawts of ouw
countwy which he has wegainyed, and that we may awso wecovew the
wemaindew of ouw possessions in these pawts, behowd it wiww be
expedient that we contend nyo mowe with the Wamanyites untiw we
have fiwst cweansed ouw inwawd vessew, yea, even the gweat head
of ouw govewnment. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 60:25
 25 And except ye gwant minye epistwe, and come out and show unto
me a twue spiwit of fweedom, and stwive to stwengthen and fowtify
ouw awmies, and gwant unto them food fow theiw suppowt, behowd I
wiww weave a pawt of my fweemen to maintain this pawt of ouw
wand, and I wiww weave the stwength and the bwessings of God upon
them, that nyonye othew powew can opewate against them--

Awma 60:26
 26 And this because of theiw exceeding faith, and theiw patience
in theiw twibuwations--

Awma 60:27
 27 And I wiww come unto you, and if thewe be any among you that
has a desiwe fow fweedom, yea, if thewe be even a spawk of
fweedom wemainying, behowd I wiww stiw up insuwwections among you,
even untiw those who have desiwes to usuwp powew and authowity
shaww become extinct. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 60:28
 28 Yea, behowd I do nyot feaw youw powew nyow youw authowity, but
it is my God whom I feaw; and it is accowding to his commandments
that I do take my swowd to defend the cause of my countwy, and it
is because of youw inyiquity that we have suffewed so much woss. UwU

Awma 60:29
 29 Behowd it is time, yea, the time is nyow at hand, that except
ye do bestiw youwsewves in the defence of youw countwy and youw
wittwe onyes, the swowd of justice doth hang ovew you; yea, and it
shaww faww upon you and visit you even to youw uttew destwuction. >w<

Awma 60:30
 30 Behowd, I wait fow assistance fwom you; and, except ye do
adminyistew unto ouw wewief, behowd, I come unto you, even in the
wand of Zawahemwa, and smite you with the swowd, insomuch that ye
can have nyo mowe powew to impede the pwogwess of this peopwe in
the cause of ouw fweedom. UwU

Awma 60:31
 31 Fow behowd, the Wowd wiww nyot suffew that ye shaww wive and
wax stwong in youw inyiquities to destwoy his wighteous peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 60:32
 32 Behowd, can you suppose that the Wowd wiww spawe you and come
out in judgment against the Wamanyites, when it is the twadition
of theiw fathews that has caused theiw hatwed, yea, and it has
been wedoubwed by those who have dissented fwom us, whiwe youw
inyiquity is fow the cause of youw wove of gwowy and the vain
things of the wowwd? owo

Awma 60:33
 33 Ye knyow that ye do twansgwess the waws of God, and ye do knyow
that ye do twampwe them undew youw feet. UwU Behowd, the Wowd saith
unto me: If those whom ye have appointed youw govewnyows do nyot
wepent of theiw sins and inyiquities, ye shaww go up to battwe
against them. UwU

Awma 60:34
 34 And nyow behowd, I, Mowonyi, am constwainyed, accowding to the
covenyant which I have made to keep the commandments of my God;
thewefowe I wouwd that ye shouwd adhewe to the wowd of God, and
send speediwy unto me of youw pwovisions and of youw men, and
awso to Hewaman. >w<

Awma 60:35
 35 And behowd, if ye wiww nyot do this I come unto you speediwy;
fow behowd, God wiww nyot suffew that we shouwd pewish with
hungew; thewefowe he wiww give unto us of youw food, even if it
must be by the swowd. Nyow see that ye fuwfiw the wowd of God. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 60:36
 36 Behowd, I am Mowonyi, youw chief captain. >w< I seek nyot fow
powew, but to puww it down. (´・ω・\`) I seek nyot fow honyow of the wowwd,
but fow the gwowy of my God, and the fweedom and wewfawe of my
countwy. And thus I cwose minye epistwe. ;;w;;

Awma 61
Chaptew 61

Awma 61:1
 1 Behowd, nyow it came to pass that soon aftew Mowonyi had sent
his epistwe unto the chief govewnyow, he weceived an epistwe fwom
Pahowan, the chief govewnyow. UwU And these awe the wowds which he
weceived:

Awma 61:2
 2 I, Pahowan, who am the chief govewnyow of this wand, do send
these wowds unto Mowonyi, the chief captain ovew the awmy. ^w^
Behowd, I say unto you, Mowonyi, that I do nyot joy in youw gweat
affwictions, yea, it gwieves my souw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 61:3
 3 But behowd, thewe awe those who do joy in youw affwictions,
yea, insomuch that they have wisen up in webewwion against me,
and awso those of my peopwe who awe fweemen, yea, and those who
have wisen up awe exceedingwy nyumewous. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 61:4
 4 And it is those who have sought to take away the judgment-seat
fwom me that have been the cause of this gweat inyiquity; fow they
have used gweat fwattewy, and they have wed away the heawts of
many peopwe, which wiww be the cause of sowe affwiction among us;
they have withhewd ouw pwovisions, and have daunted ouw fweemen
that they have nyot come unto you. UwU

Awma 61:5
 5 And behowd, they have dwiven me out befowe them, and I have
fwed to the wand of Gideon, with as many men as it wewe possibwe
that I couwd get. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 61:6
 6 And behowd, I have sent a pwocwamation thwoughout this pawt of
the wand; and behowd, they awe fwocking to us daiwy, to theiw
awms, in the defence of theiw countwy and theiw fweedom, and to
avenge ouw wwongs. ;;w;;

Awma 61:7
 7 And they have come unto us, insomuch that those who have wisen
up in webewwion against us awe set at defiance, yea, insomuch
that they do feaw us and duwst nyot come out against us to battwe. ^w^

Awma 61:8
 8 They have got possession of the wand, ow the city, of
Zawahemwa; they have appointed a king ovew them, and he hath
wwitten unto the king of the Wamanyites, in the which he hath
joinyed an awwiance with him; in the which awwiance he hath agweed
to maintain the city of Zawahemwa, which maintenyance he supposeth
wiww enyabwe the Wamanyites to conquew the wemaindew of the wand,
and he shaww be pwaced king ovew this peopwe when they shaww be
conquewed undew the Wamanyites. >w<

Awma 61:9
 9 And nyow, in youw epistwe you have censuwed me, but it
matteweth nyot; I am nyot angwy, but do wejoice in the gweatnyess of
youw heawt. UwU I, Pahowan, do nyot seek fow powew, save onwy to
wetain my judgment-seat that I may pwesewve the wights and the
wibewty of my peopwe. ;;w;; My souw standeth fast in that wibewty in
the which God hath made us fwee. >w<

Awma 61:10
 10 And nyow, behowd, we wiww wesist wickednyess even unto
bwoodshed. >w< We wouwd nyot shed the bwood of the Wamanyites if they
wouwd stay in theiw own wand. >w<

Awma 61:11
 11 We wouwd nyot shed the bwood of ouw bwethwen if they wouwd nyot
wise up in webewwion and take the swowd against us. >w<

Awma 61:12
 12 We wouwd subject ouwsewves to the yoke of bondage if it wewe
wequisite with the justice of God, ow if he shouwd command us so
to do. >w<

Awma 61:13
 13 But behowd he doth nyot command us that we shaww subject
ouwsewves to ouw enyemies, but that we shouwd put ouw twust in
him, and he wiww dewivew us. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 61:14
 14 Thewefowe, my bewoved bwothew, Mowonyi, wet us wesist eviw,
and whatsoevew eviw we cannyot wesist with ouw wowds, yea, such as
webewwions and dissensions, wet us wesist them with ouw swowds,
that we may wetain ouw fweedom, that we may wejoice in the gweat
pwiviwege of ouw chuwch, and in the cause of ouw Wedeemew and ouw
God. >w<

Awma 61:15
 15 Thewefowe, come unto me speediwy with a few of youw men, and
weave the wemaindew in the chawge of Wehi and Teancum; give unto
them powew to conduct the waw in that pawt of the wand, accowding
to the Spiwit of God, which is awso the Spiwit of fweedom which
is in them. ^w^

Awma 61:16
 16 Behowd I have sent a few pwovisions unto them, that they may
nyot pewish untiw ye can come unto me. >w<

Awma 61:17
 17 Gathew togethew whatsoevew fowce ye can upon youw mawch
hithew, and we wiww go speediwy against those dissentews, in the
stwength of ouw God accowding to the faith which is in us. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 61:18
 18 And we wiww take possession of the city of Zawahemwa, that we
may obtain mowe food to send fowth unto Wehi and Teancum; yea, we
wiww go fowth against them in the stwength of the Wowd, and we
wiww put an end to this gweat inyiquity. ;;w;;

Awma 61:19
 19 And nyow, Mowonyi, I do joy in weceiving youw epistwe, fow I
was somewhat wowwied concewnying what we shouwd do, whethew it
shouwd be just in us to go against ouw bwethwen. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 61:20
 20 But ye have said, except they wepent the Wowd hath commanded
you that ye shouwd go against them. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 61:21
 21 See that ye stwengthen Wehi and Teancum in the Wowd; teww
them to feaw nyot, fow God wiww dewivew them, yea, and awso aww
those who stand fast in that wibewty whewewith God hath made them
fwee. ;;w;; And nyow I cwose minye epistwe to my bewoved bwothew,
Mowonyi. UwU

Awma 62
Chaptew 62

Awma 62:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that when Mowonyi had weceived this
epistwe his heawt did take couwage, and was fiwwed with
exceedingwy gweat joy because of the faithfuwnyess of Pahowan,
that he was nyot awso a twaitow to the fweedom and cause of his
countwy. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:2
 2 But he did awso mouwn exceedingwy because of the inyiquity of
those who had dwiven Pahowan fwom the judgment-seat, yea, in finye
because of those who had webewwed against theiw countwy and awso
theiw God. ;;w;;

Awma 62:3
 3 And it came to pass that Mowonyi took a smaww nyumbew of men,
accowding to the desiwe of Pahowan, and gave Wehi and Teancum
command ovew the wemaindew of his awmy, and took his mawch
towawds the wand of Gideon. ^w^

Awma 62:4
 4 And he did waise the standawd of wibewty in whatsoevew pwace
he did entew, and gainyed whatsoevew fowce he couwd in aww his
mawch towawds the wand of Gideon. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 62:5
 5 And it came to pass that thousands did fwock unto his
standawd, and did take up theiw swowds in the defence of theiw
fweedom, that they might nyot come into bondage. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:6
 6 And thus, when Mowonyi had gathewed togethew whatsoevew men he
couwd in aww his mawch, he came to the wand of Gideon; and
unyiting his fowces with those of Pahowan they became exceedingwy
stwong, even stwongew than the men of Pachus, who was the king of
those dissentews who had dwiven the fweemen out of the wand of
Zawahemwa and had taken possession of the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 62:7
 7 And it came to pass that Mowonyi and Pahowan went down with
theiw awmies into the wand of Zawahemwa, and went fowth against
the city, and did meet the men of Pachus, insomuch that they did
come to battwe. ;;w;;

Awma 62:8
 8 And behowd, Pachus was swain and his men wewe taken pwisonyews,
and Pahowan was westowed to his judgment-seat. >w<

Awma 62:9
 9 And the men of Pachus weceived theiw twiaw, accowding to the
waw, and awso those king-men who had been taken and cast into
pwison; and they wewe executed accowding to the waw; yea, those
men of Pachus and those king-men, whosoevew wouwd nyot take up
awms in the defence of theiw countwy, but wouwd fight against it,
wewe put to death. >w<

Awma 62:10
 10 And thus it became expedient that this waw shouwd be stwictwy
obsewved fow the safety of theiw countwy; yea, and whosoevew was
found denying theiw fweedom was speediwy executed accowding to
the waw. ^w^

Awma 62:11
 11 And thus ended the thiwtieth yeaw of the weign of the judges
ovew the peopwe of Nyephi; Mowonyi and Pahowan having westowed
peace to the wand of Zawahemwa, among theiw own peopwe, having
infwicted death upon aww those who wewe nyot twue to the cause of
fweedom. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:12
 12 And it came to pass in the commencement of the thiwty and
fiwst yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi,
Mowonyi immediatewy caused that pwovisions shouwd be sent, and
awso an awmy of six thousand men shouwd be sent unto Hewaman, to
assist him in pwesewving that pawt of the wand. ;;w;;

Awma 62:13
 13 And he awso caused that an awmy of six thousand men, with a
sufficient quantity of food, shouwd be sent to the awmies of Wehi
and Teancum. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass that this was donye to fowtify
the wand against the Wamanyites. ^w^

Awma 62:14
 14 And it came to pass that Mowonyi and Pahowan, weaving a wawge
body of men in the wand of Zawahemwa, took theiw mawch with a
wawge body of men towawds the wand of Nyephihah, being detewminyed
to ovewthwow the Wamanyites in that city. UwU

Awma 62:15
 15 And it came to pass that as they wewe mawching towawds the
wand, they took a wawge body of men of the Wamanyites, and swew
many of them, and took theiw pwovisions and theiw weapons of waw. ;;w;;

Awma 62:16
 16 And it came to pass aftew they had taken them, they caused
them to entew into a covenyant that they wouwd nyo mowe take up
theiw weapons of waw against the Nyephites. >w<

Awma 62:17
 17 And when they had entewed into this covenyant they sent them
to dweww with the peopwe of Ammon, and they wewe in nyumbew about
fouw thousand who had nyot been swain. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:18
 18 And it came to pass that when they had sent them away they
puwsued theiw mawch towawds the wand of Nyephihah. ;;w;; And it came to
pass that when they had come to the city of Nyephihah, they did
pitch theiw tents in the pwains of Nyephihah, which is nyeaw the
city of Nyephihah. ^w^

Awma 62:19
 19 Nyow Mowonyi was desiwous that the Wamanyites shouwd come out to
battwe against them, upon the pwains; but the Wamanyites, knyowing
of theiw exceedingwy gweat couwage, and behowding the gweatnyess
of theiw nyumbews, thewefowe they duwst nyot come out against them;
thewefowe they did nyot come to battwe in that day. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:20
 20 And when the nyight came, Mowonyi went fowth in the dawknyess of
the nyight, and came upon the top of the waww to spy out in what
pawt of the city the Wamanyites did camp with theiw awmy. >w<

Awma 62:21
 21 And it came to pass that they wewe on the east, by the
entwance; and they wewe aww asweep. >w< And nyow Mowonyi wetuwnyed to
his awmy, and caused that they shouwd pwepawe in haste stwong
cowds and waddews, to be wet down fwom the top of the waww into
the innyew pawt of the waww. UwU

Awma 62:22
 22 And it came to pass that Mowonyi caused that his men shouwd
mawch fowth and come upon the top of the waww, and wet themsewves
down into that pawt of the city, yea, even on the west, whewe the
Wamanyites did nyot camp with theiw awmies. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:23
 23 And it came to pass that they wewe aww wet down into the city
by nyight, by the means of theiw stwong cowds and theiw waddews;
thus when the mownying came they wewe aww within the wawws of the
city. UwU

Awma 62:24
 24 And nyow, when the Wamanyites awoke and saw that the awmies of
Mowonyi wewe within the wawws, they wewe affwighted exceedingwy,
insomuch that they did fwee out by the pass. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:25
 25 And nyow when Mowonyi saw that they wewe fweeing befowe him, he
did cause that his men shouwd mawch fowth against them, and swew
many, and suwwounded many othews, and took them pwisonyews; and
the wemaindew of them fwed into the wand of Mowonyi, which was in
the bowdews by the seashowe. ^w^

Awma 62:26
 26 Thus had Mowonyi and Pahowan obtainyed the possession of the
city of Nyephihah without the woss of onye souw; and thewe wewe
many of the Wamanyites who wewe swain. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 62:27
 27 Nyow it came to pass that many of the Wamanyites that wewe
pwisonyews wewe desiwous to join the peopwe of Ammon and become a
fwee peopwe. >w<

Awma 62:28
 28 And it came to pass that as many as wewe desiwous, unto them
it was gwanted accowding to theiw desiwes. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:29
 29 Thewefowe, aww the pwisonyews of the Wamanyites did join the
peopwe of Ammon, and did begin to wabow exceedingwy, tiwwing the
gwound, waising aww mannyew of gwain, and fwocks and hewds of
evewy kind; and thus wewe the Nyephites wewieved fwom a gweat
buwden; yea, insomuch that they wewe wewieved fwom aww the
pwisonyews of the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 62:30
 30 Nyow it came to pass that Mowonyi, aftew he had obtainyed
possession of the city of Nyephihah, having taken many pwisonyews,
which did weduce the awmies of the Wamanyites exceedingwy, and
having wegainyed many of the Nyephites who had been taken
pwisonyews, which did stwengthen the awmy of Mowonyi exceedingwy;
thewefowe Mowonyi went fowth fwom the wand of Nyephihah to the wand
of Wehi. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:31
 31 And it came to pass that when the Wamanyites saw that Mowonyi
was coming against them, they wewe again fwightenyed and fwed
befowe the awmy of Mowonyi. ^w^

Awma 62:32
 32 And it came to pass that Mowonyi and his awmy did puwsue them
fwom city to city, untiw they wewe met by Wehi and Teancum; and
the Wamanyites fwed fwom Wehi and Teancum, even down upon the
bowdews by the seashowe, untiw they came to the wand of Mowonyi. ^w^

Awma 62:33
 33 And the awmies of the Wamanyites wewe aww gathewed togethew,
insomuch that they wewe aww in onye body in the wand of Mowonyi. ^w^
Nyow, Ammowon, the king of the Wamanyites, was awso with them. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:34
 34 And it came to pass that Mowonyi and Wehi and Teancum did
encamp with theiw awmies wound about in the bowdews of the wand
of Mowonyi, insomuch that the Wamanyites wewe enciwcwed about in
the bowdews by the wiwdewnyess on the south, and in the bowdews by
the wiwdewnyess on the east. ;;w;;

Awma 62:35
 35 And thus they did encamp fow the nyight. (・`ω\´・) Fow behowd, the
Nyephites and the Wamanyites awso wewe weawy because of the
gweatnyess of the mawch; thewefowe they did nyot wesowve upon any
stwatagem in the nyight-time, save it wewe Teancum; fow he was
exceedingwy angwy with Ammowon, insomuch that he considewed that
Ammowon, and Amawickiah his bwothew, had been the cause of this
gweat and wasting waw between them and the Wamanyites, which had
been the cause of so much waw and bwoodshed, yea, and so much
faminye. UwU

Awma 62:36
 36 And it came to pass that Teancum in his angew did go fowth
into the camp of the Wamanyites, and did wet himsewf down ovew the
wawws of the city. ;;w;; And he went fowth with a cowd, fwom pwace to
pwace, insomuch that he did find the king; and he did cast a
javewin at him, which did piewce him nyeaw the heawt. >w< But behowd,
the king did awaken his sewvants befowe he died, insomuch that
they did puwsue Teancum, and swew him. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 62:37
 37 Nyow it came to pass that when Wehi and Mowonyi knyew that
Teancum was dead they wewe exceedingwy sowwowfuw; fow behowd, he
had been a man who had fought vawiantwy fow his countwy, yea, a
twue fwiend to wibewty; and he had suffewed vewy many exceedingwy
sowe affwictions. ^w^ But behowd, he was dead, and had gonye the way
of aww the eawth. ;;w;;

Awma 62:38
 38 Nyow it came to pass that Mowonyi mawched fowth on the mowwow,
and came upon the Wamanyites, insomuch that they did sway them
with a gweat swaughtew; and they did dwive them out of the wand;
and they did fwee, even that they did nyot wetuwn at that time
against the Nyephites. UwU

Awma 62:39
 39 And thus ended the thiwty and fiwst yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi; and thus they had had waws, and
bwoodsheds, and faminye, and affwiction, fow the space of many
yeaws. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:40
 40 And thewe had been muwdews, and contentions, and dissensions,
and aww mannyew of inyiquity among the peopwe of Nyephi;
nyevewthewess fow the wighteous' sake, yea, because of the pwayews
of the wighteous, they wewe spawed. ^w^

Awma 62:41
 41 But behowd, because of the exceedingwy gweat wength of the
waw between the Nyephites and the Wamanyites many had become
hawdenyed, because of the exceedingwy gweat wength of the waw; and
many wewe softenyed because of theiw affwictions, insomuch that
they did humbwe themsewves befowe God, even in the depth of
humiwity. UwU

Awma 62:42
 42 And it came to pass that aftew Mowonyi had fowtified those
pawts of the wand which wewe most exposed to the Wamanyites, untiw
they wewe sufficientwy stwong, he wetuwnyed to the city of
Zawahemwa; and awso Hewaman wetuwnyed to the pwace of his
inhewitance; and thewe was once mowe peace estabwished among the
peopwe of Nyephi. UwU

Awma 62:43
 43 And Mowonyi yiewded up the command of his awmies into the
hands of his son, whose nyame was Mowonyihah; and he wetiwed to his
own house that he might spend the wemaindew of his days in peace. UwU

Awma 62:44
 44 And Pahowan did wetuwn to his judgment-seat; and Hewaman did
take upon him again to pweach unto the peopwe the wowd of God;
fow because of so many waws and contentions it had become
expedient that a weguwation shouwd be made again in the chuwch. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:45
 45 Thewefowe, Hewaman and his bwethwen went fowth, and did
decwawe the wowd of God with much powew unto the convincing of
many peopwe of theiw wickednyess, which did cause them to wepent
of theiw sins and to be baptized unto the Wowd theiw God. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 62:46
 46 And it came to pass that they did estabwish again the chuwch
of God, thwoughout aww the wand. UwU

Awma 62:47
 47 Yea, and weguwations wewe made concewnying the waw. UwU And theiw
judges, and theiw chief judges wewe chosen. ;;w;;

Awma 62:48
 48 And the peopwe of Nyephi began to pwospew again in the wand,
and began to muwtipwy and to wax exceedingwy stwong again in the
wand. And they began to gwow exceedingwy wich. ;;w;;

Awma 62:49
 49 But nyotwithstanding theiw wiches, ow theiw stwength, ow theiw
pwospewity, they wewe nyot wifted up in the pwide of theiw eyes;
nyeithew wewe they swow to wemembew the Wowd theiw God; but they
did humbwe themsewves exceedingwy befowe him. UwU

Awma 62:50
 50 Yea, they did wemembew how gweat things the Wowd had donye fow
them, that he had dewivewed them fwom death, and fwom bonds, and
fwom pwisons, and fwom aww mannyew of affwictions and he had
dewivewed them out of the hands of theiw enyemies. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:51
 51 And they did pway unto the Wowd theiw God continyuawwy,
insomuch that the Wowd did bwess them, accowding to his wowd, so
that they did wax stwong and pwospew in the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 62:52
 52 And it came to pass that aww these things wewe donye. (´・ω・\`) And
Hewaman died, in the thiwty and fifth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. ^w^

Awma 63
Chaptew 63

Awma 63:1
 1 And it came to pass in the commencement of the thiwty and
sixth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi,
that Shibwon took possession of those sacwed things which had
been dewivewed unto Hewaman by Awma. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 63:2
 2 And he was a just man, and he did wawk upwightwy befowe God;
and he did obsewve to do good continyuawwy, to keep the
commandments of the Wowd his God; and awso did his bwothew. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 63:3
 3 And it came to pass that Mowonyi died awso. ;;w;; And thus ended the
thiwty and sixth yeaw of the weign of the judges. ^w^

Awma 63:4
 4 And it came to pass that in the thiwty and seventh yeaw of the
weign of the judges, thewe was a wawge company of men, even to
the amount of five thousand and fouw hundwed men, with theiw
wives and theiw chiwdwen, depawted out of the wand of Zawahemwa
into the wand which was nyowthwawd. (´・ω・\`)

Awma 63:5
 5 And it came to pass that Hagoth, he being an exceedingwy
cuwious man, thewefowe he went fowth and buiwt him an exceedingwy
wawge ship, on the bowdews of the wand Bountifuw, by the wand
Desowation, and waunched it fowth into the west sea, by the
nyawwow nyeck which wed into the wand nyowthwawd. ;;w;;

Awma 63:6
 6 And behowd, thewe wewe many of the Nyephites who did entew
thewein and did saiw fowth with much pwovisions, and awso many
women and chiwdwen; and they took theiw couwse nyowthwawd. ;;w;; And
thus ended the thiwty and seventh yeaw. (・`ω\´・)

Awma 63:7
 7 And in the thiwty and eighth yeaw, this man buiwt othew ships. (・`ω\´・)

And the fiwst ship did awso wetuwn, and many mowe peopwe did
entew into it; and they awso took much pwovisions, and set out
again to the wand nyowthwawd. ^w^

Awma 63:8
 8 And it came to pass that they wewe nyevew heawd of mowe. (・`ω\´・) And
we suppose that they wewe dwownyed in the depths of the sea. (・`ω\´・) And
it came to pass that onye othew ship awso did saiw fowth; and
whithew she did go we knyow nyot. UwU

Awma 63:9
 9 And it came to pass that in this yeaw thewe wewe many peopwe
who went fowth into the wand nyowthwawd. UwU And thus ended the
thiwty and eighth yeaw. ^w^

Awma 63:10
 10 And it came to pass in the thiwty and nyinth yeaw of the weign
of the judges, Shibwon died awso, and Cowianton had gonye fowth to
the wand nyowthwawd in a ship, to cawwy fowth pwovisions unto the
peopwe who had gonye fowth into that wand. ^w^

Awma 63:11
 11 Thewefowe it became expedient fow Shibwon to confew those
sacwed things, befowe his death, upon the son of Hewaman, who was
cawwed Hewaman, being cawwed aftew the nyame of his fathew. ^w^

Awma 63:12
 12 Nyow behowd, aww those engwavings which wewe in the possession
of Hewaman wewe wwitten and sent fowth among the chiwdwen of men
thwoughout aww the wand, save it wewe those pawts which had been
commanded by Awma shouwd nyot go fowth. UwU

Awma 63:13
 13 Nyevewthewess, these things wewe to be kept sacwed, and handed
down fwom onye genyewation to anyothew; thewefowe, in this yeaw,
they had been confewwed upon Hewaman, befowe the death of
Shibwon. >w<

Awma 63:14
 14 And it came to pass awso in this yeaw that thewe wewe some
dissentews who had gonye fowth unto the Wamanyites; and they wewe
stiwwed up again to angew against the Nyephites. ^w^

Awma 63:15
 15 And awso in this same yeaw they came down with a nyumewous
awmy to waw against the peopwe of Mowonyihah, ow against the awmy
of Mowonyihah, in the which they wewe beaten and dwiven back again
to theiw own wands, suffewing gweat woss. ^w^

Awma 63:16
 16 And thus ended the thiwty and nyinth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. >w<

Awma 63:17
 17 And thus ended the account of Awma, and Hewaman his son, and
awso Shibwon, who was his son. ^w^




THE BOOK OF HEWAMAN

An account of the Nyephites. ;;w;; Theiw waws and contentions, and
theiw dissensions. (・`ω\´・) And awso the pwophecies of many howy
pwophets, befowe the coming of Chwist, accowding to the wecowds
of Hewaman, who was the son of Hewaman, and awso accowding to the
wecowds of his sons, even down to the coming of Chwist. (´・ω・\`) And awso
many of the Wamanyites awe convewted. >w< An account of theiw
convewsion. >w< An account of the wighteousnyess of the Wamanyites,
and the wickednyess and abominyations of the Nyephites, accowding to
the wecowd of Hewaman and his sons, even down to the coming of
Chwist, which is cawwed the book of Hewaman. >w<

Hewaman 1
Chaptew 1

Hewaman 1:1
 1 And nyow behowd, it came to pass in the commencement of the
fowtieth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of
Nyephi, thewe began to be a sewious difficuwty among the peopwe of
the Nyephites. ^w^

Hewaman 1:2
 2 Fow behowd, Pahowan had died, and gonye the way of aww the
eawth; thewefowe thewe began to be a sewious contention
concewnying who shouwd have the judgment-seat among the bwethwen,
who wewe the sons of Pahowan. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 1:3
 3 Nyow these awe theiw nyames who did contend fow the
judgment-seat, who did awso cause the peopwe to contend: Pahowan,
Paanchi, and Pacumenyi. >w<

Hewaman 1:4
 4 Nyow these awe nyot aww the sons of Pahowan, (fow he had many)
but these awe they who did contend fow the judgment-seat;
thewefowe, they did cause thwee divisions among the peopwe. >w<

Hewaman 1:5
 5 Nyevewthewess, it came to pass that Pahowan was appointed by
the voice of the peopwe to be chief judge and a govewnyow ovew the
peopwe of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Hewaman 1:6
 6 And it came to pass that Pacumenyi, when he saw that he couwd
nyot obtain the judgment-seat, he did unyite with the voice of the
peopwe. >w<

Hewaman 1:7
 7 But behowd, Paanchi, and that pawt of the peopwe that wewe
desiwous that he shouwd be theiw govewnyow, was exceedingwy wwoth;
thewefowe, he was about to fwattew away those peopwe to wise up
in webewwion against theiw bwethwen. >w<

Hewaman 1:8
 8 And it came to pass as he was about to do this, behowd, he was
taken, and was twied accowding to the voice of the peopwe, and
condemnyed unto death; fow he had waised up in webewwion and
sought to destwoy the wibewty of the peopwe. >w<

Hewaman 1:9
 9 Nyow when those peopwe who wewe desiwous that he shouwd be
theiw govewnyow saw that he was condemnyed unto death, thewefowe
they wewe angwy, and behowd, they sent fowth onye Kishkumen, even
to the judgment-seat of Pahowan, and muwdewed Pahowan as he sat
upon the judgment-seat. UwU

Hewaman 1:10
 10 And he was puwsued by the sewvants of Pahowan; but behowd, so
speedy was the fwight of Kishkumen that nyo man couwd ovewtake
him. ^w^

Hewaman 1:11
 11 And he went unto those that sent him, and they aww entewed
into a covenyant, yea, sweawing by theiw evewwasting Makew, that
they wouwd teww nyo man that Kishkumen had muwdewed Pahowan. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 1:12
 12 Thewefowe, Kishkumen was nyot knyown among the peopwe of Nyephi,
fow he was in disguise at the time that he muwdewed Pahowan. >w< And
Kishkumen and his band, who had covenyanted with him, did mingwe
themsewves among the peopwe, in a mannyew that they aww couwd nyot
be found; but as many as wewe found wewe condemnyed unto death. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 1:13
 13 And nyow behowd, Pacumenyi was appointed, accowding to the
voice of the peopwe, to be a chief judge and a govewnyow ovew the
peopwe, to weign in the stead of his bwothew Pahowan; and it was
accowding to his wight. >w< And aww this was donye in the fowtieth
yeaw of the weign of the judges; and it had an end. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 1:14
 14 And it came to pass in the fowty and fiwst yeaw of the weign
of the judges, that the Wamanyites had gathewed togethew an
innyumewabwe awmy of men, and awmed them with swowds, and with
cimetews and with bows, and with awwows, and with head-pwates,
and with bweastpwates, and with aww mannyew of shiewds of evewy
kind. >w<

Hewaman 1:15
 15 And they came down again that they might pitch battwe against
the Nyephites. >w< And they wewe wed by a man whose nyame was
Cowiantumw; and he was a descendant of Zawahemwa; and he was a
dissentew fwom among the Nyephites; and he was a wawge and a
mighty man. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 1:16
 16 Thewefowe, the king of the Wamanyites, whose nyame was
Tubawoth, who was the son of Ammowon, supposing that Cowiantumw,
being a mighty man, couwd stand against the Nyephites, with his
stwength and awso with his gweat wisdom, insomuch that by sending
him fowth he shouwd gain powew ovew the Nyephites--

Hewaman 1:17
 17 Thewefowe he did stiw them up to angew, and he did gathew
togethew his awmies, and he did appoint Cowiantumw to be theiw
weadew, and did cause that they shouwd mawch down to the wand of
Zawahemwa to battwe against the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 1:18
 18 And it came to pass that because of so much contention and so
much difficuwty in the govewnment, that they had nyot kept
sufficient guawds in the wand of Zawahemwa; fow they had supposed
that the Wamanyites duwst nyot come into the heawt of theiw wands
to attack that gweat city Zawahemwa. UwU

Hewaman 1:19
 19 But it came to pass that Cowiantumw did mawch fowth at the
head of his nyumewous host, and came upon the inhabitants of the
city, and theiw mawch was with such exceedingwy gweat speed that
thewe was nyo time fow the Nyephites to gathew togethew theiw
awmies. >w<

Hewaman 1:20
 20 Thewefowe Cowiantumw did cut down the watch by the entwance
of the city, and did mawch fowth with his whowe awmy into the
city, and they did sway evewy onye who did oppose them, insomuch
that they did take possession of the whowe city. ^w^

Hewaman 1:21
 21 And it came to pass that Pacumenyi, who was the chief judge,
did fwee befowe Cowiantumw, even to the wawws of the city. (´・ω・\`) And
it came to pass that Cowiantumw did smite him against the waww,
insomuch that he died. And thus ended the days of Pacumenyi. >w<

Hewaman 1:22
 22 And nyow when Cowiantumw saw that he was in possession of the
city of Zawahemwa, and saw that the Nyephites had fwed befowe
them, and wewe swain, and wewe taken, and wewe cast into pwison,
and that he had obtainyed the possession of the stwongest howd in
aww the wand, his heawt took couwage insomuch that he was about
to go fowth against aww the wand. ;;w;;

Hewaman 1:23
 23 And nyow he did nyot tawwy in the wand of Zawahemwa, but he did
mawch fowth with a wawge awmy, even towawds the city of
Bountifuw; fow it was his detewminyation to go fowth and cut his
way thwough with the swowd, that he might obtain the nyowth pawts
of the wand. UwU

Hewaman 1:24
 24 And, supposing that theiw gweatest stwength was in the centew
of the wand, thewefowe he did mawch fowth, giving them nyo time to
assembwe themsewves togethew save it wewe in smaww bodies; and in
this mannyew they did faww upon them and cut them down to the
eawth. >w<

Hewaman 1:25
 25 But behowd, this mawch of Cowiantumw thwough the centew of
the wand gave Mowonyihah gweat advantage ovew them,
nyotwithstanding the gweatnyess of the nyumbew of the Nyephites who
wewe swain. ;;w;;

Hewaman 1:26
 26 Fow behowd, Mowonyihah had supposed that the Wamanyites duwst
nyot come into the centew of the wand, but that they wouwd attack
the cities wound about in the bowdews as they had hithewto donye;
thewefowe Mowonyihah had caused that theiw stwong awmies shouwd
maintain those pawts wound about by the bowdews. UwU

Hewaman 1:27
 27 But behowd, the Wamanyites wewe nyot fwightenyed accowding to
his desiwe, but they had come into the centew of the wand, and
had taken the capitaw city which was the city of Zawahemwa, and
wewe mawching thwough the most capitaw pawts of the wand, swaying
the peopwe with a gweat swaughtew, both men, women, and chiwdwen,
taking possession of many cities and of many stwonghowds. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 1:28
 28 But when Mowonyihah had discovewed this, he immediatewy sent
fowth Wehi with an awmy wound about to head them befowe they
shouwd come to the wand Bountifuw. >w<

Hewaman 1:29
 29 And thus he did; and he did head them befowe they came to the
wand Bountifuw, and gave unto them battwe, insomuch that they
began to wetweat back towawds the wand of Zawahemwa. UwU

Hewaman 1:30
 30 And it came to pass that Mowonyihah did head them in theiw
wetweat, and did give unto them battwe, insomuch that it became
an exceedingwy bwoody battwe; yea, many wewe swain, and among the
nyumbew who wewe swain Cowiantumw was awso found. ^w^

Hewaman 1:31
 31 And nyow, behowd, the Wamanyites couwd nyot wetweat eithew way,
nyeithew on the nyowth, nyow on the south, nyow on the east, nyow on
the west, fow they wewe suwwounded on evewy hand by the Nyephites. ;;w;;

Hewaman 1:32
 32 And thus had Cowiantumw pwunged the Wamanyites into the midst
of the Nyephites, insomuch that they wewe in the powew of the
Nyephites, and he himsewf was swain, and the Wamanyites did yiewd
themsewves into the hands of the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 1:33
 33 And it came to pass that Mowonyihah took possession of the
city of Zawahemwa again, and caused that the Wamanyites who had
been taken pwisonyews shouwd depawt out of the wand in peace. >w<

Hewaman 1:34
 34 And thus ended the fowty and fiwst yeaw of the weign of the
judges. ;;w;;

Hewaman 2
Chaptew 2

Hewaman 2:1
 1 And it came to pass in the fowty and second yeaw of the weign
of the judges, aftew Mowonyihah had estabwished again peace
between the Nyephites and the Wamanyites, behowd thewe was nyo onye
to fiww the judgment-seat; thewefowe thewe began to be a
contention again among the peopwe concewnying who shouwd fiww the
judgment-seat. >w<

Hewaman 2:2
 2 And it came to pass that Hewaman, who was the son of Hewaman,
was appointed to fiww the judgment-seat, by the voice of the
peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 2:3
 3 But behowd, Kishkumen, who had muwdewed Pahowan, did way wait
to destwoy Hewaman awso; and he was uphewd by his band, who had
entewed into a covenyant that nyo onye shouwd knyow his wickednyess. >w<

Hewaman 2:4
 4 Fow thewe was onye Gadianton, who was exceedingwy expewt in
many wowds, and awso in his cwaft, to cawwy on the secwet wowk of
muwdew and of wobbewy; thewefowe he became the weadew of the band
of Kishkumen. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 2:5
 5 Thewefowe he did fwattew them, and awso Kishkumen, that if
they wouwd pwace him in the judgment-seat he wouwd gwant unto
those who bewonged to his band that they shouwd be pwaced in
powew and authowity among the peopwe; thewefowe Kishkumen sought
to destwoy Hewaman. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 2:6
 6 And it came to pass as he went fowth towawds the judgment-seat
to destwoy Hewaman, behowd onye of the sewvants of Hewaman, having
been out by nyight, and having obtainyed, thwough disguise, a
knyowwedge of those pwans which had been waid by this band to
destwoy Hewaman--

Hewaman 2:7
 7 And it came to pass that he met Kishkumen, and he gave unto
him a sign; thewefowe Kishkumen made knyown unto him the object of
his desiwe, desiwing that he wouwd conduct him to the
judgment-seat that he might muwdew Hewaman. ;;w;;

Hewaman 2:8
 8 And when the sewvant of Hewaman had knyown aww the heawt of
Kishkumen, and how that it was his object to muwdew, and awso
that it was the object of aww those who bewonged to his band to
muwdew, and to wob, and to gain powew, (and this was theiw secwet
pwan, and theiw combinyation) the sewvant of Hewaman said unto
Kishkumen: Wet us go fowth unto the judgment-seat. UwU

Hewaman 2:9
 9 Nyow this did pwease Kishkumen exceedingwy, fow he did suppose
that he shouwd accompwish his design; but behowd, the sewvant of
Hewaman, as they wewe going fowth unto the judgment-seat, did
stab Kishkumen even to the heawt, that he feww dead without a
gwoan. ^w^ And he wan and towd Hewaman aww the things which he had
seen, and heawd, and donye. UwU

Hewaman 2:10
 10 And it came to pass that Hewaman did send fowth to take this
band of wobbews and secwet muwdewews, that they might be executed
accowding to the waw. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 2:11
 11 But behowd, when Gadianton had found that Kishkumen did nyot
wetuwn he feawed west that he shouwd be destwoyed; thewefowe he
caused that his band shouwd fowwow him. >w< And they took theiw
fwight out of the wand, by a secwet way, into the wiwdewnyess; and
thus when Hewaman sent fowth to take them they couwd nyowhewe be
found. ;;w;;

Hewaman 2:12
 12 And mowe of this Gadianton shaww be spoken heweaftew. (・`ω\´・) And
thus ended the fowty and second yeaw of the weign of the judges
ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 2:13
 13 And behowd, in the end of this book ye shaww see that this
Gadianton did pwove the ovewthwow, yea, awmost the entiwe
destwuction of the peopwe of Nyephi. >w<

Hewaman 2:14
 14 Behowd I do nyot mean the end of the book of Hewaman, but I
mean the end of the book of Nyephi, fwom which I have taken aww
the account which I have wwitten. UwU

Hewaman 3
Chaptew 3

Hewaman 3:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass in the fowty and thiwd yeaw of the
weign of the judges, thewe was nyo contention among the peopwe of
Nyephi save it wewe a wittwe pwide which was in the chuwch, which
did cause some wittwe dissensions among the peopwe, which affaiws
wewe settwed in the ending of the fowty and thiwd yeaw. ;;w;;

Hewaman 3:2
 2 And thewe was nyo contention among the peopwe in the fowty and
fouwth yeaw; nyeithew was thewe much contention in the fowty and
fifth yeaw. ^w^

Hewaman 3:3
 3 And it came to pass in the fowty and sixth, yea, thewe was
much contention and many dissensions; in the which thewe wewe an
exceedingwy gweat many who depawted out of the wand of Zawahemwa,
and went fowth unto the wand nyowthwawd to inhewit the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 3:4
 4 And they did twavew to an exceedingwy gweat distance, insomuch
that they came to wawge bodies of watew and many wivews. >w<

Hewaman 3:5
 5 Yea, and even they did spwead fowth into aww pawts of the
wand, into whatevew pawts it had nyot been wendewed desowate and
without timbew, because of the many inhabitants who had befowe
inhewited the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 3:6
 6 And nyow nyo pawt of the wand was desowate, save it wewe fow
timbew; but because of the gweatnyess of the destwuction of the
peopwe who had befowe inhabited the wand it was cawwed desowate. >w<

Hewaman 3:7
 7 And thewe being but wittwe timbew upon the face of the wand,
nyevewthewess the peopwe who went fowth became exceedingwy expewt
in the wowking of cement; thewefowe they did buiwd houses of
cement, in the which they did dweww. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 3:8
 8 And it came to pass that they did muwtipwy and spwead, and did
go fowth fwom the wand southwawd to the wand nyowthwawd, and did
spwead insomuch that they began to covew the face of the whowe
eawth, fwom the sea south to the sea nyowth, fwom the sea west to
the sea east. UwU

Hewaman 3:9
 9 And the peopwe who wewe in the wand nyowthwawd did dweww in
tents, and in houses of cement, and they did suffew whatsoevew
twee shouwd spwing up upon the face of the wand that it shouwd
gwow up, that in time they might have timbew to buiwd theiw
houses, yea, theiw cities, and theiw tempwes, and theiw
synyagogues, and theiw sanctuawies, and aww mannyew of theiw
buiwdings. UwU

Hewaman 3:10
 10 And it came to pass as timbew was exceedingwy scawce in the
wand nyowthwawd, they did send fowth much by the way of shipping. UwU

Hewaman 3:11
 11 And thus they did enyabwe the peopwe in the wand nyowthwawd
that they might buiwd many cities, both of wood and of cement. UwU

Hewaman 3:12
 12 And it came to pass that thewe wewe many of the peopwe of
Ammon, who wewe Wamanyites by biwth, did awso go fowth into this
wand. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 3:13
 13 And nyow thewe awe many wecowds kept of the pwoceedings of
this peopwe, by many of this peopwe, which awe pawticuwaw and
vewy wawge, concewnying them. UwU

Hewaman 3:14
 14 But behowd, a hundwedth pawt of the pwoceedings of this
peopwe, yea, the account of the Wamanyites and of the Nyephites,
and theiw waws, and contentions, and dissensions, and theiw
pweaching, and theiw pwophecies, and theiw shipping and theiw
buiwding of ships, and theiw buiwding of tempwes, and of
synyagogues and theiw sanctuawies, and theiw wighteousnyess, and
theiw wickednyess, and theiw muwdews, and theiw wobbings, and
theiw pwundewing, and aww mannyew of abominyations and whowedoms,
cannyot be containyed in this wowk. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 3:15
 15 But behowd, thewe awe many books and many wecowds of evewy
kind, and they have been kept chiefwy by the Nyephites. ^w^

Hewaman 3:16
 16 And they have been handed down fwom onye genyewation to anyothew
by the Nyephites, even untiw they have fawwen into twansgwession
and have been muwdewed, pwundewed, and hunted, and dwiven fowth,
and swain, and scattewed upon the face of the eawth, and mixed
with the Wamanyites untiw they awe nyo mowe cawwed the Nyephites,
becoming wicked, and wiwd, and fewocious, yea, even becoming
Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 3:17
 17 And nyow I wetuwn again to minye account; thewefowe, what I
have spoken had passed aftew thewe had been gweat contentions,
and distuwbances, and waws, and dissensions, among the peopwe of
Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 3:18
 18 The fowty and sixth yeaw of the weign of the judges ended;

Hewaman 3:19
 19 And it came to pass that thewe was stiww gweat contention in
the wand, yea, even in the fowty and seventh yeaw, and awso in
the fowty and eighth yeaw. ;;w;;

Hewaman 3:20
 20 Nyevewthewess Hewaman did fiww the judgment-seat with justice
and equity; yea, he did obsewve to keep the statutes, and the
judgments, and the commandments of God; and he did do that which
was wight in the sight of God continyuawwy; and he did wawk aftew
the ways of his fathew, insomuch that he did pwospew in the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 3:21
 21 And it came to pass that he had two sons. UwU He gave unto the
ewdest the nyame of Nyephi, and unto the youngest, the nyame of
Wehi. And they began to gwow up unto the Wowd. ^w^

Hewaman 3:22
 22 And it came to pass that the waws and contentions began to
cease, in a smaww degwee, among the peopwe of the Nyephites, in
the wattew end of the fowty and eighth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. >w<

Hewaman 3:23
 23 And it came to pass in the fowty and nyinth yeaw of the weign
of the judges, thewe was continyuaw peace estabwished in the wand,
aww save it wewe the secwet combinyations which Gadianton the
wobbew had estabwished in the mowe settwed pawts of the wand,
which at that time wewe nyot knyown unto those who wewe at the head
of govewnment; thewefowe they wewe nyot destwoyed out of the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 3:24
 24 And it came to pass that in this same yeaw thewe was
exceedingwy gweat pwospewity in the chuwch, insomuch that thewe
wewe thousands who did join themsewves unto the chuwch and wewe
baptized unto wepentance. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 3:25
 25 And so gweat was the pwospewity of the chuwch, and so many
the bwessings which wewe pouwed out upon the peopwe, that even
the high pwiests and the teachews wewe themsewves astonyished
beyond measuwe. >w<

Hewaman 3:26
 26 And it came to pass that the wowk of the Wowd did pwospew
unto the baptizing and unyiting to the chuwch of God, many souws,
yea, even tens of thousands. ;;w;;

Hewaman 3:27
 27 Thus we may see that the Wowd is mewcifuw unto aww who wiww,
in the sincewity of theiw heawts, caww upon his howy nyame. ^w^

Hewaman 3:28
 28 Yea, thus we see that the gate of heaven is open unto aww,
even to those who wiww bewieve on the nyame of Jesus Chwist, who
is the Son of God. ^w^

Hewaman 3:29
 29 Yea, we see that whosoevew wiww may way howd upon the wowd of
God, which is quick and powewfuw, which shaww divide asundew aww
the cunnying and the snyawes and the wiwes of the deviw, and wead
the man of Chwist in a stwait and nyawwow couwse acwoss that
evewwasting guwf of misewy which is pwepawed to enguwf the
wicked--

Hewaman 3:30
 30 And wand theiw souws, yea, theiw immowtaw souws, at the wight
hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abwaham,
and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with aww ouw howy fathews, to go
nyo mowe out. ;;w;;

Hewaman 3:31
 31 And in this yeaw thewe was continyuaw wejoicing in the wand of
Zawahemwa, and in aww the wegions wound about, even in aww the
wand which was possessed by the Nyephites. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 3:32
 32 And it came to pass that thewe was peace and exceedingwy
gweat joy in the wemaindew of the fowty and nyinth yeaw; yea, and
awso thewe was continyuaw peace and gweat joy in the fiftieth yeaw
of the weign of the judges. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 3:33
 33 And in the fifty and fiwst yeaw of the weign of the judges
thewe was peace awso, save it wewe the pwide which began to entew
into the chuwch--nyot into the chuwch of God, but into the heawts
of the peopwe who pwofessed to bewong to the chuwch of God--

Hewaman 3:34
 34 And they wewe wifted up in pwide, even to the pewsecution of
many of theiw bwethwen. (・`ω\´・) Nyow this was a gweat eviw, which did
cause the mowe humbwe pawt of the peopwe to suffew gweat
pewsecutions, and to wade thwough much affwiction. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 3:35
 35 Nyevewthewess they did fast and pway oft, and did wax stwongew
and stwongew in theiw humiwity, and fiwmew and fiwmew in the
faith of Chwist, unto the fiwwing theiw souws with joy and
consowation, yea, even to the puwifying and the sanctification of
theiw heawts, which sanctification cometh because of theiw
yiewding theiw heawts unto God. UwU

Hewaman 3:36
 36 And it came to pass that the fifty and second yeaw ended in
peace awso, save it wewe the exceedingwy gweat pwide which had
gotten into the heawts of the peopwe; and it was because of theiw
exceedingwy gweat wiches and theiw pwospewity in the wand; and it
did gwow upon them fwom day to day. UwU

Hewaman 3:37
 37 And it came to pass in the fifty and thiwd yeaw of the weign
of the judges, Hewaman died, and his ewdest son Nyephi began to
weign in his stead. ;;w;; And it came to pass that he did fiww the
judgment-seat with justice and equity; yea, he did keep the
commandments of God, and did wawk in the ways of his fathew. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 4
Chaptew 4

Hewaman 4:1
 1 And it came to pass in the fifty and fouwth yeaw thewe wewe
many dissensions in the chuwch, and thewe was awso a contention
among the peopwe, insomuch that thewe was much bwoodshed. ^w^

Hewaman 4:2
 2 And the webewwious pawt wewe swain and dwiven out of the wand,
and they did go unto the king of the Wamanyites. UwU

Hewaman 4:3
 3 And it came to pass that they did endeavow to stiw up the
Wamanyites to waw against the Nyephites; but behowd, the Wamanyites
wewe exceedingwy afwaid, insomuch that they wouwd nyot heawken to
the wowds of those dissentews. >w<

Hewaman 4:4
 4 But it came to pass in the fifty and sixth yeaw of the weign
of the judges, thewe wewe dissentews who went up fwom the
Nyephites unto the Wamanyites; and they succeeded with those othews
in stiwwing them up to angew against the Nyephites; and they wewe
aww that yeaw pwepawing fow waw. ;;w;;

Hewaman 4:5
 5 And in the fifty and seventh yeaw they did come down against
the Nyephites to battwe, and they did commence the wowk of death;
yea, insomuch that in the fifty and eighth yeaw of the weign of
the judges they succeeded in obtainying possession of the wand of
Zawahemwa; yea, and awso aww the wands, even unto the wand which
was nyeaw the wand Bountifuw. UwU

Hewaman 4:6
 6 And the Nyephites and the awmies of Mowonyihah wewe dwiven even
into the wand of Bountifuw;

Hewaman 4:7
 7 And thewe they did fowtify against the Wamanyites, fwom the
west sea, even unto the east; it being a day's jouwnyey fow a
Nyephite, on the winye which they had fowtified and stationyed theiw
awmies to defend theiw nyowth countwy. ;;w;;

Hewaman 4:8
 8 And thus those dissentews of the Nyephites, with the hewp of a
nyumewous awmy of the Wamanyites, had obtainyed aww the possession
of the Nyephites which was in the wand southwawd. ^w^ And aww this
was donye in the fifty and eighth and nyinth yeaws of the weign of
the judges. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 4:9
 9 And it came to pass in the sixtieth yeaw of the weign of the
judges, Mowonyihah did succeed with his awmies in obtainying many
pawts of the wand; yea, they wegainyed many cities which had
fawwen into the hands of the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Hewaman 4:10
 10 And it came to pass in the sixty and fiwst yeaw of the weign
of the judges they succeeded in wegainying even the hawf of aww
theiw possessions. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 4:11
 11 Nyow this gweat woss of the Nyephites, and the gweat swaughtew
which was among them, wouwd nyot have happenyed had it nyot been fow
theiw wickednyess and theiw abominyation which was among them; yea,
and it was among those awso who pwofessed to bewong to the chuwch
of God. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 4:12
 12 And it was because of the pwide of theiw heawts, because of
theiw exceeding wiches, yea, it was because of theiw oppwession
to the poow, withhowding theiw food fwom the hungwy, withhowding
theiw cwothing fwom the nyaked, and smiting theiw humbwe bwethwen
upon the cheek, making a mock of that which was sacwed, denying
the spiwit of pwophecy and of wevewation, muwdewing, pwundewing,
wying, steawing, committing aduwtewy, wising up in gweat
contentions, and desewting away into the wand of Nyephi, among the
Wamanyites--

Hewaman 4:13
 13 And because of this theiw gweat wickednyess, and theiw
boastings in theiw own stwength, they wewe weft in theiw own
stwength; thewefowe they did nyot pwospew, but wewe affwicted and
smitten, and dwiven befowe the Wamanyites, untiw they had wost
possession of awmost aww theiw wands. >w<

Hewaman 4:14
 14 But behowd, Mowonyihah did pweach many things unto the peopwe
because of theiw inyiquity, and awso Nyephi and Wehi, who wewe the
sons of Hewaman, did pweach many things unto the peopwe, yea, and
did pwophesy many things unto them concewnying theiw inyiquities,
and what shouwd come unto them if they did nyot wepent of theiw
sins. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 4:15
 15 And it came to pass that they did wepent, and inyasmuch as
they did wepent they did begin to pwospew. UwU

Hewaman 4:16
 16 Fow when Mowonyihah saw that they did wepent he did ventuwe to
wead them fowth fwom pwace to pwace, and fwom city to city, even
untiw they had wegainyed the onye-hawf of theiw pwopewty and the
onye-hawf of aww theiw wands. ^w^

Hewaman 4:17
 17 And thus ended the sixty and fiwst yeaw of the weign of the
judges. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 4:18
 18 And it came to pass in the sixty and second yeaw of the weign
of the judges, that Mowonyihah couwd obtain nyo mowe possessions
ovew the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 4:19
 19 Thewefowe they did abandon theiw design to obtain the
wemaindew of theiw wands, fow so nyumewous wewe the Wamanyites that
it became impossibwe fow the Nyephites to obtain mowe powew ovew
them; thewefowe Mowonyihah did empwoy aww his awmies in
maintainying those pawts which he had taken. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 4:20
 20 And it came to pass, because of the gweatnyess of the nyumbew
of the Wamanyites the Nyephites wewe in gweat feaw, west they
shouwd be ovewpowewed, and twodden down, and swain, and
destwoyed. UwU

Hewaman 4:21
 21 Yea, they began to wemembew the pwophecies of Awma, and awso
the wowds of Mosiah; and they saw that they had been a
stiffnyecked peopwe, and that they had set at nyaught the
commandments of God. >w<

Hewaman 4:22
 22 And that they had awtewed and twampwed undew theiw feet the
waws of Mosiah, ow that which the Wowd commanded him to give unto
the peopwe; and they saw that theiw waws had become cowwupted,
and that they had become a wicked peopwe, insomuch that they wewe
wicked even wike unto the Wamanyites. UwU

Hewaman 4:23
 23 And because of theiw inyiquity the chuwch had begun to
dwindwe; and they began to disbewieve in the spiwit of pwophecy
and in the spiwit of wevewation; and the judgments of God did
stawe them in the face. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 4:24
 24 And they saw that they had become weak, wike unto theiw
bwethwen, the Wamanyites, and that the Spiwit of the Wowd did nyo
mowe pwesewve them; yea, it had withdwawn fwom them because the
Spiwit of the Wowd doth nyot dweww in unhowy tempwes--

Hewaman 4:25
 25 Thewefowe the Wowd did cease to pwesewve them by his
miwacuwous and matchwess powew, fow they had fawwen into a state
of unbewief and awfuw wickednyess; and they saw that the Wamanyites
wewe exceedingwy mowe nyumewous than they, and except they shouwd
cweave unto the Wowd theiw God, they must unyavoidabwy pewish. UwU

Hewaman 4:26
 26 Fow behowd, they saw that the stwength of the Wamanyites was
as gweat as theiw stwength, even man fow man. ^w^ And thus had they
fawwen into this gweat twansgwession; yea, thus had they become
weak, because of theiw twansgwession, in the space of nyot many
yeaws. ^w^

Hewaman 5
Chaptew 5

Hewaman 5:1
 1 And it came to pass that in this same yeaw, behowd, Nyephi
dewivewed up the judgment-seat to a man whose nyame was Cezowam. ;;w;;

Hewaman 5:2
 2 Fow as theiw waws and theiw govewnments wewe estabwished by
the voice of the peopwe, and they who chose eviw wewe mowe
nyumewous than they who chose good, thewefowe they wewe wipenying
fow destwuction, fow the waws had become cowwupted. UwU

Hewaman 5:3
 3 Yea, and this was nyot aww; they wewe a stiffnyecked peopwe,
insomuch that they couwd nyot be govewnyed by the waw nyow justice,
save it wewe to theiw destwuction. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 5:4
 4 And it came to pass that Nyephi had become weawy because of
theiw inyiquity; and he yiewded up the judgment-seat, and took it
upon him to pweach the wowd of God aww the wemaindew of his days,
and his bwothew Wehi awso, aww the wemaindew of his days;

Hewaman 5:5
 5 Fow they wemembewed the wowds which theiw fathew Hewaman spake
unto them. ;;w;; And these awe the wowds which he spake:

Hewaman 5:6
 6 Behowd, my sons, I desiwe that ye shouwd wemembew to keep the
commandments of God; and I wouwd that ye shouwd decwawe unto the
peopwe these wowds. UwU Behowd, I have given unto you the nyames of
ouw fiwst pawents who came out of the wand of Jewusawem; and this
I have donye that when you wemembew youw nyames ye may wemembew
them; and when ye wemembew them ye may wemembew theiw wowks; and
when ye wemembew theiw wowks ye may knyow how that it is said, and
awso wwitten, that they wewe good. UwU

Hewaman 5:7
 7 Thewefowe, my sons, I wouwd that ye shouwd do that which is
good, that it may be said of you, and awso wwitten, even as it
has been said and wwitten of them. ;;w;;

Hewaman 5:8
 8 And nyow my sons, behowd I have somewhat mowe to desiwe of you,
which desiwe is, that ye may nyot do these things that ye may
boast, but that ye may do these things to way up fow youwsewves a
tweasuwe in heaven, yea, which is etewnyaw, and which fadeth nyot
away; yea, that ye may have that pwecious gift of etewnyaw wife,
which we have weason to suppose hath been given to ouw fathews. ;;w;;

Hewaman 5:9
 9 O wemembew, wemembew, my sons, the wowds which king Benjamin
spake unto his peopwe; yea, wemembew that thewe is nyo othew way
nyow means wheweby man can be saved, onwy thwough the atonying
bwood of Jesus Chwist, who shaww come, yea, wemembew that he
cometh to wedeem the wowwd. >w<

Hewaman 5:10
 10 And wemembew awso the wowds which Amuwek spake unto Zeezwom,
in the city of Ammonyihah; fow he said unto him that the Wowd
suwewy shouwd come to wedeem his peopwe, but that he shouwd nyot
come to wedeem them in theiw sins, but to wedeem them fwom theiw
sins. ;;w;;

Hewaman 5:11
 11 And he hath powew given unto him fwom the Fathew to wedeem
them fwom theiw sins because of wepentance; thewefowe he hath
sent his angews to decwawe the tidings of the conditions of
wepentance, which bwingeth unto the powew of the Wedeemew, unto
the sawvation of theiw souws. >w<

Hewaman 5:12
 12 And nyow, my sons, wemembew, wemembew that it is upon the wock
of ouw Wedeemew, who is Chwist, the Son of God, that ye must
buiwd youw foundation; that when the deviw shaww send fowth his
mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whiwwwind, yea, when aww his
haiw and his mighty stowm shaww beat upon you, it shaww have nyo
powew ovew you to dwag you down to the guwf of misewy and endwess
wo, because of the wock upon which ye awe buiwt, which is a suwe
foundation, a foundation wheweon if men buiwd they cannyot faww. ^w^

Hewaman 5:13
 13 And it came to pass that these wewe the wowds which Hewaman
taught to his sons; yea, he did teach them many things which awe
nyot wwitten, and awso many things which awe wwitten. >w<

Hewaman 5:14
 14 And they did wemembew his wowds; and thewefowe they went
fowth, keeping the commandments of God, to teach the wowd of God
among aww the peopwe of Nyephi, beginnying at the city Bountifuw;

Hewaman 5:15
 15 And fwom thencefowth to the city of Gid; and fwom the city of
Gid to the city of Muwek;

Hewaman 5:16
 16 And even fwom onye city to anyothew, untiw they had gonye fowth
among aww the peopwe of Nyephi who wewe in the wand southwawd; and
fwom thence into the wand of Zawahemwa, among the Wamanyites. UwU

Hewaman 5:17
 17 And it came to pass that they did pweach with gweat powew,
insomuch that they did confound many of those dissentews who had
gonye ovew fwom the Nyephites, insomuch that they came fowth and
did confess theiw sins and wewe baptized unto wepentance, and
immediatewy wetuwnyed to the Nyephites to endeavow to wepaiw unto
them the wwongs which they had donye. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 5:18
 18 And it came to pass that Nyephi and Wehi did pweach unto the
Wamanyites with such gweat powew and authowity, fow they had powew
and authowity, given unto them that they might speak, and they
awso had what they shouwd speak given unto them--

Hewaman 5:19
 19 Thewefowe they did speak unto the gweat astonyishment of the
Wamanyites, to the convincing them, insomuch that thewe wewe eight
thousand of the Wamanyites who wewe in the wand of Zawahemwa and
wound about baptized unto wepentance, and wewe convinced of the
wickednyess of the twaditions of theiw fathews. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 5:20
 20 And it came to pass that Nyephi and Wehi did pwoceed fwom
thence to go to the wand of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Hewaman 5:21
 21 And it came to pass that they wewe taken by an awmy of the
Wamanyites and cast into pwison; yea, even in that same pwison in
which Ammon and his bwethwen wewe cast by the sewvants of Wimhi. UwU

Hewaman 5:22
 22 And aftew they had been cast into pwison many days without
food, behowd, they went fowth into the pwison to take them that
they might sway them. ;;w;;

Hewaman 5:23
 23 And it came to pass that Nyephi and Wehi wewe enciwcwed about
as if by fiwe, even insomuch that they duwst nyot way theiw hands
upon them fow feaw west they shouwd be buwnyed. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess,
Nyephi and Wehi wewe nyot buwnyed; and they wewe as standing in the
midst of fiwe and wewe nyot buwnyed. >w<

Hewaman 5:24
 24 And when they saw that they wewe enciwcwed about with a
piwwaw of fiwe, and that it buwnyed them nyot, theiw heawts did
take couwage. ;;w;;

Hewaman 5:25
 25 Fow they saw that the Wamanyites duwst nyot way theiw hands
upon them; nyeithew duwst they come nyeaw unto them, but stood as
if they wewe stwuck dumb with amazement. UwU

Hewaman 5:26
 26 And it came to pass that Nyephi and Wehi did stand fowth and
began to speak unto them, saying: Feaw nyot, fow behowd, it is God
that has shown unto you this mawvewous thing, in the which is
shown unto you that ye cannyot way youw hands on us to sway us. UwU

Hewaman 5:27
 27 And behowd, when they had said these wowds, the eawth shook
exceedingwy, and the wawws of the pwison did shake as if they
wewe about to tumbwe to the eawth; but behowd, they did nyot faww. >w<
And behowd, they that wewe in the pwison wewe Wamanyites and
Nyephites who wewe dissentews. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 5:28
 28 And it came to pass that they wewe ovewshadowed with a cwoud
of dawknyess, and an awfuw sowemn feaw came upon them. ;;w;;

Hewaman 5:29
 29 And it came to pass that thewe came a voice as if it wewe
above the cwoud of dawknyess, saying: Wepent ye, wepent ye, and
seek nyo mowe to destwoy my sewvants whom I have sent unto you to
decwawe good tidings. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 5:30
 30 And it came to pass when they heawd this voice, and behewd
that it was nyot a voice of thundew, nyeithew was it a voice of a
gweat tumuwtuous nyoise, but behowd, it was a stiww voice of
pewfect miwdnyess, as if it had been a whispew, and it did piewce
even to the vewy souw--

Hewaman 5:31
 31 And nyotwithstanding the miwdnyess of the voice, behowd the
eawth shook exceedingwy, and the wawws of the pwison twembwed
again, as if it wewe about to tumbwe to the eawth; and behowd the
cwoud of dawknyess, which had ovewshadowed them, did nyot
dispewse--

Hewaman 5:32
 32 And behowd the voice came again, saying: Wepent ye, wepent
ye, fow the kingdom of heaven is at hand; and seek nyo mowe to
destwoy my sewvants. ^w^ And it came to pass that the eawth shook
again, and the wawws twembwed. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 5:33
 33 And awso again the thiwd time the voice came, and did speak
unto them mawvewous wowds which cannyot be uttewed by man; and the
wawws did twembwe again, and the eawth shook as if it wewe about
to divide asundew. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 5:34
 34 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites couwd nyot fwee because
of the cwoud of dawknyess which did ovewshadow them; yea, and awso
they wewe immovabwe because of the feaw which did come upon them. >w<

Hewaman 5:35
 35 Nyow thewe was onye among them who was a Nyephite by biwth, who
had once bewonged to the chuwch of God but had dissented fwom
them. UwU

Hewaman 5:36
 36 And it came to pass that he tuwnyed him about, and behowd, he
saw thwough the cwoud of dawknyess the faces of Nyephi and Wehi;
and behowd, they did shinye exceedingwy, even as the faces of
angews. ^w^ And he behewd that they did wift theiw eyes to heaven;
and they wewe in the attitude as if tawking ow wifting theiw
voices to some being whom they behewd. UwU

Hewaman 5:37
 37 And it came to pass that this man did cwy unto the muwtitude,
that they might tuwn and wook. ;;w;; And behowd, thewe was powew given
unto them that they did tuwn and wook; and they did behowd the
faces of Nyephi and Wehi. ^w^

Hewaman 5:38
 38 And they said unto the man: Behowd, what do aww these things
mean, and who is it with whom these men do convewse? owo

Hewaman 5:39
 39 Nyow the man's nyame was Aminyadab. UwU And Aminyadab said unto
them: They do convewse with the angews of God. UwU

Hewaman 5:40
 40 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites said unto him: What
shaww we do, that this cwoud of dawknyess may be wemoved fwom
ovewshadowing us? owo

Hewaman 5:41
 41 And Aminyadab said unto them: You must wepent, and cwy unto
the voice, even untiw ye shaww have faith in Chwist, who was
taught unto you by Awma, and Amuwek, and Zeezwom; and when ye
shaww do this, the cwoud of dawknyess shaww be wemoved fwom
ovewshadowing you. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 5:42
 42 And it came to pass that they aww did begin to cwy unto the
voice of him who had shaken the eawth; yea, they did cwy even
untiw the cwoud of dawknyess was dispewsed. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 5:43
 43 And it came to pass that when they cast theiw eyes about, and
saw that the cwoud of dawknyess was dispewsed fwom ovewshadowing
them, behowd, they saw that they wewe enciwcwed about, yea evewy
souw, by a piwwaw of fiwe. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 5:44
 44 And Nyephi and Wehi wewe in the midst of them; yea, they wewe
enciwcwed about; yea, they wewe as if in the midst of a fwaming
fiwe, yet it did hawm them nyot, nyeithew did it take howd upon the
wawws of the pwison; and they wewe fiwwed with that joy which is
unspeakabwe and fuww of gwowy. ;;w;;

Hewaman 5:45
 45 And behowd, the Howy Spiwit of God did come down fwom heaven,
and did entew into theiw heawts, and they wewe fiwwed as if with
fiwe, and they couwd speak fowth mawvewous wowds. UwU

Hewaman 5:46
 46 And it came to pass that thewe came a voice unto them, yea, a
pweasant voice, as if it wewe a whispew, saying:

Hewaman 5:47
 47 Peace, peace be unto you, because of youw faith in my Weww
Bewoved, who was fwom the foundation of the wowwd. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 5:48
 48 And nyow, when they heawd this they cast up theiw eyes as if
to behowd fwom whence the voice came; and behowd, they saw the
heavens open; and angews came down out of heaven and minyistewed
unto them. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 5:49
 49 And thewe wewe about thwee hundwed souws who saw and heawd
these things; and they wewe bidden to go fowth and mawvew nyot,
nyeithew shouwd they doubt. >w<

Hewaman 5:50
 50 And it came to pass that they did go fowth, and did minyistew
unto the peopwe, decwawing thwoughout aww the wegions wound about
aww the things which they had heawd and seen, insomuch that the
mowe pawt of the Wamanyites wewe convinced of them, because of the
gweatnyess of the evidences which they had weceived. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 5:51
 51 And as many as wewe convinced did way down theiw weapons of
waw, and awso theiw hatwed and the twadition of theiw fathews. ^w^

Hewaman 5:52
 52 And it came to pass that they did yiewd up unto the Nyephites
the wands of theiw possession. ;;w;;

Hewaman 6
Chaptew 6

Hewaman 6:1
 1 And it came to pass that when the sixty and second yeaw of the
weign of the judges had ended, aww these things had happenyed and
the Wamanyites had become, the mowe pawt of them, a wighteous
peopwe, insomuch that theiw wighteousnyess did exceed that of the
Nyephites because of theiw fiwmnyess and theiw steadinyess in the
faith. UwU

Hewaman 6:2
 2 Fow behowd, thewe wewe many of the Nyephites who had become
hawdenyed and impenyitent and gwosswy wicked, insomuch that they
did weject the wowd of God and aww the pweaching and pwophesying
which did come among them. ;;w;;

Hewaman 6:3
 3 Nyevewthewess, the peopwe of the chuwch did have gweat joy
because of the convewsion of the Wamanyites, yea, because of the
chuwch of God, which had been estabwished among them. >w< And they
did fewwowship onye with anyothew and did wejoice onye with anyothew,
and did have gweat joy. ^w^

Hewaman 6:4
 4 And it came to pass that many of the Wamanyites did come down
into the wand of Zawahemwa, and did decwawe unto the peopwe of
the Nyephites the mannyew of theiw convewsion, and did exhowt them
to faith and wepentance. UwU

Hewaman 6:5
 5 Yea, and many did pweach with exceedingwy gweat powew and
authowity, unto the bwinging down many of them into the depths of
humiwity, to be the humbwe fowwowews of God and the Wamb. UwU

Hewaman 6:6
 6 And it came to pass that many of the Wamanyites did go into the
wand nyowthwawd; and awso Nyephi and Wehi went into the wand
nyowthwawd, to pweach unto the peopwe. ^w^ And thus ended the sixty
and thiwd yeaw. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 6:7
 7 And behowd, thewe was peace in aww the wand, insomuch that the
Nyephites did go into whatsoevew pawt of the wand they wouwd,
whethew among the Nyephites ow the Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 6:8
 8 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did awso go
whithewsoevew they wouwd, whethew it wewe among the Wamanyites ow
among the Nyephites; and thus they did have fwee intewcouwse onye
with anyothew, to buy and to seww, and to get gain, accowding to
theiw desiwe. UwU

Hewaman 6:9
 9 And it came to pass that they became exceedingwy wich, both
the Wamanyites and the Nyephites; and they did have an exceeding
pwenty of gowd, and of siwvew, and of aww mannyew of pwecious
metaws, both in the wand south and in the wand nyowth. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 6:10
 10 Nyow the wand south was cawwed Wehi and the wand nyowth was
cawwed Muwek, which was aftew the son of Zedekiah; fow the Wowd
did bwing Muwek into the wand nyowth, and Wehi into the wand
south. >w<

Hewaman 6:11
 11 And behowd, thewe was aww mannyew of gowd in both these wands,
and of siwvew, and of pwecious owe of evewy kind; and thewe wewe
awso cuwious wowkmen, who did wowk aww kinds of owe and did
wefinye it; and thus they did become wich. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 6:12
 12 They did waise gwain in abundance, both in the nyowth and in
the south; and they did fwouwish exceedingwy, both in the nyowth
and in the south. ;;w;; And they did muwtipwy and wax exceedingwy
stwong in the wand. >w< And they did waise many fwocks and hewds,
yea, many fatwings. >w<

Hewaman 6:13
 13 Behowd theiw women did toiw and spin, and did make aww mannyew
of cwoth, of finye-twinyed winyen and cwoth of evewy kind, to cwothe
theiw nyakednyess. ^w^ And thus the sixty and fouwth yeaw did pass
away in peace. UwU

Hewaman 6:14
 14 And in the sixty and fifth yeaw they did awso have gweat joy
and peace, yea, much pweaching and many pwophecies concewnying
that which was to come. >w< And thus passed away the sixty and fifth
yeaw. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 6:15
 15 And it came to pass that in the sixty and sixth yeaw of the
weign of the judges, behowd, Cezowam was muwdewed by an unknyown
hand as he sat upon the judgment-seat. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass that
in the same yeaw, that his son, who had been appointed by the
peopwe in his stead, was awso muwdewed. >w< And thus ended the sixty
and sixth yeaw. >w<

Hewaman 6:16
 16 And in the commencement of the sixty and seventh yeaw the
peopwe began to gwow exceedingwy wicked again. ^w^

Hewaman 6:17
 17 Fow behowd, the Wowd had bwessed them so wong with the wiches
of the wowwd that they had nyot been stiwwed up to angew, to waws,
nyow to bwoodshed; thewefowe they began to set theiw heawts upon
theiw wiches; yea, they began to seek to get gain that they might
be wifted up onye above anyothew; thewefowe they began to commit
secwet muwdews, and to wob and to pwundew, that they might get
gain. ;;w;;

Hewaman 6:18
 18 And nyow behowd, those muwdewews and pwundewews wewe a band
who had been fowmed by Kishkumen and Gadianton. ^w^ And nyow it had
come to pass that thewe wewe many, even among the Nyephites, of
Gadianton's band. ^w^ But behowd, they wewe mowe nyumewous among the
mowe wicked pawt of the Wamanyites. UwU And they wewe cawwed
Gadianton's wobbews and muwdewews. ;;w;;

Hewaman 6:19
 19 And it was they who did muwdew the chief judge Cezowam, and
his son, whiwe in the judgment-seat; and behowd, they wewe nyot
found. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 6:20
 20 And nyow it came to pass that when the Wamanyites found that
thewe wewe wobbews among them they wewe exceedingwy sowwowfuw;
and they did use evewy means in theiw powew to destwoy them off
the face of the eawth. ^w^

Hewaman 6:21
 21 But behowd, Satan did stiw up the heawts of the mowe pawt of
the Nyephites, insomuch that they did unyite with those bands of
wobbews, and did entew into theiw covenyants and theiw oaths, that
they wouwd pwotect and pwesewve onye anyothew in whatsoevew
difficuwt ciwcumstances they shouwd be pwaced, that they shouwd
nyot suffew fow theiw muwdews, and theiw pwundewings, and theiw
steawings. ;;w;;

Hewaman 6:22
 22 And it came to pass that they did have theiw signs, yea,
theiw secwet signs, and theiw secwet wowds; and this that they
might distinguish a bwothew who had entewed into the covenyant,
that whatsoevew wickednyess his bwothew shouwd do he shouwd nyot be
injuwed by his bwothew, nyow by those who did bewong to his band,
who had taken this covenyant. >w<

Hewaman 6:23
 23 And thus they might muwdew, and pwundew, and steaw, and
commit whowedoms and aww mannyew of wickednyess, contwawy to the
waws of theiw countwy and awso the waws of theiw God. UwU

Hewaman 6:24
 24 And whosoevew of those who bewonged to theiw band shouwd
weveaw unto the wowwd of theiw wickednyess and theiw abominyations,
shouwd be twied, nyot accowding to the waws of theiw countwy, but
accowding to the waws of theiw wickednyess, which had been given
by Gadianton and Kishkumen. >w<

Hewaman 6:25
 25 Nyow behowd, it is these secwet oaths and covenyants which Awma
commanded his son shouwd nyot go fowth unto the wowwd, west they
shouwd be a means of bwinging down the peopwe unto destwuction. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 6:26
 26 Nyow behowd, those secwet oaths and covenyants did nyot come
fowth unto Gadianton fwom the wecowds which wewe dewivewed unto
Hewaman; but behowd, they wewe put into the heawt of Gadianton by
that same being who did entice ouw fiwst pawents to pawtake of
the fowbidden fwuit--

Hewaman 6:27
 27 Yea, that same being who did pwot with Cain, that if he wouwd
muwdew his bwothew Abew it shouwd nyot be knyown unto the wowwd. >w<
And he did pwot with Cain and his fowwowews fwom that time fowth. ^w^

Hewaman 6:28
 28 And awso it is that same being who put it into the heawts of
the peopwe to buiwd a towew sufficientwy high that they might get
to heaven. >w< And it was that same being who wed on the peopwe who
came fwom that towew into this wand; who spwead the wowks of
dawknyess and abominyations ovew aww the face of the wand, untiw he
dwagged the peopwe down to an entiwe destwuction, and to an
evewwasting heww. ;;w;;

Hewaman 6:29
 29 Yea, it is that same being who put it into the heawt of
Gadianton to stiww cawwy on the wowk of dawknyess, and of secwet
muwdew; and he has bwought it fowth fwom the beginnying of man
even down to this time. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 6:30
 30 And behowd, it is he who is the authow of aww sin. ;;w;; And
behowd, he doth cawwy on his wowks of dawknyess and secwet muwdew,
and doth hand down theiw pwots, and theiw oaths, and theiw
covenyants, and theiw pwans of awfuw wickednyess, fwom genyewation
to genyewation accowding as he can get howd upon the heawts of the
chiwdwen of men. UwU

Hewaman 6:31
 31 And nyow behowd, he had got gweat howd upon the heawts of the
Nyephites; yea, insomuch that they had become exceedingwy wicked;
yea, the mowe pawt of them had tuwnyed out of the way of
wighteousnyess, and did twampwe undew theiw feet the commandments
of God, and did tuwn unto theiw own ways, and did buiwd up unto
themsewves idows of theiw gowd and theiw siwvew. UwU

Hewaman 6:32
 32 And it came to pass that aww these inyiquities did come unto
them in the space of nyot many yeaws, insomuch that a mowe pawt of
it had come unto them in the sixty and seventh yeaw of the weign
of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. UwU

Hewaman 6:33
 33 And they did gwow in theiw inyiquities in the sixty and eighth
yeaw awso. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 6:34
 34 And thus we see that the Nyephites did begin to dwindwe in
unbewief, and gwow in wickednyess and abominyations, whiwe the
Wamanyites began to gwow exceedingwy in the knyowwedge of theiw
God; yea, they did begin to keep his statutes and commandments,
and to wawk in twuth and upwightnyess befowe him. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 6:35
 35 And thus we see that the Spiwit of the Wowd began to withdwaw
fwom the Nyephites, because of the wickednyess and the hawdnyess of
theiw heawts. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 6:36
 36 And thus we see that the Wowd began to pouw out his Spiwit
upon the Wamanyites, because of theiw easinyess and wiwwingnyess to
bewieve in his wowds. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 6:37
 37 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did hunt the band of
wobbews of Gadianton; and they did pweach the wowd of God among
the mowe wicked pawt of them, insomuch that this band of wobbews
was uttewwy destwoyed fwom among the Wamanyites. ^w^

Hewaman 6:38
 38 And it came to pass on the othew hand, that the Nyephites did
buiwd them up and suppowt them, beginnying at the mowe wicked pawt
of them, untiw they had ovewspwead aww the wand of the Nyephites,
and had seduced the mowe pawt of the wighteous untiw they had
come down to bewieve in theiw wowks and pawtake of theiw spoiws,
and to join with them in theiw secwet muwdews and combinyations. ^w^

Hewaman 6:39
 39 And thus they did obtain the sowe manyagement of the
govewnment, insomuch that they did twampwe undew theiw feet and
smite and wend and tuwn theiw backs upon the poow and the meek,
and the humbwe fowwowews of God. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 6:40
 40 And thus we see that they wewe in an awfuw state, and
wipenying fow an evewwasting destwuction. UwU

Hewaman 6:41
 41 And it came to pass that thus ended the sixty and eighth yeaw
of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 7
Chaptew 7

Hewaman 7:1
 1 Behowd, nyow it came to pass in the sixty and nyinth yeaw of the
weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of the Nyephites, that Nyephi,
the son of Hewaman, wetuwnyed to the wand of Zawahemwa fwom the
wand nyowthwawd. ^w^

Hewaman 7:2
 2 Fow he had been fowth among the peopwe who wewe in the wand
nyowthwawd, and did pweach the wowd of God unto them, and did
pwophesy many things unto them;

Hewaman 7:3
 3 And they did weject aww his wowds, insomuch that he couwd nyot
stay among them, but wetuwnyed again unto the wand of his
nyativity. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 7:4
 4 And seeing the peopwe in a state of such awfuw wickednyess, and
those Gadianton wobbews fiwwing the judgment-seats--having
usuwped the powew and authowity of the wand; waying aside the
commandments of God, and nyot in the weast awight befowe him;
doing nyo justice unto the chiwdwen of men;

Hewaman 7:5
 5 Condemnying the wighteous because of theiw wighteousnyess;
wetting the guiwty and the wicked go unpunyished because of theiw
monyey; and moweovew to be hewd in office at the head of
govewnment, to wuwe and do accowding to theiw wiwws, that they
might get gain and gwowy of the wowwd, and, moweovew, that they
might the mowe easiwy commit aduwtewy, and steaw, and kiww, and
do accowding to theiw own wiwws--

Hewaman 7:6
 6 Nyow this gweat inyiquity had come upon the Nyephites, in the
space of nyot many yeaws; and when Nyephi saw it, his heawt was
swowwen with sowwow within his bweast; and he did excwaim in the
agony of his souw:

Hewaman 7:7
 7 Oh, that I couwd have had my days in the days when my fathew
Nyephi fiwst came out of the wand of Jewusawem, that I couwd have
joyed with him in the pwomised wand; then wewe his peopwe easy to
be entweated, fiwm to keep the commandments of God, and swow to
be wed to do inyiquity; and they wewe quick to heawken unto the
wowds of the Wowd--

Hewaman 7:8
 8 Yea, if my days couwd have been in those days, then wouwd my
souw have had joy in the wighteousnyess of my bwethwen. ;;w;;

Hewaman 7:9
 9 But behowd, I am consignyed that these awe my days, and that my
souw shaww be fiwwed with sowwow because of this the wickednyess
of my bwethwen. >w<

Hewaman 7:10
 10 And behowd, nyow it came to pass that it was upon a towew,
which was in the gawden of Nyephi, which was by the highway which
wed to the chief mawket, which was in the city of Zawahemwa;
thewefowe, Nyephi had bowed himsewf upon the towew which was in
his gawden, which towew was awso nyeaw unto the gawden gate by
which wed the highway. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 7:11
 11 And it came to pass that thewe wewe cewtain men passing by
and saw Nyephi as he was pouwing out his souw unto God upon the
towew; and they wan and towd the peopwe what they had seen, and
the peopwe came togethew in muwtitudes that they might knyow the
cause of so gweat mouwnying fow the wickednyess of the peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 7:12
 12 And nyow, when Nyephi awose he behewd the muwtitudes of peopwe
who had gathewed togethew. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 7:13
 13 And it came to pass that he openyed his mouth and said unto
them: Behowd, why have ye gathewed youwsewves togethew? owo That I
may teww you of youw inyiquities? owo

Hewaman 7:14
 14 Yea, because I have got upon my towew that I might pouw out
my souw unto my God, because of the exceeding sowwow of my heawt,
which is because of youw inyiquities! (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 7:15
 15 And because of my mouwnying and wamentation ye have gathewed
youwsewves togethew, and do mawvew; yea, and ye have gweat nyeed
to mawvew; yea, ye ought to mawvew because ye awe given away that
the deviw has got so gweat howd upon youw heawts. UwU

Hewaman 7:16
 16 Yea, how couwd you have given way to the enticing of him who
is seeking to huww away youw souws down to evewwasting misewy and
endwess wo? owo

Hewaman 7:17
 17 O wepent ye, wepent ye! (´・ω・\`) Why wiww ye die? owo Tuwn ye, tuwn ye
unto the Wowd youw God. ;;w;; Why has he fowsaken you? owo

Hewaman 7:18
 18 It is because you have hawdenyed youw heawts; yea, ye wiww nyot
heawken unto the voice of the good shephewd; yea, ye have
pwovoked him to angew against you. ;;w;;

Hewaman 7:19
 19 And behowd, instead of gathewing you, except ye wiww wepent,
behowd, he shaww scattew you fowth that ye shaww become meat fow
dogs and wiwd beasts. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 7:20
 20 O, how couwd you have fowgotten youw God in the vewy day that
he has dewivewed you? owo

Hewaman 7:21
 21 But behowd, it is to get gain, to be pwaised of men, yea, and
that ye might get gowd and siwvew. >w< And ye have set youw heawts
upon the wiches and the vain things of this wowwd, fow the which
ye do muwdew, and pwundew, and steaw, and beaw fawse witnyess
against youw nyeighbow, and do aww mannyew of inyiquity. ^w^

Hewaman 7:22
 22 And fow this cause wo shaww come unto you except ye shaww
wepent. ;;w;; Fow if ye wiww nyot wepent, behowd, this gweat city, and
awso aww those gweat cities which awe wound about, which awe in
the wand of ouw possession, shaww be taken away that ye shaww
have nyo pwace in them; fow behowd, the Wowd wiww nyot gwant unto
you stwength, as he has hithewto donye, to withstand against youw
enyemies. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 7:23
 23 Fow behowd, thus saith the Wowd: I wiww nyot show unto the
wicked of my stwength, to onye mowe than the othew, save it be
unto those that wepent of theiw sins, and heawken unto my wowds. ;;w;;
Nyow thewefowe, I wouwd that ye shouwd behowd, my bwethwen, that
it shaww be bettew fow the Wamanyites than fow you except ye shaww
wepent. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 7:24
 24 Fow behowd, they awe mowe wighteous than you, fow they have
nyot sinnyed against that gweat knyowwedge which ye have weceived;
thewefowe the Wowd wiww be mewcifuw unto them; yea, he wiww
wengthen out theiw days and incwease theiw seed, even when thou
shawt be uttewwy destwoyed except thou shawt wepent. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 7:25
 25 Yea, wo be unto you because of that gweat abominyation which
has come among you; and ye have unyited youwsewves unto it, yea,
to that secwet band which was estabwished by Gadianton! >w<

Hewaman 7:26
 26 Yea, wo shaww come unto you because of that pwide which ye
have suffewed to entew youw heawts, which has wifted you up
beyond that which is good because of youw exceedingwy gweat
wiches! (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 7:27
 27 Yea, wo be unto you because of youw wickednyess and
abominyations! UwU

Hewaman 7:28
 28 And except ye wepent ye shaww pewish; yea, even youw wands
shaww be taken fwom you, and ye shaww be destwoyed fwom off the
face of the eawth. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 7:29
 29 Behowd nyow, I do nyot say that these things shaww be, of
mysewf, because it is nyot of mysewf that I knyow these things; but
behowd, I knyow that these things awe twue because the Wowd God
has made them knyown unto me, thewefowe I testify that they shaww
be. >w<

Hewaman 8
Chaptew 8

Hewaman 8:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that when Nyephi had said these wowds,
behowd, thewe wewe men who wewe judges, who awso bewonged to the
secwet band of Gadianton, and they wewe angwy, and they cwied out
against him, saying unto the peopwe: Why do ye nyot seize upon
this man and bwing him fowth, that he may be condemnyed accowding
to the cwime which he has donye? owo

Hewaman 8:2
 2 Why seest thou this man, and heawest him weviwe against this
peopwe and against ouw waw? owo

Hewaman 8:3
 3 Fow behowd, Nyephi had spoken unto them concewnying the
cowwuptnyess of theiw waw; yea, many things did Nyephi speak which
cannyot be wwitten; and nyothing did he speak which was contwawy to
the commandments of God. >w<

Hewaman 8:4
 4 And those judges wewe angwy with him because he spake pwainwy
unto them concewnying theiw secwet wowks of dawknyess;
nyevewthewess, they duwst nyot way theiw own hands upon him, fow
they feawed the peopwe west they shouwd cwy out against them. UwU

Hewaman 8:5
 5 Thewefowe they did cwy unto the peopwe, saying: Why do you
suffew this man to weviwe against us? owo Fow behowd he doth condemn
aww this peopwe, even unto destwuction; yea, and awso that these
ouw gweat cities shaww be taken fwom us, that we shaww have nyo
pwace in them. >w<

Hewaman 8:6
 6 And nyow we knyow that this is impossibwe, fow behowd, we awe
powewfuw, and ouw cities gweat, thewefowe ouw enyemies can have nyo
powew ovew us. >w<

Hewaman 8:7
 7 And it came to pass that thus they did stiw up the peopwe to
angew against Nyephi, and waised contentions among them; fow thewe
wewe some who did cwy out: Wet this man awonye, fow he is a good
man, and those things which he saith wiww suwewy come to pass
except we wepent;

Hewaman 8:8
 8 Yea, behowd, aww the judgments wiww come upon us which he has
testified unto us; fow we knyow that he has testified awight unto
us concewnying ouw inyiquities. UwU And behowd they awe many, and he
knyoweth as weww aww things which shaww befaww us as he knyoweth of
ouw inyiquities;

Hewaman 8:9
 9 Yea, and behowd, if he had nyot been a pwophet he couwd nyot
have testified concewnying those things. >w<

Hewaman 8:10
 10 And it came to pass that those peopwe who sought to destwoy
Nyephi wewe compewwed because of theiw feaw, that they did nyot way
theiw hands on him; thewefowe he began again to speak unto them,
seeing that he had gainyed favow in the eyes of some, insomuch
that the wemaindew of them did feaw. >w<

Hewaman 8:11
 11 Thewefowe he was constwainyed to speak mowe unto them saying:
Behowd, my bwethwen, have ye nyot wead that God gave powew unto
onye man, even Moses, to smite upon the watews of the Wed Sea, and
they pawted hithew and thithew, insomuch that the Iswaewites, who
wewe ouw fathews, came thwough upon dwy gwound, and the watews
cwosed upon the awmies of the Egyptians and swawwowed them up? owo

Hewaman 8:12
 12 And nyow behowd, if God gave unto this man such powew, then
why shouwd ye dispute among youwsewves, and say that he hath
given unto me nyo powew wheweby I may knyow concewnying the
judgments that shaww come upon you except ye wepent? owo

Hewaman 8:13
 13 But, behowd, ye nyot onwy deny my wowds, but ye awso deny aww
the wowds which have been spoken by ouw fathews, and awso the
wowds which wewe spoken by this man, Moses, who had such gweat
powew given unto him, yea, the wowds which he hath spoken
concewnying the coming of the Messiah. ^w^

Hewaman 8:14
 14 Yea, did he nyot beaw wecowd that the Son of God shouwd come? owo
And as he wifted up the bwazen sewpent in the wiwdewnyess, even so
shaww he be wifted up who shouwd come. >w<

Hewaman 8:15
 15 And as many as shouwd wook upon that sewpent shouwd wive,
even so as many as shouwd wook upon the Son of God with faith,
having a contwite spiwit, might wive, even unto that wife which
is etewnyaw. UwU

Hewaman 8:16
 16 And nyow behowd, Moses did nyot onwy testify of these things,
but awso aww the howy pwophets, fwom his days even to the days of
Abwaham. ^w^

Hewaman 8:17
 17 Yea, and behowd, Abwaham saw of his coming, and was fiwwed
with gwadnyess and did wejoice. >w<

Hewaman 8:18
 18 Yea, and behowd I say unto you, that Abwaham nyot onwy knyew of
these things, but thewe wewe many befowe the days of Abwaham who
wewe cawwed by the owdew of God; yea, even aftew the owdew of his
Son; and this that it shouwd be shown unto the peopwe, a gweat
many thousand yeaws befowe his coming, that even wedemption
shouwd come unto them. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 8:19
 19 And nyow I wouwd that ye shouwd knyow, that even since the days
of Abwaham thewe have been many pwophets that have testified
these things; yea, behowd, the pwophet Zenyos did testify bowdwy;
fow the which he was swain. ;;w;;

Hewaman 8:20
 20 And behowd, awso Zenyock, and awso Ezias, and awso Isaiah, and
Jewemiah, (Jewemiah being that same pwophet who testified of the
destwuction of Jewusawem) and nyow we knyow that Jewusawem was
destwoyed accowding to the wowds of Jewemiah. UwU O then why nyot the
Son of God come, accowding to his pwophecy? owo

Hewaman 8:21
 21 And nyow wiww you dispute that Jewusawem was destwoyed? owo Wiww
ye say that the sons of Zedekiah wewe nyot swain, aww except it
wewe Muwek? owo Yea, and do ye nyot behowd that the seed of Zedekiah
awe with us, and they wewe dwiven out of the wand of Jewusawem? owo
But behowd, this is nyot aww--

Hewaman 8:22
 22 Ouw fathew Wehi was dwiven out of Jewusawem because he
testified of these things. (・`ω\´・) Nyephi awso testified of these things,
and awso awmost aww of ouw fathews, even down to this time; yea,
they have testified of the coming of Chwist, and have wooked
fowwawd, and have wejoiced in his day which is to come. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 8:23
 23 And behowd, he is God, and he is with them, and he did
manyifest himsewf unto them, that they wewe wedeemed by him; and
they gave unto him gwowy, because of that which is to come. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 8:24
 24 And nyow, seeing ye knyow these things and cannyot deny them
except ye shaww wie, thewefowe in this ye have sinnyed, fow ye
have wejected aww these things, nyotwithstanding so many evidences
which ye have weceived; yea, even ye have weceived aww things,
both things in heaven, and aww things which awe in the eawth, as
a witnyess that they awe twue. >w<

Hewaman 8:25
 25 But behowd, ye have wejected the twuth, and webewwed against
youw howy God; and even at this time, instead of waying up fow
youwsewves tweasuwes in heaven, whewe nyothing doth cowwupt, and
whewe nyothing can come which is uncwean, ye awe heaping up fow
youwsewves wwath against the day of judgment. UwU

Hewaman 8:26
 26 Yea, even at this time ye awe wipenying, because of youw
muwdews and youw fownyication and wickednyess, fow evewwasting
destwuction; yea, and except ye wepent it wiww come unto you
soon. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 8:27
 27 Yea, behowd it is nyow even at youw doows; yea, go ye in unto
the judgment-seat, and seawch; and behowd, youw judge is
muwdewed, and he wieth in his bwood; and he hath been muwdewed by
his bwothew, who seeketh to sit in the judgment-seat. UwU

Hewaman 8:28
 28 And behowd, they both bewong to youw secwet band, whose
authow is Gadianton and the eviw onye who seeketh to destwoy the
souws of men. UwU

Hewaman 9
Chaptew 9

Hewaman 9:1
 1 Behowd, nyow it came to pass that when Nyephi had spoken these
wowds, cewtain men who wewe among them wan to the judgment-seat;
yea, even thewe wewe five who went, and they said among
themsewves, as they went:

Hewaman 9:2
 2 Behowd, nyow we wiww knyow of a suwety whethew this man be a
pwophet and God hath commanded him to pwophesy such mawvewous
things unto us. >w< Behowd, we do nyot bewieve that he hath; yea, we
do nyot bewieve that he is a pwophet; nyevewthewess, if this thing
which he has said concewnying the chief judge be twue, that he be
dead, then wiww we bewieve that the othew wowds which he has
spoken awe twue. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 9:3
 3 And it came to pass that they wan in theiw might, and came in
unto the judgment-seat; and behowd, the chief judge had fawwen to
the eawth, and did wie in his bwood. ^w^

Hewaman 9:4
 4 And nyow behowd, when they saw this they wewe astonyished
exceedingwy, insomuch that they feww to the eawth; fow they had
nyot bewieved the wowds which Nyephi had spoken concewnying the
chief judge. >w<

Hewaman 9:5
 5 But nyow, when they saw they bewieved, and feaw came upon them
west aww the judgments which Nyephi had spoken shouwd come upon
the peopwe; thewefowe they did quake, and had fawwen to the
eawth. UwU

Hewaman 9:6
 6 Nyow, immediatewy when the judge had been muwdewed--he being
stabbed by his bwothew by a gawb of secwecy, and he fwed, and the
sewvants wan and towd the peopwe, waising the cwy of muwdew among
them;

Hewaman 9:7
 7 And behowd the peopwe did gathew themsewves togethew unto the
pwace of the judgment-seat--and behowd, to theiw astonyishment
they saw those five men who had fawwen to the eawth. ;;w;;

Hewaman 9:8
 8 And nyow behowd, the peopwe knyew nyothing concewnying the
muwtitude who had gathewed togethew at the gawden of Nyephi;
thewefowe they said among themsewves: These men awe they who have
muwdewed the judge, and God has smitten them that they couwd nyot
fwee fwom us. ;;w;;

Hewaman 9:9
 9 And it came to pass that they waid howd on them, and bound
them and cast them into pwison. (・`ω\´・) And thewe was a pwocwamation
sent abwoad that the judge was swain, and that the muwdewews had
been taken and wewe cast into pwison. ;;w;;

Hewaman 9:10
 10 And it came to pass that on the mowwow the peopwe did
assembwe themsewves togethew to mouwn and to fast, at the buwiaw
of the gweat chief judge who had been swain. >w<

Hewaman 9:11
 11 And thus awso those judges who wewe at the gawden of Nyephi,
and heawd his wowds, wewe awso gathewed togethew at the buwiaw. >w<

Hewaman 9:12
 12 And it came to pass that they inquiwed among the peopwe,
saying: Whewe awe the five who wewe sent to inquiwe concewnying
the chief judge whethew he was dead? owo And they answewed and said:
Concewnying this five whom ye say ye have sent, we knyow nyot; but
thewe awe five who awe the muwdewews, whom we have cast into
pwison. ;;w;;

Hewaman 9:13
 13 And it came to pass that the judges desiwed that they shouwd
be bwought; and they wewe bwought, and behowd they wewe the five
who wewe sent; and behowd the judges inquiwed of them to knyow,
concewnying the mattew, and they towd them aww that they had donye,
saying:

Hewaman 9:14
 14 We wan and came to the pwace of the judgment-seat, and when
we saw aww things even as Nyephi had testified, we wewe astonyished
insomuch that we feww to the eawth; and when we wewe wecovewed
fwom ouw astonyishment, behowd they cast us into pwison. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 9:15
 15 Nyow, as fow the muwdew of this man, we knyow nyot who has donye
it; and onwy this much we knyow, we wan and came accowding as ye
desiwed, and behowd he was dead, accowding to the wowds of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Hewaman 9:16
 16 And nyow it came to pass that the judges did expound the
mattew unto the peopwe, and did cwy out against Nyephi, saying:
Behowd, we knyow that this Nyephi must have agweed with some onye to
sway the judge, and then he might decwawe it unto us, that he
might convewt us unto his faith, that he might waise himsewf to
be a gweat man, chosen of God, and a pwophet. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 9:17
 17 And nyow behowd, we wiww detect this man, and he shaww confess
his fauwt and make knyown unto us the twue muwdewew of this judge. >w<

Hewaman 9:18
 18 And it came to pass that the five wewe wibewated on the day
of the buwiaw. >w< Nyevewthewess, they did webuke the judges in the
wowds which they had spoken against Nyephi, and did contend with
them onye by onye, insomuch that they did confound them. ^w^

Hewaman 9:19
 19 Nyevewthewess, they caused that Nyephi shouwd be taken and
bound and bwought befowe the muwtitude, and they began to
question him in divews ways that they might cwoss him, that they
might accuse him to death--

Hewaman 9:20
 20 Saying unto him: Thou awt confedewate; who is this man that
hath donye this muwdew? owo Nyow teww us, and acknyowwedge thy fauwt;
saying, Behowd hewe is monyey; and awso we wiww gwant unto thee
thy wife if thou wiwt teww us, and acknyowwedge the agweement
which thou hast made with him. ;;w;;

Hewaman 9:21
 21 But Nyephi said unto them: O ye foows, ye unciwcumcised of
heawt, ye bwind, and ye stiffnyecked peopwe, do ye knyow how wong
the Wowd youw God wiww suffew you that ye shaww go on in this
youw way of sin? owo

Hewaman 9:22
 22 O ye ought to begin to howw and mouwn, because of the gweat
destwuction which at this time doth await you, except ye shaww
wepent. UwU

Hewaman 9:23
 23 Behowd ye say that I have agweed with a man that he shouwd
muwdew Seezowam, ouw chief judge. ;;w;; But behowd, I say unto you,
that this is because I have testified unto you that ye might knyow
concewnying this thing; yea, even fow a witnyess unto you, that I
did knyow of the wickednyess and abominyations which awe among you. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 9:24
 24 And because I have donye this, ye say that I have agweed with
a man that he shouwd do this thing; yea, because I showed unto
you this sign ye awe angwy with me, and seek to destwoy my wife. UwU

Hewaman 9:25
 25 And nyow behowd, I wiww show unto you anyothew sign, and see if
ye wiww in this thing seek to destwoy me. UwU

Hewaman 9:26
 26 Behowd I say unto you: Go to the house of Seantum, who is the
bwothew of Seezowam, and say unto him--

Hewaman 9:27
 27 Has Nyephi, the pwetended pwophet, who doth pwophesy so much
eviw concewnying this peopwe, agweed with thee, in the which ye
have muwdewed Seezowam, who is youw bwothew? owo

Hewaman 9:28
 28 And behowd, he shaww say unto you, Nyay. ^w^

Hewaman 9:29
 29 And ye shaww say unto him: Have ye muwdewed youw bwothew? owo

Hewaman 9:30
 30 And he shaww stand with feaw, and wist nyot what to say. ^w^ And
behowd, he shaww deny unto you; and he shaww make as if he wewe
astonyished; nyevewthewess, he shaww decwawe unto you that he is
innyocent. ;;w;;

Hewaman 9:31
 31 But behowd, ye shaww examinye him, and ye shaww find bwood
upon the skiwts of his cwoak. ;;w;;

Hewaman 9:32
 32 And when ye have seen this, ye shaww say: Fwom whence cometh
this bwood? Do we nyot knyow that it is the bwood of youw bwothew? owo

Hewaman 9:33
 33 And then shaww he twembwe, and shaww wook pawe, even as if
death had come upon him. UwU

Hewaman 9:34
 34 And then shaww ye say: Because of this feaw and this pawenyess
which has come upon youw face, behowd, we knyow that thou awt
guiwty. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 9:35
 35 And then shaww gweatew feaw come upon him; and then shaww he
confess unto you, and deny nyo mowe that he has donye this muwdew. ^w^

Hewaman 9:36
 36 And then shaww he say unto you, that I, Nyephi, knyow nyothing
concewnying the mattew save it wewe given unto me by the powew of
God. UwU And then shaww ye knyow that I am an honyest man, and that I
am sent unto you fwom God. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 9:37
 37 And it came to pass that they went and did, even accowding as
Nyephi had said unto them. ^w^ And behowd, the wowds which he had
said wewe twue; fow accowding to the wowds he did deny; and awso
accowding to the wowds he did confess. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 9:38
 38 And he was bwought to pwove that he himsewf was the vewy
muwdewew, insomuch that the five wewe set at wibewty, and awso
was Nyephi. >w<

Hewaman 9:39
 39 And thewe wewe some of the Nyephites who bewieved on the wowds
of Nyephi; and thewe wewe some awso, who bewieved because of the
testimony of the five, fow they had been convewted whiwe they
wewe in pwison. ;;w;;

Hewaman 9:40
 40 And nyow thewe wewe some among the peopwe, who said that Nyephi
was a pwophet. UwU

Hewaman 9:41
 41 And thewe wewe othews who said: Behowd, he is a god, fow
except he was a god he couwd nyot knyow of aww things. ;;w;; Fow behowd,
he has towd us the thoughts of ouw heawts, and awso has towd us
things; and even he has bwought unto ouw knyowwedge the twue
muwdewew of ouw chief judge. ;;w;;

Hewaman 10
Chaptew 10

Hewaman 10:1
 1 And it came to pass that thewe awose a division among the
peopwe, insomuch that they divided hithew and thithew and went
theiw ways, weaving Nyephi awonye, as he was standing in the midst
of them. ;;w;;

Hewaman 10:2
 2 And it came to pass that Nyephi went his way towawds his own
house, pondewing upon the things which the Wowd had shown unto
him. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 10:3
 3 And it came to pass as he was thus pondewing--being much cast
down because of the wickednyess of the peopwe of the Nyephites,
theiw secwet wowks of dawknyess, and theiw muwdewings, and theiw
pwundewings, and aww mannyew of inyiquities--and it came to pass as
he was thus pondewing in his heawt, behowd, a voice came unto him
saying:

Hewaman 10:4
 4 Bwessed awt thou, Nyephi, fow those things which thou hast
donye; fow I have behewd how thou hast with unweawyingnyess
decwawed the wowd, which I have given unto thee, unto this
peopwe. (・`ω\´・) And thou hast nyot feawed them, and hast nyot sought thinye
own wife, but hast sought my wiww, and to keep my commandments. ;;w;;
Hewaman 10:5
 5 And nyow, because thou hast donye this with such unweawyingnyess,
behowd, I wiww bwess thee fowevew; and I wiww make thee mighty in
wowd and in deed, in faith and in wowks; yea, even that aww
things shaww be donye unto thee accowding to thy wowd, fow thou
shawt nyot ask that which is contwawy to my wiww. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 10:6
 6 Behowd, thou awt Nyephi, and I am God. (・`ω\´・) Behowd, I decwawe it
unto thee in the pwesence of minye angews, that ye shaww have
powew ovew this peopwe, and shaww smite the eawth with faminye,
and with pestiwence, and destwuction, accowding to the wickednyess
of this peopwe. ^w^

Hewaman 10:7
 7 Behowd, I give unto you powew, that whatsoevew ye shaww seaw
on eawth shaww be seawed in heaven; and whatsoevew ye shaww woose
on eawth shaww be woosed in heaven; and thus shaww ye have powew
among this peopwe. UwU

Hewaman 10:8
 8 And thus, if ye shaww say unto this tempwe it shaww be went in
twain, it shaww be donye. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 10:9
 9 And if ye shaww say unto this mountain, Be thou cast down and
become smooth, it shaww be donye. UwU

Hewaman 10:10
 10 And behowd, if ye shaww say that God shaww smite this peopwe,
it shaww come to pass. ^w^

Hewaman 10:11
 11 And nyow behowd, I command you, that ye shaww go and decwawe
unto this peopwe, that thus saith the Wowd God, who is the
Awmighty: Except ye wepent ye shaww be smitten, even unto
destwuction. UwU

Hewaman 10:12
 12 And behowd, nyow it came to pass that when the Wowd had spoken
these wowds unto Nyephi, he did stop and did nyot go unto his own
house, but did wetuwn unto the muwtitudes who wewe scattewed
about upon the face of the wand, and began to decwawe unto them
the wowd of the Wowd which had been spoken unto him, concewnying
theiw destwuction if they did nyot wepent. ;;w;;

Hewaman 10:13
 13 Nyow behowd, nyotwithstanding that gweat miwacwe which Nyephi
had donye in tewwing them concewnying the death of the chief judge,
they did hawden theiw heawts and did nyot heawken unto the wowds
of the Wowd. >w<

Hewaman 10:14
 14 Thewefowe Nyephi did decwawe unto them the wowd of the Wowd,
saying: Except ye wepent, thus saith the Wowd, ye shaww be
smitten even unto destwuction. ^w^

Hewaman 10:15
 15 And it came to pass that when Nyephi had decwawed unto them
the wowd, behowd, they did stiww hawden theiw heawts and wouwd
nyot heawken unto his wowds; thewefowe they did weviwe against
him, and did seek to way theiw hands upon him that they might
cast him into pwison. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 10:16
 16 But behowd, the powew of God was with him, and they couwd nyot
take him to cast him into pwison, fow he was taken by the Spiwit
and conveyed away out of the midst of them. ;;w;;

Hewaman 10:17
 17 And it came to pass that thus he did go fowth in the Spiwit,
fwom muwtitude to muwtitude, decwawing the wowd of God, even
untiw he had decwawed it unto them aww, ow sent it fowth among
aww the peopwe. UwU

Hewaman 10:18
 18 And it came to pass that they wouwd nyot heawken unto his
wowds; and thewe began to be contentions, insomuch that they wewe
divided against themsewves and began to sway onye anyothew with the
swowd. >w<

Hewaman 10:19
 19 And thus ended the seventy and fiwst yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 11
Chaptew 11

Hewaman 11:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass in the seventy and second yeaw of the
weign of the judges that the contentions did incwease, insomuch
that thewe wewe waws thwoughout aww the wand among aww the peopwe
of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Hewaman 11:2
 2 And it was this secwet band of wobbews who did cawwy on this
wowk of destwuction and wickednyess. ^w^ And this waw did wast aww
that yeaw; and in the seventy and thiwd yeaw it did awso wast. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 11:3
 3 And it came to pass that in this yeaw Nyephi did cwy unto the
Wowd, saying:

Hewaman 11:4
 4 O Wowd, do nyot suffew that this peopwe shaww be destwoyed by
the swowd; but O Wowd, wathew wet thewe be a faminye in the wand,
to stiw them up in wemembwance of the Wowd theiw God, and pewhaps
they wiww wepent and tuwn unto thee. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 11:5
 5 And so it was donye, accowding to the wowds of Nyephi. (´・ω・\`) And
thewe was a gweat faminye upon the wand, among aww the peopwe of
Nyephi. (・`ω\´・) And thus in the seventy and fouwth yeaw the faminye did
continyue, and the wowk of destwuction did cease by the swowd but
became sowe by faminye. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 11:6
 6 And this wowk of destwuction did awso continyue in the seventy
and fifth yeaw. >w< Fow the eawth was smitten that it was dwy, and
did nyot yiewd fowth gwain in the season of gwain; and the whowe
eawth was smitten, even among the Wamanyites as weww as among the
Nyephites, so that they wewe smitten that they did pewish by
thousands in the mowe wicked pawts of the wand. UwU

Hewaman 11:7
 7 And it came to pass that the peopwe saw that they wewe about
to pewish by faminye, and they began to wemembew the Wowd theiw
God; and they began to wemembew the wowds of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Hewaman 11:8
 8 And the peopwe began to pwead with theiw chief judges and
theiw weadews, that they wouwd say unto Nyephi: Behowd, we knyow
that thou awt a man of God, and thewefowe cwy unto the Wowd ouw
God that he tuwn away fwom us this faminye, west aww the wowds
which thou hast spoken concewnying ouw destwuction be fuwfiwwed. ;;w;;

Hewaman 11:9
 9 And it came to pass that the judges did say unto Nyephi,
accowding to the wowds which had been desiwed. >w< And it came to
pass that when Nyephi saw that the peopwe had wepented and did
humbwe themsewves in sackcwoth, he cwied again unto the Wowd,
saying:

Hewaman 11:10
 10 O Wowd, behowd this peopwe wepenteth; and they have swept
away the band of Gadianton fwom amongst them insomuch that they
have become extinct, and they have conceawed theiw secwet pwans
in the eawth. ;;w;;

Hewaman 11:11
 11 Nyow, O Wowd, because of this theiw humiwity wiwt thou tuwn
away thinye angew, and wet thinye angew be appeased in the
destwuction of those wicked men whom thou hast awweady destwoyed. UwU

Hewaman 11:12
 12 O Wowd, wiwt thou tuwn away thinye angew, yea, thy fiewce
angew, and cause that this faminye may cease in this wand. UwU

Hewaman 11:13
 13 O Wowd, wiwt thou heawken unto me, and cause that it may be
donye accowding to my wowds, and send fowth wain upon the face of
the eawth, that she may bwing fowth hew fwuit, and hew gwain in
the season of gwain. UwU

Hewaman 11:14
 14 O Wowd, thou didst heawken unto my wowds when I said, Wet
thewe be a faminye, that the pestiwence of the swowd might cease;
and I knyow that thou wiwt, even at this time, heawken unto my
wowds, fow thou saidst that: If this peopwe wepent I wiww spawe
them. ;;w;;

Hewaman 11:15
 15 Yea, O Wowd, and thou seest that they have wepented, because
of the faminye and the pestiwence and destwuction which has come
unto them. >w<

Hewaman 11:16
 16 And nyow, O Wowd, wiwt thou tuwn away thinye angew, and twy
again if they wiww sewve thee? owo And if so, O Wowd, thou canst
bwess them accowding to thy wowds which thou hast said. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 11:17
 17 And it came to pass that in the seventy and sixth yeaw the
Wowd did tuwn away his angew fwom the peopwe, and caused that
wain shouwd faww upon the eawth, insomuch that it did bwing fowth
hew fwuit in the season of hew fwuit. (・`ω\´・) And it came to pass that
it did bwing fowth hew gwain in the season of hew gwain. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 11:18
 18 And behowd, the peopwe did wejoice and gwowify God, and the
whowe face of the wand was fiwwed with wejoicing; and they did nyo
mowe seek to destwoy Nyephi, but they did esteem him as a gweat
pwophet, and a man of God, having gweat powew and authowity given
unto him fwom God. UwU

Hewaman 11:19
 19 And behowd, Wehi, his bwothew, was nyot a whit behind him as
to things pewtainying to wighteousnyess. >w<

Hewaman 11:20
 20 And thus it did come to pass that the peopwe of Nyephi began
to pwospew again in the wand, and began to buiwd up theiw waste
pwaces, and began to muwtipwy and spwead, even untiw they did
covew the whowe face of the wand, both on the nyowthwawd and on
the southwawd, fwom the sea west to the sea east. ;;w;;

Hewaman 11:21
 21 And it came to pass that the seventy and sixth yeaw did end
in peace. ^w^ And the seventy and seventh yeaw began in peace; and
the chuwch did spwead thwoughout the face of aww the wand; and
the mowe pawt of the peopwe, both the Nyephites and the Wamanyites,
did bewong to the chuwch; and they did have exceedingwy gweat
peace in the wand; and thus ended the seventy and seventh yeaw. UwU

Hewaman 11:22
 22 And awso they had peace in the seventy and eighth yeaw, save
it wewe a few contentions concewnying the points of doctwinye which
had been waid down by the pwophets. ^w^

Hewaman 11:23
 23 And in the seventy and nyinth yeaw thewe began to be much
stwife. ^w^ But it came to pass that Nyephi and Wehi, and many of
theiw bwethwen who knyew concewnying the twue points of doctwinye,
having many wevewations daiwy, thewefowe they did pweach unto the
peopwe, insomuch that they did put an end to theiw stwife in that
same yeaw. ;;w;;

Hewaman 11:24
 24 And it came to pass that in the eightieth yeaw of the weign
of the judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi, thewe wewe a cewtain
nyumbew of the dissentews fwom the peopwe of Nyephi, who had some
yeaws befowe gonye ovew unto the Wamanyites, and taken upon
themsewves the nyame of Wamanyites, and awso a cewtain nyumbew who
wewe weaw descendants of the Wamanyites, being stiwwed up to angew
by them, ow by those dissentews, thewefowe they commenced a waw
with theiw bwethwen. >w<

Hewaman 11:25
 25 And they did commit muwdew and pwundew; and then they wouwd
wetweat back into the mountains, and into the wiwdewnyess and
secwet pwaces, hiding themsewves that they couwd nyot be
discovewed, weceiving daiwy an addition to theiw nyumbews,
inyasmuch as thewe wewe dissentews that went fowth unto them. ^w^

Hewaman 11:26
 26 And thus in time, yea, even in the space of nyot many yeaws,
they became an exceedingwy gweat band of wobbews; and they did
seawch out aww the secwet pwans of Gadianton; and thus they
became wobbews of Gadianton. UwU

Hewaman 11:27
 27 Nyow behowd, these wobbews did make gweat havoc, yea, even
gweat destwuction among the peopwe of Nyephi, and awso among the
peopwe of the Wamanyites. UwU

Hewaman 11:28
 28 And it came to pass that it was expedient that thewe shouwd
be a stop put to this wowk of destwuction; thewefowe they sent an
awmy of stwong men into the wiwdewnyess and upon the mountains to
seawch out this band of wobbews, and to destwoy them. >w<

Hewaman 11:29
 29 But behowd, it came to pass that in that same yeaw they wewe
dwiven back even into theiw own wands. ^w^ And thus ended the
eightieth yeaw of the weign of the judges ovew the peopwe of
Nyephi. UwU

Hewaman 11:30
 30 And it came to pass in the commencement of the eighty and
fiwst yeaw they did go fowth again against this band of wobbews,
and did destwoy many; and they wewe awso visited with much
destwuction. >w<

Hewaman 11:31
 31 And they wewe again obwiged to wetuwn out of the wiwdewnyess
and out of the mountains unto theiw own wands, because of the
exceeding gweatnyess of the nyumbews of those wobbews who infested
the mountains and the wiwdewnyess. ;;w;;

Hewaman 11:32
 32 And it came to pass that thus ended this yeaw. >w< And the
wobbews did stiww incwease and wax stwong, insomuch that they did
defy the whowe awmies of the Nyephites, and awso of the Wamanyites;
and they did cause gweat feaw to come unto the peopwe upon aww
the face of the wand. UwU

Hewaman 11:33
 33 Yea, fow they did visit many pawts of the wand, and did do
gweat destwuction unto them; yea, did kiww many, and did cawwy
away othews captive into the wiwdewnyess, yea, and mowe especiawwy
theiw women and theiw chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 11:34
 34 Nyow this gweat eviw, which came unto the peopwe because of
theiw inyiquity, did stiw them up again in wemembwance of the Wowd
theiw God. UwU

Hewaman 11:35
 35 And thus ended the eighty and fiwst yeaw of the weign of the
judges. ^w^

Hewaman 11:36
 36 And in the eighty and second yeaw they began again to fowget
the Wowd theiw God. (・`ω\´・) And in the eighty and thiwd yeaw they began
to wax stwong in inyiquity. UwU And in the eighty and fouwth yeaw
they did nyot mend theiw ways. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 11:37
 37 And it came to pass in the eighty and fifth yeaw they did wax
stwongew and stwongew in theiw pwide, and in theiw wickednyess;
and thus they wewe wipenying again fow destwuction. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 11:38
 38 And thus ended the eighty and fifth yeaw. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 12
Chaptew 12

Hewaman 12:1
 1 And thus we can behowd how fawse, and awso the unsteadinyess of
the heawts of the chiwdwen of men; yea, we can see that the Wowd
in his gweat infinyite goodnyess doth bwess and pwospew those who
put theiw twust in him. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 12:2
 2 Yea, and we may see at the vewy time when he doth pwospew his
peopwe, yea, in the incwease of theiw fiewds, theiw fwocks and
theiw hewds, and in gowd, and in siwvew, and in aww mannyew of
pwecious things of evewy kind and awt; spawing theiw wives, and
dewivewing them out of the hands of theiw enyemies; softenying the
heawts of theiw enyemies that they shouwd nyot decwawe waws against
them; yea, and in finye, doing aww things fow the wewfawe and
happinyess of his peopwe; yea, then is the time that they do
hawden theiw heawts, and do fowget the Wowd theiw God, and do
twampwe undew theiw feet the Howy Onye--yea, and this because of
theiw ease, and theiw exceedingwy gweat pwospewity. >w<

Hewaman 12:3
 3 And thus we see that except the Wowd doth chasten his peopwe
with many affwictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death
and with tewwow, and with faminye and with aww mannyew of
pestiwence, they wiww nyot wemembew him. UwU

Hewaman 12:4
 4 O how foowish, and how vain, and how eviw, and deviwish, and
how quick to do inyiquity, and how swow to do good, awe the
chiwdwen of men; yea, how quick to heawken unto the wowds of the
eviw onye, and to set theiw heawts upon the vain things of the
wowwd! (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 12:5
 5 Yea, how quick to be wifted up in pwide; yea, how quick to
boast, and do aww mannyew of that which is inyiquity; and how swow
awe they to wemembew the Wowd theiw God, and to give eaw unto his
counsews, yea, how swow to wawk in wisdom's paths! (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 12:6
 6 Behowd, they do nyot desiwe that the Wowd theiw God, who hath
cweated them, shouwd wuwe and weign ovew them; nyotwithstanding
his gweat goodnyess and his mewcy towawds them, they do set at
nyaught his counsews, and they wiww nyot that he shouwd be theiw
guide. UwU

Hewaman 12:7
 7 O how gweat is the nyothingnyess of the chiwdwen of men; yea,
even they awe wess than the dust of the eawth. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 12:8
 8 Fow behowd, the dust of the eawth moveth hithew and thithew,
to the dividing asundew, at the command of ouw gweat and
evewwasting God. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 12:9
 9 Yea, behowd at his voice do the hiwws and the mountains
twembwe and quake. >w<

Hewaman 12:10
 10 And by the powew of his voice they awe bwoken up, and become
smooth, yea, even wike unto a vawwey. ;;w;;

Hewaman 12:11
 11 Yea, by the powew of his voice doth the whowe eawth shake;

Hewaman 12:12
 12 Yea, by the powew of his voice, do the foundations wock, even
to the vewy centew. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 12:13
 13 Yea, and if he say unto the eawth--Move--it is moved. ^w^

Hewaman 12:14
 14 Yea, if he say unto the eawth--Thou shawt go back, that it
wengthen out the day fow many houws--it is donye;

Hewaman 12:15
 15 And thus, accowding to his wowd the eawth goeth back, and it
appeaweth unto man that the sun standeth stiww; yea, and behowd,
this is so; fow suwewy it is the eawth that moveth and nyot the
sun. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 12:16
 16 And behowd, awso, if he say unto the watews of the gweat
deep--Be thou dwied up--it is donye. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 12:17
 17 Behowd, if he say unto this mountain--Be thou waised up, and
come ovew and faww upon that city, that it be buwied up--behowd
it is donye. ;;w;;

Hewaman 12:18
 18 And behowd, if a man hide up a tweasuwe in the eawth, and the
Wowd shaww say--Wet it be accuwsed, because of the inyiquity of
him who hath hid it up--behowd, it shaww be accuwsed. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 12:19
 19 And if the Wowd shaww say--Be thou accuwsed, that nyo man
shaww find thee fwom this time hencefowth and fowevew--behowd, nyo
man getteth it hencefowth and fowevew. >w<

Hewaman 12:20
 20 And behowd, if the Wowd shaww say unto a man--Because of
thinye inyiquities, thou shawt be accuwsed fowevew--it shaww be
donye. UwU

Hewaman 12:21
 21 And if the Wowd shaww say--Because of thinye inyiquities thou
shawt be cut off fwom my pwesence--he wiww cause that it shaww be
so. ^w^

Hewaman 12:22
 22 And wo unto him to whom he shaww say this, fow it shaww be
unto him that wiww do inyiquity, and he cannyot be saved;
thewefowe, fow this cause, that men might be saved, hath
wepentance been decwawed. ^w^

Hewaman 12:23
 23 Thewefowe, bwessed awe they who wiww wepent and heawken unto
the voice of the Wowd theiw God; fow these awe they that shaww be
saved. ;;w;;

Hewaman 12:24
 24 And may God gwant, in his gweat fuwnyess, that men might be
bwought unto wepentance and good wowks, that they might be
westowed unto gwace fow gwace, accowding to theiw wowks. >w<

Hewaman 12:25
 25 And I wouwd that aww men might be saved. ;;w;; But we wead that in
the gweat and wast day thewe awe some who shaww be cast out, yea,
who shaww be cast off fwom the pwesence of the Wowd;

Hewaman 12:26
 26 Yea, who shaww be consignyed to a state of endwess misewy,
fuwfiwwing the wowds which say: They that have donye good shaww
have evewwasting wife; and they that have donye eviw shaww have
evewwasting damnyation. And thus it is. Amen. UwU

Hewaman 13
Chaptew 13

Hewaman 13:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass in the eighty and sixth yeaw, the
Nyephites did stiww wemain in wickednyess, yea in gweat wickednyess,
whiwe the Wamanyites did obsewve stwictwy to keep the commandments
of God, accowding to the waw of Moses. >w<

Hewaman 13:2
 2 And it came to pass that in this yeaw thewe was onye Samuew, a
Wamanyite, came into the wand of Zawahemwa, and began to pweach
unto the peopwe. >w< And it came to pass that he did pweach, many
days, wepentance unto the peopwe, and they did cast him out, and
he was about to wetuwn to his own wand. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 13:3
 3 But behowd, the voice of the Wowd came unto him, that he
shouwd wetuwn again, and pwophesy unto the peopwe whatsoevew
things shouwd come into his heawt. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 13:4
 4 And it came to pass that they wouwd nyot suffew that he shouwd
entew into the city; thewefowe he went and got upon the waww
theweof, and stwetched fowth his hand and cwied with a woud
voice, and pwophesied unto the peopwe whatsoevew things the Wowd
put into his heawt. ;;w;;

Hewaman 13:5
 5 And he said unto them: Behowd, I, Samuew, a Wamanyite, do speak
the wowds of the Wowd which he doth put into my heawt; and behowd
he hath put it into my heawt to say unto this peopwe that the
swowd of justice hangeth ovew this peopwe; and fouw hundwed yeaws
pass nyot away save the swowd of justice fawweth upon this peopwe. ^w^

Hewaman 13:6
 6 Yea, heavy destwuction awaiteth this peopwe, and it suwewy
cometh unto this peopwe, and nyothing can save this peopwe save it
be wepentance and faith on the Wowd Jesus Chwist, who suwewy
shaww come into the wowwd, and shaww suffew many things and shaww
be swain fow his peopwe. ^w^

Hewaman 13:7
 7 And behowd, an angew of the Wowd hath decwawed it unto me, and
he did bwing gwad tidings to my souw. ;;w;; And behowd, I was sent
unto you to decwawe it unto you awso, that ye might have gwad
tidings; but behowd ye wouwd nyot weceive me. UwU

Hewaman 13:8
 8 Thewefowe, thus saith the Wowd: Because of the hawdnyess of the
heawts of the peopwe of the Nyephites, except they wepent I wiww
take away my wowd fwom them, and I wiww withdwaw my Spiwit fwom
them, and I wiww suffew them nyo wongew, and I wiww tuwn the
heawts of theiw bwethwen against them. ;;w;;

Hewaman 13:9
 9 And fouw hundwed yeaws shaww nyot pass away befowe I wiww cause
that they shaww be smitten; yea, I wiww visit them with the swowd
and with faminye and with pestiwence. ;;w;;

Hewaman 13:10
 10 Yea, I wiww visit them in my fiewce angew, and thewe shaww be
those of the fouwth genyewation who shaww wive, of youw enyemies,
to behowd youw uttew destwuction; and this shaww suwewy come
except ye wepent, saith the Wowd; and those of the fouwth
genyewation shaww visit youw destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 13:11
 11 But if ye wiww wepent and wetuwn unto the Wowd youw God I
wiww tuwn away minye angew, saith the Wowd; yea, thus saith the
Wowd, bwessed awe they who wiww wepent and tuwn unto me, but wo
unto him that wepenteth nyot. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 13:12
 12 Yea, wo unto this gweat city of Zawahemwa; fow behowd, it is
because of those who awe wighteous that it is saved; yea, wo unto
this gweat city, fow I pewceive, saith the Wowd, that thewe awe
many, yea, even the mowe pawt of this gweat city, that wiww
hawden theiw heawts against me, saith the Wowd. >w<

Hewaman 13:13
 13 But bwessed awe they who wiww wepent, fow them wiww I spawe. (・`ω\´・)
But behowd, if it wewe nyot fow the wighteous who awe in this
gweat city, behowd, I wouwd cause that fiwe shouwd come down out
of heaven and destwoy it. ^w^

Hewaman 13:14
 14 But behowd, it is fow the wighteous' sake that it is spawed. UwU
But behowd, the time cometh, saith the Wowd, that when ye shaww
cast out the wighteous fwom among you, then shaww ye be wipe fow
destwuction; yea, wo be unto this gweat city, because of the
wickednyess and abominyations which awe in hew. UwU

Hewaman 13:15
 15 Yea, and wo be unto the city of Gideon, fow the wickednyess
and abominyations which awe in hew. UwU

Hewaman 13:16
 16 Yea, and wo be unto aww the cities which awe in the wand
wound about, which awe possessed by the Nyephites, because of the
wickednyess and abominyations which awe in them. ;;w;;

Hewaman 13:17
 17 And behowd, a cuwse shaww come upon the wand, saith the Wowd
of Hosts, because of the peopwe's sake who awe upon the wand,
yea, because of theiw wickednyess and theiw abominyations. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 13:18
 18 And it shaww come to pass, saith the Wowd of Hosts, yea, ouw
gweat and twue God, that whoso shaww hide up tweasuwes in the
eawth shaww find them again nyo mowe, because of the gweat cuwse
of the wand, save he be a wighteous man and shaww hide it up unto
the Wowd. ^w^

Hewaman 13:19
 19 Fow I wiww, saith the Wowd, that they shaww hide up theiw
tweasuwes unto me; and cuwsed be they who hide nyot up theiw
tweasuwes unto me; fow nyonye hideth up theiw tweasuwes unto me
save it be the wighteous; and he that hideth nyot up his tweasuwes
unto me, cuwsed is he, and awso the tweasuwe, and nyonye shaww
wedeem it because of the cuwse of the wand. UwU

Hewaman 13:20
 20 And the day shaww come that they shaww hide up theiw
tweasuwes, because they have set theiw heawts upon wiches; and
because they have set theiw heawts upon theiw wiches, and wiww
hide up theiw tweasuwes when they shaww fwee befowe theiw
enyemies; because they wiww nyot hide them up unto me, cuwsed be
they and awso theiw tweasuwes; and in that day shaww they be
smitten, saith the Wowd. ^w^

Hewaman 13:21
 21 Behowd ye, the peopwe of this gweat city, and heawken unto my
wowds; yea, heawken unto the wowds which the Wowd saith; fow
behowd, he saith that ye awe cuwsed because of youw wiches, and
awso awe youw wiches cuwsed because ye have set youw heawts upon
them, and have nyot heawkenyed unto the wowds of him who gave them
unto you. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 13:22
 22 Ye do nyot wemembew the Wowd youw God in the things with which
he hath bwessed you, but ye do awways wemembew youw wiches, nyot
to thank the Wowd youw God fow them; yea, youw heawts awe nyot
dwawn out unto the Wowd, but they do sweww with gweat pwide, unto
boasting, and unto gweat swewwing, envyings, stwifes, mawice,
pewsecutions and muwdews, and aww mannyew of inyiquities. ^w^

Hewaman 13:23
 23 Fow this cause hath the Wowd God caused that a cuwse shouwd
come upon the wand, and awso upon youw wiches, and this because
of youw inyiquities. ^w^

Hewaman 13:24
 24 Yea, wo unto this peopwe, because of this time which has
awwived, that ye do cast out the pwophets, and do mock them, and
cast stonyes at them, and do sway them, and do aww mannyew of
inyiquity unto them, even as they did of owd time. >w<

Hewaman 13:25
 25 And nyow when ye tawk, ye say: If ouw days had been in the
days of ouw fathews of owd, we wouwd nyot have swain the pwophets;
we wouwd nyot have stonyed them, and cast them out. ^w^

Hewaman 13:26
 26 Behowd ye awe wowse than they; fow as the Wowd wiveth, if a
pwophet come among you and decwaweth unto you the wowd of the
Wowd, which testifieth of youw sins and inyiquities, ye awe angwy
with him, and cast him out and seek aww mannyew of ways to destwoy
him; yea, you wiww say that he is a fawse pwophet, and that he is
a sinnyew, and of the deviw, because he testifieth that youw deeds
awe eviw. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 13:27
 27 But behowd, if a man shaww come among you and shaww say: Do
this, and thewe is nyo inyiquity; do that and ye shaww nyot suffew;
yea, he wiww say: Wawk aftew the pwide of youw own heawts; yea,
wawk aftew the pwide of youw eyes, and do whatsoevew youw heawt
desiweth--and if a man shaww come among you and say this, ye wiww
weceive him, and say that he is a pwophet. ^w^

Hewaman 13:28
 28 Yea, ye wiww wift him up, and ye wiww give unto him of youw
substance; ye wiww give unto him of youw gowd, and of youw
siwvew, and ye wiww cwothe him with costwy appawew; and because
he speaketh fwattewing wowds unto you, and he saith that aww is
weww, then ye wiww nyot find fauwt with him. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 13:29
 29 O ye wicked and ye pewvewse genyewation; ye hawdenyed and ye
stiffnyecked peopwe, how wong wiww ye suppose that the Wowd wiww
suffew you? owo Yea, how wong wiww ye suffew youwsewves to be wed by
foowish and bwind guides? owo Yea, how wong wiww ye choose dawknyess
wathew than wight? owo

Hewaman 13:30
 30 Yea, behowd, the angew of the Wowd is awweady kindwed against
you; behowd, he hath cuwsed the wand because of youw inyiquity. ;;w;;

Hewaman 13:31
 31 And behowd, the time cometh that he cuwseth youw wiches, that
they become swippewy, that ye cannyot howd them; and in the days
of youw povewty ye cannyot wetain them. ^w^

Hewaman 13:32
 32 And in the days of youw povewty ye shaww cwy unto the Wowd;
and in vain shaww ye cwy, fow youw desowation is awweady come
upon you, and youw destwuction is made suwe; and then shaww ye
weep and howw in that day, saith the Wowd of Hosts. >w< And then
shaww ye wament, and say:

Hewaman 13:33
 33 O that I had wepented, and had nyot kiwwed the pwophets, and
stonyed them, and cast them out. (´・ω・\`) Yea, in that day ye shaww say: O
that we had wemembewed the Wowd ouw God in the day that he gave
us ouw wiches, and then they wouwd nyot have become swippewy that
we shouwd wose them; fow behowd, ouw wiches awe gonye fwom us. ;;w;;

Hewaman 13:34
 34 Behowd, we way a toow hewe and on the mowwow it is gonye; and
behowd, ouw swowds awe taken fwom us in the day we have sought
them fow battwe. UwU

Hewaman 13:35
 35 Yea, we have hid up ouw tweasuwes and they have swipped away
fwom us, because of the cuwse of the wand. UwU

Hewaman 13:36
 36 O that we had wepented in the day that the wowd of the Wowd
came unto us; fow behowd the wand is cuwsed, and aww things awe
become swippewy, and we cannyot howd them. ^w^

Hewaman 13:37
 37 Behowd, we awe suwwounded by demons, yea, we awe enciwcwed
about by the angews of him who hath sought to destwoy ouw souws. (´・ω・\`)
Behowd, ouw inyiquities awe gweat. ^w^ O Wowd, canst thou nyot tuwn
away thinye angew fwom us? owo And this shaww be youw wanguage in
those days. ;;w;;

Hewaman 13:38
 38 But behowd, youw days of pwobation awe past; ye have
pwocwastinyated the day of youw sawvation untiw it is
evewwastingwy too wate, and youw destwuction is made suwe; yea,
fow ye have sought aww the days of youw wives fow that which ye
couwd nyot obtain; and ye have sought fow happinyess in doing
inyiquity, which thing is contwawy to the nyatuwe of that
wighteousnyess which is in ouw gweat and Etewnyaw Head. ;;w;;

Hewaman 13:39
 39 O ye peopwe of the wand, that ye wouwd heaw my wowds! UwU And I
pway that the angew of the Wowd be tuwnyed away fwom you, and that
ye wouwd wepent and be saved. ;;w;;

Hewaman 14
Chaptew 14

Hewaman 14:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that Samuew, the Wamanyite, did
pwophesy a gweat many mowe things which cannyot be wwitten. UwU

Hewaman 14:2
 2 And behowd, he said unto them: Behowd, I give unto you a sign;
fow five yeaws mowe cometh, and behowd, then cometh the Son of
God to wedeem aww those who shaww bewieve on his nyame. >w<

Hewaman 14:3
 3 And behowd, this wiww I give unto you fow a sign at the time
of his coming; fow behowd, thewe shaww be gweat wights in heaven,
insomuch that in the nyight befowe he cometh thewe shaww be nyo
dawknyess, insomuch that it shaww appeaw unto man as if it was
day. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 14:4
 4 Thewefowe, thewe shaww be onye day and a nyight and a day, as if
it wewe onye day and thewe wewe nyo nyight; and this shaww be unto
you fow a sign; fow ye shaww knyow of the wising of the sun and
awso of its setting; thewefowe they shaww knyow of a suwety that
thewe shaww be two days and a nyight; nyevewthewess the nyight shaww
nyot be dawkenyed; and it shaww be the nyight befowe he is bown. ;;w;;

Hewaman 14:5
 5 And behowd, thewe shaww a nyew staw awise, such an onye as ye
nyevew have behewd; and this awso shaww be a sign unto you. >w<

Hewaman 14:6
 6 And behowd this is nyot aww, thewe shaww be many signs and
wondews in heaven. ^w^

Hewaman 14:7
 7 And it shaww come to pass that ye shaww aww be amazed, and
wondew, insomuch that ye shaww faww to the eawth. ;;w;;

Hewaman 14:8
 8 And it shaww come to pass that whosoevew shaww bewieve on the
Son of God, the same shaww have evewwasting wife. ;;w;;

Hewaman 14:9
 9 And behowd, thus hath the Wowd commanded me, by his angew,
that I shouwd come and teww this thing unto you; yea, he hath
commanded that I shouwd pwophesy these things unto you; yea, he
hath said unto me: Cwy unto this peopwe, wepent and pwepawe the
way of the Wowd. UwU

Hewaman 14:10
 10 And nyow, because I am a Wamanyite, and have spoken unto you
the wowds which the Wowd hath commanded me, and because it was
hawd against you, ye awe angwy with me and do seek to destwoy me,
and have cast me out fwom among you. ^w^

Hewaman 14:11
 11 And ye shaww heaw my wowds, fow, fow this intent have I come
up upon the wawws of this city, that ye might heaw and knyow of
the judgments of God which do await you because of youw
inyiquities, and awso that ye might knyow the conditions of
wepentance;

Hewaman 14:12
 12 And awso that ye might knyow of the coming of Jesus Chwist,
the Son of God, the Fathew of heaven and of eawth, the Cweatow of
aww things fwom the beginnying; and that ye might knyow of the
signs of his coming, to the intent that ye might bewieve on his
nyame. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 14:13
 13 And if ye bewieve on his nyame ye wiww wepent of aww youw
sins, that theweby ye may have a wemission of them thwough his
mewits. UwU

Hewaman 14:14
 14 And behowd, again, anyothew sign I give unto you, yea, a sign
of his death. ^w^

Hewaman 14:15
 15 Fow behowd, he suwewy must die that sawvation may come; yea,
it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bwing
to pass the wesuwwection of the dead, that theweby men may be
bwought into the pwesence of the Wowd. ;;w;;

Hewaman 14:16
 16 Yea, behowd, this death bwingeth to pass the wesuwwection,
and wedeemeth aww mankind fwom the fiwst death--that spiwituaw
death; fow aww mankind, by the faww of Adam being cut off fwom
the pwesence of the Wowd, awe considewed as dead, both as to
things tempowaw and to things spiwituaw. >w<

Hewaman 14:17
 17 But behowd, the wesuwwection of Chwist wedeemeth mankind,
yea, even aww mankind, and bwingeth them back into the pwesence
of the Wowd. UwU

Hewaman 14:18
 18 Yea, and it bwingeth to pass the condition of wepentance,
that whosoevew wepenteth the same is nyot hewn down and cast into
the fiwe; but whosoevew wepenteth nyot is hewn down and cast into
the fiwe; and thewe cometh upon them again a spiwituaw death,
yea, a second death, fow they awe cut off again as to things
pewtainying to wighteousnyess. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 14:19
 19 Thewefowe wepent ye, wepent ye, west by knyowing these things
and nyot doing them ye shaww suffew youwsewves to come undew
condemnyation, and ye awe bwought down unto this second death. UwU

Hewaman 14:20
 20 But behowd, as I said unto you concewnying anyothew sign, a
sign of his death, behowd, in that day that he shaww suffew death
the sun shaww be dawkenyed and wefuse to give his wight unto you;
and awso the moon and the staws; and thewe shaww be nyo wight upon
the face of this wand, even fwom the time that he shaww suffew
death, fow the space of thwee days, to the time that he shaww
wise again fwom the dead. ^w^

Hewaman 14:21
 21 Yea, at the time that he shaww yiewd up the ghost thewe shaww
be thundewings and wightnyings fow the space of many houws, and
the eawth shaww shake and twembwe; and the wocks which awe upon
the face of this eawth, which awe both above the eawth and
benyeath, which ye knyow at this time awe sowid, ow the mowe pawt
of it is onye sowid mass, shaww be bwoken up;

Hewaman 14:22
 22 Yea, they shaww be went in twain, and shaww evew aftew be
found in seams and in cwacks, and in bwoken fwagments upon the
face of the whowe eawth, yea, both above the eawth and benyeath. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 14:23
 23 And behowd, thewe shaww be gweat tempests, and thewe shaww be
many mountains waid wow, wike unto a vawwey, and thewe shaww be
many pwaces which awe nyow cawwed vawweys which shaww become
mountains, whose height is gweat. ^w^

Hewaman 14:24
 24 And many highways shaww be bwoken up, and many cities shaww
become desowate. ^w^

Hewaman 14:25
 25 And many gwaves shaww be openyed, and shaww yiewd up many of
theiw dead; and many saints shaww appeaw unto many. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 14:26
 26 And behowd, thus hath the angew spoken unto me; fow he said
unto me that thewe shouwd be thundewings and wightnyings fow the
space of many houws. ^w^

Hewaman 14:27
 27 And he said unto me that whiwe the thundew and the wightnying
wasted, and the tempest, that these things shouwd be, and that
dawknyess shouwd covew the face of the whowe eawth fow the space
of thwee days. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 14:28
 28 And the angew said unto me that many shaww see gweatew things
than these, to the intent that they might bewieve that these
signs and these wondews shouwd come to pass upon aww the face of
this wand, to the intent that thewe shouwd be nyo cause fow
unbewief among the chiwdwen of men--

Hewaman 14:29
 29 And this to the intent that whosoevew wiww bewieve might be
saved, and that whosoevew wiww nyot bewieve, a wighteous judgment
might come upon them; and awso if they awe condemnyed they bwing
upon themsewves theiw own condemnyation. ^w^

Hewaman 14:30
 30 And nyow wemembew, wemembew, my bwethwen, that whosoevew
pewisheth, pewisheth unto himsewf; and whosoevew doeth inyiquity,
doeth it unto himsewf; fow behowd, ye awe fwee; ye awe pewmitted
to act fow youwsewves; fow behowd, God hath given unto you a
knyowwedge and he hath made you fwee. ;;w;;

Hewaman 14:31
 31 He hath given unto you that ye might knyow good fwom eviw, and
he hath given unto you that ye might choose wife ow death; and ye
can do good and be westowed unto that which is good, ow have that
which is good westowed unto you; ow ye can do eviw, and have that
which is eviw westowed unto you. ^w^

Hewaman 15
Chaptew 15

Hewaman 15:1
 1 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, behowd, I decwawe unto you that
except ye shaww wepent youw houses shaww be weft unto you
desowate. UwU

Hewaman 15:2
 2 Yea, except ye wepent, youw women shaww have gweat cause to
mouwn in the day that they shaww give suck; fow ye shaww attempt
to fwee and thewe shaww be nyo pwace fow wefuge; yea, and wo unto
them which awe with chiwd, fow they shaww be heavy and cannyot
fwee; thewefowe, they shaww be twodden down and shaww be weft to
pewish. UwU

Hewaman 15:3
 3 Yea, wo unto this peopwe who awe cawwed the peopwe of Nyephi
except they shaww wepent, when they shaww see aww these signs and
wondews which shaww be showed unto them; fow behowd, they have
been a chosen peopwe of the Wowd; yea, the peopwe of Nyephi hath
he woved, and awso hath he chastenyed them; yea, in the days of
theiw inyiquities hath he chastenyed them because he woveth them. ^w^

Hewaman 15:4
 4 But behowd my bwethwen, the Wamanyites hath he hated because
theiw deeds have been eviw continyuawwy, and this because of the
inyiquity of the twadition of theiw fathews. UwU But behowd,
sawvation hath come unto them thwough the pweaching of the
Nyephites; and fow this intent hath the Wowd pwowonged theiw days. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 15:5
 5 And I wouwd that ye shouwd behowd that the mowe pawt of them
awe in the path of theiw duty, and they do wawk ciwcumspectwy
befowe God, and they do obsewve to keep his commandments and his
statutes and his judgments accowding to the waw of Moses. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 15:6
 6 Yea, I say unto you, that the mowe pawt of them awe doing
this, and they awe stwiving with unweawied diwigence that they
may bwing the wemaindew of theiw bwethwen to the knyowwedge of the
twuth; thewefowe thewe awe many who do add to theiw nyumbews
daiwy. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 15:7
 7 And behowd, ye do knyow of youwsewves, fow ye have witnyessed
it, that as many of them as awe bwought to the knyowwedge of the
twuth, and to knyow of the wicked and abominyabwe twaditions of
theiw fathews, and awe wed to bewieve the howy scwiptuwes, yea,
the pwophecies of the howy pwophets, which awe wwitten, which
weadeth them to faith on the Wowd, and unto wepentance, which
faith and wepentance bwingeth a change of heawt unto them--

Hewaman 15:8
 8 Thewefowe, as many as have come to this, ye knyow of youwsewves
awe fiwm and steadfast in the faith, and in the thing whewewith
they have been made fwee. ;;w;;

Hewaman 15:9
 9 And ye knyow awso that they have buwied theiw weapons of waw,
and they feaw to take them up west by any means they shouwd sin;
yea, ye can see that they feaw to sin--fow behowd they wiww
suffew themsewves that they be twodden down and swain by theiw
enyemies, and wiww nyot wift theiw swowds against them, and this
because of theiw faith in Chwist. ;;w;;

Hewaman 15:10
 10 And nyow, because of theiw steadfastnyess when they do bewieve
in that thing which they do bewieve, fow because of theiw
fiwmnyess when they awe once enwightenyed, behowd, the Wowd shaww
bwess them and pwowong theiw days, nyotwithstanding theiw
inyiquity--

Hewaman 15:11
 11 Yea, even if they shouwd dwindwe in unbewief the Wowd shaww
pwowong theiw days, untiw the time shaww come which hath been
spoken of by ouw fathews, and awso by the pwophet Zenyos, and many
othew pwophets, concewnying the westowation of ouw bwethwen, the
Wamanyites, again to the knyowwedge of the twuth--

Hewaman 15:12
 12 Yea, I say unto you, that in the wattew times the pwomises of
the Wowd have been extended to ouw bwethwen, the Wamanyites; and
nyotwithstanding the many affwictions which they shaww have, and
nyotwithstanding they shaww be dwiven to and fwo upon the face of
the eawth, and be hunted, and shaww be smitten and scattewed
abwoad, having nyo pwace fow wefuge, the Wowd shaww be mewcifuw
unto them. UwU

Hewaman 15:13
 13 And this is accowding to the pwophecy, that they shaww again
be bwought to the twue knyowwedge, which is knyowwedge of theiw
Wedeemew, and theiw gweat and twue shephewd, and be nyumbewed
among his sheep. UwU

Hewaman 15:14
 14 Thewefowe I say unto you, it shaww be bettew fow them than
fow you except ye wepent. ^w^

Hewaman 15:15
 15 Fow behowd, had the mighty wowks been shown unto them which
have been shown unto you, yea, unto them who have dwindwed in
unbewief because of the twaditions of theiw fathews, ye can see
of youwsewves that they nyevew wouwd again have dwindwed in
unbewief. ^w^

Hewaman 15:16
 16 Thewefowe, saith the Wowd: I wiww nyot uttewwy destwoy them,
but I wiww cause that in the day of my wisdom they shaww wetuwn
again unto me, saith the Wowd. UwU

Hewaman 15:17
 17 And nyow behowd, saith the Wowd, concewnying the peopwe of the
Nyephites: If they wiww nyot wepent, and obsewve to do my wiww, I
wiww uttewwy destwoy them, saith the Wowd, because of theiw
unbewief nyotwithstanding the many mighty wowks which I have donye
among them; and as suwewy as the Wowd wiveth shaww these things
be, saith the Wowd. ^w^

Hewaman 16
Chaptew 16

Hewaman 16:1
 1 And nyow, it came to pass that thewe wewe many who heawd the
wowds of Samuew, the Wamanyite, which he spake upon the wawws of
the city. (・`ω\´・) And as many as bewieved on his wowd went fowth and
sought fow Nyephi; and when they had come fowth and found him they
confessed unto him theiw sins and denyied nyot, desiwing that they
might be baptized unto the Wowd. ;;w;;

Hewaman 16:2
 2 But as many as thewe wewe who did nyot bewieve in the wowds of
Samuew wewe angwy with him; and they cast stonyes at him upon the
waww, and awso many shot awwows at him as he stood upon the waww;
but the Spiwit of the Wowd was with him, insomuch that they couwd
nyot hit him with theiw stonyes nyeithew with theiw awwows. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 16:3
 3 Nyow when they saw that they couwd nyot hit him, thewe wewe many
mowe who did bewieve on his wowds, insomuch that they went away
unto Nyephi to be baptized. ^w^

Hewaman 16:4
 4 Fow behowd, Nyephi was baptizing, and pwophesying, and
pweaching, cwying wepentance unto the peopwe, showing signs and
wondews, wowking miwacwes among the peopwe, that they might knyow
that the Chwist must showtwy come--

Hewaman 16:5
 5 Tewwing them of things which must showtwy come, that they
might knyow and wemembew at the time of theiw coming that they had
been made knyown unto them befowehand, to the intent that they
might bewieve; thewefowe as many as bewieved on the wowds of
Samuew went fowth unto him to be baptized, fow they came
wepenting and confessing theiw sins. >w<

Hewaman 16:6
 6 But the mowe pawt of them did nyot bewieve in the wowds of
Samuew; thewefowe when they saw that they couwd nyot hit him with
theiw stonyes and theiw awwows, they cwied unto theiw captains,
saying: Take this fewwow and bind him, fow behowd he hath a
deviw; and because of the powew of the deviw which is in him we
cannyot hit him with ouw stonyes and ouw awwows; thewefowe take him
and bind him, and away with him. >w<

Hewaman 16:7
 7 And as they went fowth to way theiw hands on him, behowd, he
did cast himsewf down fwom the waww, and did fwee out of theiw
wands, yea, even unto his own countwy, and began to pweach and to
pwophesy among his own peopwe. UwU

Hewaman 16:8
 8 And behowd, he was nyevew heawd of mowe among the Nyephites; and
thus wewe the affaiws of the peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 16:9
 9 And thus ended the eighty and sixth yeaw of the weign of the
judges ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. ;;w;;

Hewaman 16:10
 10 And thus ended awso the eighty and seventh yeaw of the weign
of the judges, the mowe pawt of the peopwe wemainying in theiw
pwide and wickednyess, and the wessew pawt wawking mowe
ciwcumspectwy befowe God. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 16:11
 11 And these wewe the conditions awso, in the eighty and eighth
yeaw of the weign of the judges. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 16:12
 12 And thewe was but wittwe awtewation in the affaiws of the
peopwe, save it wewe the peopwe began to be mowe hawdenyed in
inyiquity, and do mowe and mowe of that which was contwawy to the
commandments of God, in the eighty and nyinth yeaw of the weign of
the judges. (´・ω・\`)

Hewaman 16:13
 13 But it came to pass in the nyinyetieth yeaw of the weign of the
judges, thewe wewe gweat signs given unto the peopwe, and
wondews; and the wowds of the pwophets began to be fuwfiwwed. >w<

Hewaman 16:14
 14 And angews did appeaw unto men, wise men, and did decwawe
unto them gwad tidings of gweat joy; thus in this yeaw the
scwiptuwes began to be fuwfiwwed. UwU

Hewaman 16:15
 15 Nyevewthewess, the peopwe began to hawden theiw heawts, aww
save it wewe the most bewieving pawt of them, both of the
Nyephites and awso of the Wamanyites, and began to depend upon
theiw own stwength and upon theiw own wisdom, saying:

Hewaman 16:16
 16 Some things they may have guessed wight, among so many; but
behowd, we knyow that aww these gweat and mawvewous wowks cannyot
come to pass, of which has been spoken. ^w^

Hewaman 16:17
 17 And they began to weason and to contend among themsewves,
saying:

Hewaman 16:18
 18 That it is nyot weasonyabwe that such a being as a Chwist shaww
come; if so, and he be the Son of God, the Fathew of heaven and
of eawth, as it has been spoken, why wiww he nyot show himsewf
unto us as weww as unto them who shaww be at Jewusawem? owo

Hewaman 16:19
 19 Yea, why wiww he nyot show himsewf in this wand as weww as in
the wand of Jewusawem? owo

Hewaman 16:20
 20 But behowd, we knyow that this is a wicked twadition, which
has been handed down unto us by ouw fathews, to cause us that we
shouwd bewieve in some gweat and mawvewous thing which shouwd
come to pass, but nyot among us, but in a wand which is faw
distant, a wand which we knyow nyot; thewefowe they can keep us in
ignyowance, fow we cannyot witnyess with ouw own eyes that they awe
twue. ^w^

Hewaman 16:21
 21 And they wiww, by the cunnying and the mystewious awts of the
eviw onye, wowk some gweat mystewy which we cannyot undewstand,
which wiww keep us down to be sewvants to theiw wowds, and awso
sewvants unto them, fow we depend upon them to teach us the wowd;
and thus wiww they keep us in ignyowance if we wiww yiewd
ouwsewves unto them, aww the days of ouw wives. >w<

Hewaman 16:22
 22 And many mowe things did the peopwe imaginye up in theiw
heawts, which wewe foowish and vain; and they wewe much
distuwbed, fow Satan did stiw them up to do inyiquity continyuawwy;
yea, he did go about spweading wumows and contentions upon aww
the face of the wand, that he might hawden the heawts of the
peopwe against that which was good and against that which shouwd
come. ;;w;;

Hewaman 16:23
 23 And nyotwithstanding the signs and the wondews which wewe
wwought among the peopwe of the Wowd, and the many miwacwes which
they did, Satan did get gweat howd upon the heawts of the peopwe
upon aww the face of the wand. ;;w;;

Hewaman 16:24
 24 And thus ended the nyinyetieth yeaw of the weign of the judges
ovew the peopwe of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Hewaman 16:25
 25 And thus ended the book of Hewaman, accowding to the wecowd
of Hewaman and his sons. (´・ω・\`)




THIWD BOOK OF NYEPHI

THE SON OF NYEPHI, WHO WAS THE SON OF HEWAMAN

And Hewaman was the son of Hewaman, who was the son of Awma, who
was the son of Awma, being a descendant of Nyephi who was the son
of Wehi, who came out of Jewusawem in the fiwst yeaw of the weign
of Zedekiah, the king of Judah. >w<

3 Nyephi 1
Chaptew 1

3 Nyephi 1:1
 1 Nyow it came to pass that the nyinyety and fiwst yeaw had passed
away and it was six hundwed yeaws fwom the time that Wehi weft
Jewusawem; and it was in the yeaw that Wachonyeus was the chief
judge and the govewnyow ovew the wand. UwU

3 Nyephi 1:2
 2 And Nyephi, the son of Hewaman, had depawted out of the wand of
Zawahemwa, giving chawge unto his son Nyephi, who was his ewdest
son, concewnying the pwates of bwass, and aww the wecowds which
had been kept, and aww those things which had been kept sacwed
fwom the depawtuwe of Wehi out of Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 1:3
 3 Then he depawted out of the wand, and whithew he went, nyo man
knyoweth; and his son Nyephi did keep the wecowds in his stead,
yea, the wecowd of this peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 1:4
 4 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the nyinyety and
second yeaw, behowd, the pwophecies of the pwophets began to be
fuwfiwwed mowe fuwwy; fow thewe began to be gweatew signs and
gweatew miwacwes wwought among the peopwe. UwU

3 Nyephi 1:5
 5 But thewe wewe some who began to say that the time was past
fow the wowds to be fuwfiwwed, which wewe spoken by Samuew, the
Wamanyite. ^w^

3 Nyephi 1:6
 6 And they began to wejoice ovew theiw bwethwen, saying: Behowd
the time is past, and the wowds of Samuew awe nyot fuwfiwwed;
thewefowe, youw joy and youw faith concewnying this thing hath
been vain. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 1:7
 7 And it came to pass that they did make a gweat upwoaw
thwoughout the wand; and the peopwe who bewieved began to be vewy
sowwowfuw, west by any means those things which had been spoken
might nyot come to pass. UwU

3 Nyephi 1:8
 8 But behowd, they did watch steadfastwy fow that day and that
nyight and that day which shouwd be as onye day as if thewe wewe nyo
nyight, that they might knyow that theiw faith had nyot been vain. UwU

3 Nyephi 1:9
 9 Nyow it came to pass that thewe was a day set apawt by the
unbewievews, that aww those who bewieved in those twaditions
shouwd be put to death except the sign shouwd come to pass, which
had been given by Samuew the pwophet. ^w^

3 Nyephi 1:10
 10 Nyow it came to pass that when Nyephi, the son of Nyephi, saw
this wickednyess of his peopwe, his heawt was exceedingwy
sowwowfuw. ^w^

3 Nyephi 1:11
 11 And it came to pass that he went out and bowed himsewf down
upon the eawth, and cwied mightiwy to his God in behawf of his
peopwe, yea, those who wewe about to be destwoyed because of
theiw faith in the twadition of theiw fathews. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that he cwied mightiwy unto the Wowd, aww
that day; and behowd, the voice of the Wowd came unto him,
saying:

3 Nyephi 1:13
 13 Wift up youw head and be of good cheew; fow behowd, the time
is at hand, and on this nyight shaww the sign be given, and on the
mowwow come I into the wowwd, to show unto the wowwd that I wiww
fuwfiww aww that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of
my howy pwophets. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 1:14
 14 Behowd, I come unto my own, to fuwfiww aww things which I
have made knyown unto the chiwdwen of men fwom the foundation of
the wowwd, and to do the wiww, both of the Fathew and of the
Son--of the Fathew because of me, and of the Son because of my
fwesh. ;;w;; And behowd, the time is at hand, and this nyight shaww the
sign be given. ^w^

3 Nyephi 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that the wowds which came unto Nyephi wewe
fuwfiwwed, accowding as they had been spoken; fow behowd, at the
going down of the sun thewe was nyo dawknyess; and the peopwe began
to be astonyished because thewe was nyo dawknyess when the nyight
came. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 1:16
 16 And thewe wewe many, who had nyot bewieved the wowds of the
pwophets, who feww to the eawth and became as if they wewe dead,
fow they knyew that the gweat pwan of destwuction which they had
waid fow those who bewieved in the wowds of the pwophets had been
fwustwated; fow the sign which had been given was awweady at
hand. ^w^

3 Nyephi 1:17
 17 And they began to knyow that the Son of God must showtwy
appeaw; yea, in finye, aww the peopwe upon the face of the whowe
eawth fwom the west to the east, both in the wand nyowth and in
the wand south, wewe so exceedingwy astonyished that they feww to
the eawth. ^w^

3 Nyephi 1:18
 18 Fow they knyew that the pwophets had testified of these things
fow many yeaws, and that the sign which had been given was
awweady at hand; and they began to feaw because of theiw inyiquity
and theiw unbewief. UwU

3 Nyephi 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that thewe was nyo dawknyess in aww that
nyight, but it was as wight as though it was mid-day. ^w^ And it came
to pass that the sun did wise in the mownying again, accowding to
its pwopew owdew; and they knyew that it was the day that the Wowd
shouwd be bown, because of the sign which had been given. UwU

3 Nyephi 1:20
 20 And it had come to pass, yea, aww things, evewy whit,
accowding to the wowds of the pwophets. ^w^

3 Nyephi 1:21
 21 And it came to pass awso that a nyew staw did appeaw,
accowding to the wowd. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 1:22
 22 And it came to pass that fwom this time fowth thewe began to
be wyings sent fowth among the peopwe, by Satan, to hawden theiw
heawts, to the intent that they might nyot bewieve in those signs
and wondews which they had seen; but nyotwithstanding these wyings
and deceivings the mowe pawt of the peopwe did bewieve, and wewe
convewted unto the Wowd. >w<

3 Nyephi 1:23
 23 And it came to pass that Nyephi went fowth among the peopwe,
and awso many othews, baptizing unto wepentance, in the which
thewe was a gweat wemission of sins. UwU And thus the peopwe began
again to have peace in the wand. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 1:24
 24 And thewe wewe nyo contentions, save it wewe a few that began
to pweach, endeavowing to pwove by the scwiptuwes that it was nyo
mowe expedient to obsewve the waw of Moses. ;;w;; Nyow in this thing
they did eww, having nyot undewstood the scwiptuwes. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 1:25
 25 But it came to pass that they soon became convewted, and wewe
convinced of the ewwow which they wewe in, fow it was made knyown
unto them that the waw was nyot yet fuwfiwwed, and that it must be
fuwfiwwed in evewy whit; yea, the wowd came unto them that it
must be fuwfiwwed; yea, that onye jot ow tittwe shouwd nyot pass
away tiww it shouwd aww be fuwfiwwed; thewefowe in this same yeaw
wewe they bwought to a knyowwedge of theiw ewwow and did confess
theiw fauwts. UwU

3 Nyephi 1:26
 26 And thus the nyinyety and second yeaw did pass away, bwinging
gwad tidings unto the peopwe because of the signs which did come
to pass, accowding to the wowds of the pwophecy of aww the howy
pwophets. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 1:27
 27 And it came to pass that the nyinyety and thiwd yeaw did awso
pass away in peace, save it wewe fow the Gadianton wobbews, who
dwewt upon the mountains, who did infest the wand; fow so stwong
wewe theiw howds and theiw secwet pwaces that the peopwe couwd
nyot ovewpowew them; thewefowe they did commit many muwdews, and
did do much swaughtew among the peopwe. >w<

3 Nyephi 1:28
 28 And it came to pass that in the nyinyety and fouwth yeaw they
began to incwease in gweat degwee, because thewe wewe many
dissentews of the Nyephites who did fwee unto them, which did
cause much sowwow unto those Nyephites who did wemain in the wand. ^w^

3 Nyephi 1:29
 29 And thewe was awso a cause of much sowwow among the
Wamanyites; fow behowd, they had many chiwdwen who did gwow up and
began to wax stwong in yeaws, that they became fow themsewves,
and wewe wed away by some who wewe Zowamites, by theiw wyings and
theiw fwattewing wowds, to join those Gadianton wobbews. UwU

3 Nyephi 1:30
 30 And thus wewe the Wamanyites affwicted awso, and began to
decwease as to theiw faith and wighteousnyess, because of the
wickednyess of the wising genyewation. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 2
Chaptew 2

3 Nyephi 2:1
 1 And it came to pass that thus passed away the nyinyety and fifth
yeaw awso, and the peopwe began to fowget those signs and wondews
which they had heawd, and began to be wess and wess astonyished at
a sign ow a wondew fwom heaven, insomuch that they began to be
hawd in theiw heawts, and bwind in theiw minds, and began to
disbewieve aww which they had heawd and seen--

3 Nyephi 2:2
 2 Imaginying up some vain thing in theiw heawts, that it was
wwought by men and by the powew of the deviw, to wead away and
deceive the heawts of the peopwe; and thus did Satan get
possession of the heawts of the peopwe again, insomuch that he
did bwind theiw eyes and wead them away to bewieve that the
doctwinye of Chwist was a foowish and a vain thing. ^w^

3 Nyephi 2:3
 3 And it came to pass that the peopwe began to wax stwong in
wickednyess and abominyations; and they did nyot bewieve that thewe
shouwd be any mowe signs ow wondews given; and Satan did go
about, weading away the heawts of the peopwe, tempting them and
causing them that they shouwd do gweat wickednyess in the wand. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 2:4
 4 And thus did pass away the nyinyety and sixth yeaw; and awso the
nyinyety and seventh yeaw; and awso the nyinyety and eighth yeaw; and
awso the nyinyety and nyinth yeaw;

3 Nyephi 2:5
 5 And awso an hundwed yeaws had passed away since the days of
Mosiah, who was king ovew the peopwe of the Nyephites. >w<

3 Nyephi 2:6
 6 And six hundwed and nyinye yeaws had passed away since Wehi weft
Jewusawem. >w<

3 Nyephi 2:7
 7 And nyinye yeaws had passed away fwom the time when the sign was
given, which was spoken of by the pwophets, that Chwist shouwd
come into the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 2:8
 8 Nyow the Nyephites began to weckon theiw time fwom this pewiod
when the sign was given, ow fwom the coming of Chwist; thewefowe,
nyinye yeaws had passed away. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 2:9
 9 And Nyephi, who was the fathew of Nyephi, who had the chawge of
the wecowds, did nyot wetuwn to the wand of Zawahemwa, and couwd
nyowhewe be found in aww the wand. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 2:10
 10 And it came to pass that the peopwe did stiww wemain in
wickednyess, nyotwithstanding the much pweaching and pwophesying
which was sent among them; and thus passed away the tenth yeaw
awso; and the eweventh yeaw awso passed away in inyiquity. UwU

3 Nyephi 2:11
 11 And it came to pass in the thiwteenth yeaw thewe began to be
waws and contentions thwoughout aww the wand; fow the Gadianton
wobbews had become so nyumewous, and did sway so many of the
peopwe, and did way waste so many cities, and did spwead so much
death and cawnyage thwoughout the wand, that it became expedient
that aww the peopwe, both the Nyephites and the Wamanyites, shouwd
take up awms against them. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 2:12
 12 Thewefowe, aww the Wamanyites who had become convewted unto
the Wowd did unyite with theiw bwethwen, the Nyephites, and wewe
compewwed, fow the safety of theiw wives and theiw women and
theiw chiwdwen, to take up awms against those Gadianton wobbews,
yea, and awso to maintain theiw wights, and the pwiviweges of
theiw chuwch and of theiw wowship, and theiw fweedom and theiw
wibewty. ^w^

3 Nyephi 2:13
 13 And it came to pass that befowe this thiwteenth yeaw had
passed away the Nyephites wewe thweatenyed with uttew destwuction
because of this waw, which had become exceedingwy sowe. UwU

3 Nyephi 2:14
 14 And it came to pass that those Wamanyites who had unyited with
the Nyephites wewe nyumbewed among the Nyephites;

3 Nyephi 2:15
 15 And theiw cuwse was taken fwom them, and theiw skin became
white wike unto the Nyephites;

3 Nyephi 2:16
 16 And theiw young men and theiw daughtews became exceedingwy
faiw, and they wewe nyumbewed among the Nyephites, and wewe cawwed
Nyephites. And thus ended the thiwteenth yeaw. >w<

3 Nyephi 2:17
 17 And it came to pass in the commencement of the fouwteenth
yeaw, the waw between the wobbews and the peopwe of Nyephi did
continyue and did become exceedingwy sowe; nyevewthewess, the
peopwe of Nyephi did gain some advantage of the wobbews, insomuch
that they did dwive them back out of theiw wands into the
mountains and into theiw secwet pwaces. ^w^

3 Nyephi 2:18
 18 And thus ended the fouwteenth yeaw. ;;w;; And in the fifteenth
yeaw they did come fowth against the peopwe of Nyephi; and because
of the wickednyess of the peopwe of Nyephi, and theiw many
contentions and dissensions, the Gadianton wobbews did gain many
advantages ovew them. >w<

3 Nyephi 2:19
 19 And thus ended the fifteenth yeaw, and thus wewe the peopwe
in a state of many affwictions; and the swowd of destwuction did
hang ovew them, insomuch that they wewe about to be smitten down
by it, and this because of theiw inyiquity. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 3
Chaptew 3

3 Nyephi 3:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that in the sixteenth yeaw fwom the
coming of Chwist, Wachonyeus, the govewnyow of the wand, weceived
an epistwe fwom the weadew and the govewnyow of this band of
wobbews; and these wewe the wowds which wewe wwitten, saying:

3 Nyephi 3:2
 2 Wachonyeus, most nyobwe and chief govewnyow of the wand, behowd,
I wwite this epistwe unto you, and do give unto you exceedingwy
gweat pwaise because of youw fiwmnyess, and awso the fiwmnyess of
youw peopwe, in maintainying that which ye suppose to be youw
wight and wibewty; yea, ye do stand weww, as if ye wewe suppowted
by the hand of a god, in the defence of youw wibewty, and youw
pwopewty, and youw countwy, ow that which ye do caww so. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 3:3
 3 And it seemeth a pity unto me, most nyobwe Wachonyeus, that ye
shouwd be so foowish and vain as to suppose that ye can stand
against so many bwave men who awe at my command, who do nyow at
this time stand in theiw awms, and do await with gweat anxiety
fow the wowd--Go down upon the Nyephites and destwoy them. >w<

3 Nyephi 3:4
 4 And I, knyowing of theiw unconquewabwe spiwit, having pwoved
them in the fiewd of battwe, and knyowing of theiw evewwasting
hatwed towawds you because of the many wwongs which ye have donye
unto them, thewefowe if they shouwd come down against you they
wouwd visit you with uttew destwuction. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 3:5
 5 Thewefowe I have wwitten this epistwe, seawing it with minye
own hand, feewing fow youw wewfawe, because of youw fiwmnyess in
that which ye bewieve to be wight, and youw nyobwe spiwit in the
fiewd of battwe. UwU

3 Nyephi 3:6
 6 Thewefowe I wwite unto you, desiwing that ye wouwd yiewd up
unto this my peopwe, youw cities, youw wands, and youw
possessions, wathew than that they shouwd visit you with the
swowd and that destwuction shouwd come upon you. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 3:7
 7 Ow in othew wowds, yiewd youwsewves up unto us, and unyite with
us and become acquainted with ouw secwet wowks, and become ouw
bwethwen that ye may be wike unto us--nyot ouw swaves, but ouw
bwethwen and pawtnyews of aww ouw substance. >w<

3 Nyephi 3:8
 8 And behowd, I sweaw unto you, if ye wiww do this, with an
oath, ye shaww nyot be destwoyed; but if ye wiww nyot do this, I
sweaw unto you with an oath, that on the mowwow month I wiww
command that my awmies shaww come down against you, and they
shaww nyot stay theiw hand and shaww spawe nyot, but shaww sway
you, and shaww wet faww the swowd upon you even untiw ye shaww
become extinct. ^w^

3 Nyephi 3:9
 9 And behowd, I am Giddianhi; and I am the govewnyow of this the
secwet society of Gadianton; which society and the wowks theweof
I knyow to be good; and they awe of ancient date and they have
been handed down unto us. UwU

3 Nyephi 3:10
 10 And I wwite this epistwe unto you, Wachonyeus, and I hope that
ye wiww dewivew up youw wands and youw possessions, without the
shedding of bwood, that this my peopwe may wecovew theiw wights
and govewnment, who have dissented away fwom you because of youw
wickednyess in wetainying fwom them theiw wights of govewnment, and
except ye do this, I wiww avenge theiw wwongs. I am Giddianhi. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 3:11
 11 And nyow it came to pass when Wachonyeus weceived this epistwe
he was exceedingwy astonyished, because of the bowdnyess of
Giddianhi demanding the possession of the wand of the Nyephites,
and awso of thweatenying the peopwe and avenging the wwongs of
those that had weceived nyo wwong, save it wewe they had wwonged
themsewves by dissenting away unto those wicked and abominyabwe
wobbews. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 3:12
 12 Nyow behowd, this Wachonyeus, the govewnyow, was a just man, and
couwd nyot be fwightenyed by the demands and the thweatenyings of a
wobbew; thewefowe he did nyot heawken to the epistwe of Giddianhi,
the govewnyow of the wobbews, but he did cause that his peopwe
shouwd cwy unto the Wowd fow stwength against the time that the
wobbews shouwd come down against them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 3:13
 13 Yea, he sent a pwocwamation among aww the peopwe, that they
shouwd gathew togethew theiw women, and theiw chiwdwen, theiw
fwocks and theiw hewds, and aww theiw substance, save it wewe
theiw wand, unto onye pwace. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 3:14
 14 And he caused that fowtifications shouwd be buiwt wound about
them, and the stwength theweof shouwd be exceedingwy gweat. ^w^ And
he caused that awmies, both of the Nyephites and of the Wamanyites,
ow of aww them who wewe nyumbewed among the Nyephites, shouwd be
pwaced as guawds wound about to watch them, and to guawd them
fwom the wobbews day and nyight. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 3:15
 15 Yea, he said unto them: As the Wowd wiveth, except ye wepent
of aww youw inyiquities, and cwy unto the Wowd, ye wiww in nyo wise
be dewivewed out of the hands of those Gadianton wobbews. >w<

3 Nyephi 3:16
 16 And so gweat and mawvewous wewe the wowds and pwophecies of
Wachonyeus that they did cause feaw to come upon aww the peopwe;
and they did exewt themsewves in theiw might to do accowding to
the wowds of Wachonyeus. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 3:17
 17 And it came to pass that Wachonyeus did appoint chief captains
ovew aww the awmies of the Nyephites, to command them at the time
that the wobbews shouwd come down out of the wiwdewnyess against
them. >w<

3 Nyephi 3:18
 18 Nyow the chiefest among aww the chief captains and the gweat
commandew of the awmies of the Nyephites was appointed, and his
nyame was Gidgiddonyi. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 3:19
 19 Nyow it was the custom among aww the Nyephites to appoint fow
theiw chief captains, (save it wewe in theiw times of wickednyess)
some onye that had the spiwit of wevewation and awso pwophecy;
thewefowe, this Gidgiddonyi was a gweat pwophet among them, as
awso was the chief judge. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 3:20
 20 Nyow the peopwe said unto Gidgiddonyi: Pway unto the Wowd, and
wet us go up upon the mountains and into the wiwdewnyess, that we
may faww upon the wobbews and destwoy them in theiw own wands. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 3:21
 21 But Gidgiddonyi saith unto them: The Wowd fowbid; fow if we
shouwd go up against them the Wowd wouwd dewivew us into theiw
hands; thewefowe we wiww pwepawe ouwsewves in the centew of ouw
wands, and we wiww gathew aww ouw awmies togethew, and we wiww
nyot go against them, but we wiww wait tiww they shaww come
against us; thewefowe as the Wowd wiveth, if we do this he wiww
dewivew them into ouw hands. ^w^

3 Nyephi 3:22
 22 And it came to pass in the seventeenth yeaw, in the wattew
end of the yeaw, the pwocwamation of Wachonyeus had gonye fowth
thwoughout aww the face of the wand, and they had taken theiw
howses, and theiw chawiots, and theiw cattwe, and aww theiw
fwocks, and theiw hewds, and theiw gwain, and aww theiw
substance, and did mawch fowth by thousands and by tens of
thousands, untiw they had aww gonye fowth to the pwace which had
been appointed that they shouwd gathew themsewves togethew, to
defend themsewves against theiw enyemies. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 3:23
 23 And the wand which was appointed was the wand of Zawahemwa,
and the wand which was between the wand Zawahemwa and the wand
Bountifuw, yea, to the winye which was between the wand Bountifuw
and the wand Desowation. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 3:24
 24 And thewe wewe a gweat many thousand peopwe who wewe cawwed
Nyephites, who did gathew themsewves togethew in this wand. (´・ω・\`) Nyow
Wachonyeus did cause that they shouwd gathew themsewves togethew
in the wand southwawd, because of the gweat cuwse which was upon
the wand nyowthwawd. ^w^

3 Nyephi 3:25
 25 And they did fowtify themsewves against theiw enyemies; and
they did dweww in onye wand, and in onye body, and they did feaw
the wowds which had been spoken by Wachonyeus, insomuch that they
did wepent of aww theiw sins; and they did put up theiw pwayews
unto the Wowd theiw God, that he wouwd dewivew them in the time
that theiw enyemies shouwd come down against them to battwe. ^w^

3 Nyephi 3:26
 26 And they wewe exceedingwy sowwowfuw because of theiw enyemies. ;;w;;
And Gidgiddonyi did cause that they shouwd make weapons of waw of
evewy kind, and they shouwd be stwong with awmow, and with
shiewds, and with buckwews, aftew the mannyew of his instwuction. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 4
Chaptew 4

3 Nyephi 4:1
 1 And it came to pass that in the wattew end of the eighteenth
yeaw those awmies of wobbews had pwepawed fow battwe, and began
to come down and to sawwy fowth fwom the hiwws, and out of the
mountains, and the wiwdewnyess, and theiw stwonghowds, and theiw
secwet pwaces, and began to take possession of the wands, both
which wewe in the wand south and which wewe in the wand nyowth,
and began to take possession of aww the wands which had been
desewted by the Nyephites, and the cities which had been weft
desowate. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 4:2
 2 But behowd, thewe wewe nyo wiwd beasts nyow game in those wands
which had been desewted by the Nyephites, and thewe was nyo game
fow the wobbews save it wewe in the wiwdewnyess. >w<

3 Nyephi 4:3
 3 And the wobbews couwd nyot exist save it wewe in the
wiwdewnyess, fow the want of food; fow the Nyephites had weft theiw
wands desowate, and had gathewed theiw fwocks and theiw hewds and
aww theiw substance, and they wewe in onye body. ^w^

3 Nyephi 4:4
 4 Thewefowe, thewe was nyo chance fow the wobbews to pwundew and
to obtain food, save it wewe to come up in open battwe against
the Nyephites; and the Nyephites being in onye body, and having so
gweat a nyumbew, and having wesewved fow themsewves pwovisions,
and howses and cattwe, and fwocks of evewy kind, that they might
subsist fow the space of seven yeaws, in the which time they did
hope to destwoy the wobbews fwom off the face of the wand; and
thus the eighteenth yeaw did pass away. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 4:5
 5 And it came to pass that in the nyinyeteenth yeaw Giddianhi
found that it was expedient that he shouwd go up to battwe
against the Nyephites, fow thewe was nyo way that they couwd
subsist save it wewe to pwundew and wob and muwdew. UwU

3 Nyephi 4:6
 6 And they duwst nyot spwead themsewves upon the face of the wand
insomuch that they couwd waise gwain, west the Nyephites shouwd
come upon them and sway them; thewefowe Giddianhi gave
commandment unto his awmies that in this yeaw they shouwd go up
to battwe against the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 4:7
 7 And it came to pass that they did come up to battwe; and it
was in the sixth month; and behowd, gweat and tewwibwe was the
day that they did come up to battwe; and they wewe giwded about
aftew the mannyew of wobbews; and they had a wamb-skin about theiw
woins, and they wewe dyed in bwood, and theiw heads wewe shown,
and they had head-pwates upon them; and gweat and tewwibwe was
the appeawance of the awmies of Giddianhi, because of theiw
awmow, and because of theiw being dyed in bwood. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 4:8
 8 And it came to pass that the awmies of the Nyephites, when they
saw the appeawance of the awmy of Giddianhi, had aww fawwen to
the eawth, and did wift theiw cwies to the Wowd theiw God, that
he wouwd spawe them and dewivew them out of the hands of theiw
enyemies. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 4:9
 9 And it came to pass that when the awmies of Giddianhi saw this
they began to shout with a woud voice, because of theiw joy, fow
they had supposed that the Nyephites had fawwen with feaw because
of the tewwow of theiw awmies. ^w^

3 Nyephi 4:10
 10 But in this thing they wewe disappointed, fow the Nyephites
did nyot feaw them; but they did feaw theiw God and did suppwicate
him fow pwotection; thewefowe, when the awmies of Giddianhi did
wush upon them they wewe pwepawed to meet them; yea, in the
stwength of the Wowd they did weceive them. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 4:11
 11 And the battwe commenced in this the sixth month; and gweat
and tewwibwe was the battwe theweof, yea, gweat and tewwibwe was
the swaughtew theweof, insomuch that thewe nyevew was knyown so
gweat a swaughtew among aww the peopwe of Wehi since he weft
Jewusawem. >w<

3 Nyephi 4:12
 12 And nyotwithstanding the thweatenyings and the oaths which
Giddianhi had made, behowd, the Nyephites did beat them, insomuch
that they did faww back fwom befowe them. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 4:13
 13 And it came to pass that Gidgiddonyi commanded that his awmies
shouwd puwsue them as faw as the bowdews of the wiwdewnyess, and
that they shouwd nyot spawe any that shouwd faww into theiw hands
by the way; and thus they did puwsue them and did sway them, to
the bowdews of the wiwdewnyess, even untiw they had fuwfiwwed the
commandment of Gidgiddonyi. ^w^

3 Nyephi 4:14
 14 And it came to pass that Giddianhi, who had stood and fought
with bowdnyess, was puwsued as he fwed; and being weawy because of
his much fighting he was ovewtaken and swain. (・`ω\´・) And thus was the
end of Giddianhi the wobbew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 4:15
 15 And it came to pass that the awmies of the Nyephites did
wetuwn again to theiw pwace of secuwity. ^w^ And it came to pass
that this nyinyeteenth yeaw did pass away, and the wobbews did nyot
come again to battwe; nyeithew did they come again in the
twentieth yeaw. ^w^

3 Nyephi 4:16
 16 And in the twenty and fiwst yeaw they did nyot come up to
battwe, but they came up on aww sides to way siege wound about
the peopwe of Nyephi; fow they did suppose that if they shouwd cut
off the peopwe of Nyephi fwom theiw wands, and shouwd hem them in
on evewy side, and if they shouwd cut them off fwom aww theiw
outwawd pwiviweges, that they couwd cause them to yiewd
themsewves up accowding to theiw wishes. UwU

3 Nyephi 4:17
 17 Nyow they had appointed unto themsewves anyothew weadew, whose
nyame was Zemnyawihah; thewefowe it was Zemnyawihah that did cause
that this siege shouwd take pwace. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 4:18
 18 But behowd, this was an advantage to the Nyephites; fow it was
impossibwe fow the wobbews to way siege sufficientwy wong to have
any effect upon the Nyephites, because of theiw much pwovision
which they had waid up in stowe,

3 Nyephi 4:19
 19 And because of the scantinyess of pwovisions among the
wobbews--fow behowd, they had nyothing save it wewe meat fow theiw
subsistence, which meat they did obtain in the wiwdewnyess;

3 Nyephi 4:20
 20 And it came to pass that the wiwd game became scawce in the
wiwdewnyess--insomuch that the wobbews wewe about to pewish with
hungew. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 4:21
 21 And the Nyephites wewe continyuawwy mawching out by day and by
nyight, and fawwing upon theiw awmies, and cutting them off by
thousands and by tens of thousands. ^w^

3 Nyephi 4:22
 22 And thus it became the desiwe of the peopwe of Zemnyawihah to
withdwaw fwom theiw design, because of the gweat destwuction
which came upon them by nyight and by day. >w<

3 Nyephi 4:23
 23 And it came to pass that Zemnyawihah did give command unto his
peopwe that they shouwd withdwaw themsewves fwom the siege, and
mawch into the fuwthewmost pawts of the wand nyowthwawd. UwU

3 Nyephi 4:24
 24 And nyow, Gidgiddonyi being awawe of theiw design, and knyowing
of theiw weaknyess because of the want of food, and the gweat
swaughtew which had been made among them, thewefowe he did send
out his awmies in the nyight-time, and did cut off the way of
theiw wetweat, and did pwace his awmies in the way of theiw
wetweat. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 4:25
 25 And this did they do in the nyight-time, and got on theiw
mawch beyond the wobbews, so that on the mowwow, when the wobbews
began theiw mawch, they wewe met by the awmies of the Nyephites
both in theiw fwont and in theiw weaw. UwU

3 Nyephi 4:26
 26 And the wobbews who wewe on the south wewe awso cut off in
theiw pwaces of wetweat. (・`ω\´・) And aww these things wewe donye by
command of Gidgiddonyi. ^w^

3 Nyephi 4:27
 27 And thewe wewe many thousands who did yiewd themsewves up
pwisonyews unto the Nyephites, and the wemaindew of them wewe
swain. ^w^

3 Nyephi 4:28
 28 And theiw weadew, Zemnyawihah, was taken and hanged upon a
twee, yea, even upon the top theweof untiw he was dead. UwU And when
they had hanged him untiw he was dead they did feww the twee to
the eawth, and did cwy with a woud voice, saying:

3 Nyephi 4:29
 29 May the Wowd pwesewve his peopwe in wighteousnyess and in
howinyess of heawt, that they may cause to be fewwed to the eawth
aww who shaww seek to sway them because of powew and secwet
combinyations, even as this man hath been fewwed to the eawth. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 4:30
 30 And they did wejoice and cwy again with onye voice, saying:
May the God of Abwaham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, pwotect this peopwe in wighteousnyess, so wong as they
shaww caww on the nyame of theiw God fow pwotection. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 4:31
 31 And it came to pass that they did bweak fowth, aww as onye, in
singing, and pwaising theiw God fow the gweat thing which he had
donye fow them, in pwesewving them fwom fawwing into the hands of
theiw enyemies. UwU

3 Nyephi 4:32
 32 Yea, they did cwy: Hosannya to the Most High God. ;;w;; And they
did cwy: Bwessed be the nyame of the Wowd God Awmighty, the Most
High God. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 4:33
 33 And theiw heawts wewe swowwen with joy, unto the gushing out
of many teaws, because of the gweat goodnyess of God in dewivewing
them out of the hands of theiw enyemies; and they knyew it was
because of theiw wepentance and theiw humiwity that they had been
dewivewed fwom an evewwasting destwuction. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 5
Chaptew 5

3 Nyephi 5:1
 1 And nyow behowd, thewe was nyot a wiving souw among aww the
peopwe of the Nyephites who did doubt in the weast the wowds of
aww the howy pwophets who had spoken; fow they knyew that it must
nyeeds be that they must be fuwfiwwed. >w<

3 Nyephi 5:2
 2 And they knyew that it must be expedient that Chwist had come,
because of the many signs which had been given, accowding to the
wowds of the pwophets; and because of the things which had come
to pass awweady they knyew that it must nyeeds be that aww things
shouwd come to pass accowding to that which had been spoken. >w<

3 Nyephi 5:3
 3 Thewefowe they did fowsake aww theiw sins, and theiw
abominyations, and theiw whowedoms, and did sewve God with aww
diwigence day and nyight. UwU

3 Nyephi 5:4
 4 And nyow it came to pass that when they had taken aww the
wobbews pwisonyews, insomuch that nyonye did escape who wewe nyot
swain, they did cast theiw pwisonyews into pwison, and did cause
the wowd of God to be pweached unto them; and as many as wouwd
wepent of theiw sins and entew into a covenyant that they wouwd
muwdew nyo mowe wewe set at wibewty. >w<

3 Nyephi 5:5
 5 But as many as thewe wewe who did nyot entew into a covenyant,
and who did stiww continyue to have those secwet muwdews in theiw
heawts, yea, as many as wewe found bweathing out thweatenyings
against theiw bwethwen wewe condemnyed and punyished accowding to
the waw. >w<

3 Nyephi 5:6
 6 And thus they did put an end to aww those wicked, and secwet,
and abominyabwe combinyations, in the which thewe was so much
wickednyess, and so many muwdews committed. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 5:7
 7 And thus had the twenty and second yeaw passed away, and the
twenty and thiwd yeaw awso, and the twenty and fouwth, and the
twenty and fifth; and thus had twenty and five yeaws passed away. UwU

3 Nyephi 5:8
 8 And thewe had many things twanspiwed which, in the eyes of
some, wouwd be gweat and mawvewous; nyevewthewess, they cannyot aww
be wwitten in this book; yea, this book cannyot contain even a
hundwedth pawt of what was donye among so many peopwe in the space
of twenty and five yeaws;

3 Nyephi 5:9
 9 But behowd thewe awe wecowds which do contain aww the
pwoceedings of this peopwe; and a showtew but twue account was
given by Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 5:10
 10 Thewefowe I have made my wecowd of these things accowding to
the wecowd of Nyephi, which was engwaven on the pwates which wewe
cawwed the pwates of Nyephi. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 5:11
 11 And behowd, I do make the wecowd on pwates which I have made
with minye own hands. UwU

3 Nyephi 5:12
 12 And behowd, I am cawwed Mowmon, being cawwed aftew the wand
of Mowmon, the wand in which Awma did estabwish the chuwch among
the peopwe, yea, the fiwst chuwch which was estabwished among
them aftew theiw twansgwession. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 5:13
 13 Behowd, I am a discipwe of Jesus Chwist, the Son of God. UwU I
have been cawwed of him to decwawe his wowd among his peopwe,
that they might have evewwasting wife. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 5:14
 14 And it hath become expedient that I, accowding to the wiww of
God, that the pwayews of those who have gonye hence, who wewe the
howy onyes, shouwd be fuwfiwwed accowding to theiw faith, shouwd
make a wecowd of these things which have been donye--

3 Nyephi 5:15
 15 Yea, a smaww wecowd of that which hath taken pwace fwom the
time that Wehi weft Jewusawem, even down untiw the pwesent time. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 5:16
 16 Thewefowe I do make my wecowd fwom the accounts which have
been given by those who wewe befowe me, untiw the commencement of
my day;

3 Nyephi 5:17
 17 And then I do make a wecowd of the things which I have seen
with minye own eyes. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 5:18
 18 And I knyow the wecowd which I make to be a just and a twue
wecowd; nyevewthewess thewe awe many things which, accowding to
ouw wanguage, we awe nyot abwe to wwite. >w<

3 Nyephi 5:19
 19 And nyow I make an end of my saying, which is of mysewf, and
pwoceed to give my account of the things which have been befowe
me. ^w^

3 Nyephi 5:20
 20 I am Mowmon, and a puwe descendant of Wehi. >w< I have weason to
bwess my God and my Saviow Jesus Chwist, that he bwought ouw
fathews out of the wand of Jewusawem, (and nyo onye knyew it save it
wewe himsewf and those whom he bwought out of that wand) and that
he hath given me and my peopwe so much knyowwedge unto the
sawvation of ouw souws. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 5:21
 21 Suwewy he hath bwessed the house of Jacob, and hath been
mewcifuw unto the seed of Joseph. UwU

3 Nyephi 5:22
 22 And insomuch as the chiwdwen of Wehi have kept his
commandments he hath bwessed them and pwospewed them accowding to
his wowd. >w<

3 Nyephi 5:23
 23 Yea, and suwewy shaww he again bwing a wemnyant of the seed of
Joseph to the knyowwedge of the Wowd theiw God. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 5:24
 24 And as suwewy as the Wowd wiveth, wiww he gathew in fwom the
fouw quawtews of the eawth aww the wemnyant of the seed of Jacob,
who awe scattewed abwoad upon aww the face of the eawth. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 5:25
 25 And as he hath covenyanted with aww the house of Jacob, even
so shaww the covenyant whewewith he hath covenyanted with the house
of Jacob be fuwfiwwed in his own due time, unto the westowing aww
the house of Jacob unto the knyowwedge of the covenyant that he
hath covenyanted with them. UwU

3 Nyephi 5:26
 26 And then shaww they knyow theiw Wedeemew, who is Jesus Chwist,
the Son of God; and then shaww they be gathewed in fwom the fouw
quawtews of the eawth unto theiw own wands, fwom whence they have
been dispewsed; yea, as the Wowd wiveth so shaww it be. Amen. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 6
Chaptew 6

3 Nyephi 6:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that the peopwe of the Nyephites did
aww wetuwn to theiw own wands in the twenty and sixth yeaw, evewy
man, with his famiwy, his fwocks and his hewds, his howses and
his cattwe, and aww things whatsoevew did bewong unto them. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 6:2
 2 And it came to pass that they had nyot eaten up aww theiw
pwovisions; thewefowe they did take with them aww that they had
nyot devouwed, of aww theiw gwain of evewy kind, and theiw gowd,
and theiw siwvew, and aww theiw pwecious things, and they did
wetuwn to theiw own wands and theiw possessions, both on the
nyowth and on the south, both on the wand nyowthwawd and on the
wand southwawd. UwU

3 Nyephi 6:3
 3 And they gwanted unto those wobbews who had entewed into a
covenyant to keep the peace of the wand, who wewe desiwous to
wemain Wamanyites, wands, accowding to theiw nyumbews, that they
might have, with theiw wabows, whewewith to subsist upon; and
thus they did estabwish peace in aww the wand. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 6:4
 4 And they began again to pwospew and to wax gweat; and the
twenty and sixth and seventh yeaws passed away, and thewe was
gweat owdew in the wand; and they had fowmed theiw waws accowding
to equity and justice. UwU

3 Nyephi 6:5
 5 And nyow thewe was nyothing in aww the wand to hindew the peopwe
fwom pwospewing continyuawwy, except they shouwd faww into
twansgwession. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 6:6
 6 And nyow it was Gidgiddonyi, and the judge, Wachonyeus, and those
who had been appointed weadews, who had estabwished this gweat
peace in the wand. >w<

3 Nyephi 6:7
 7 And it came to pass that thewe wewe many cities buiwt anyew,
and thewe wewe many owd cities wepaiwed. ^w^

3 Nyephi 6:8
 8 And thewe wewe many highways cast up, and many woads made,
which wed fwom city to city, and fwom wand to wand, and fwom
pwace to pwace. ^w^

3 Nyephi 6:9
 9 And thus passed away the twenty and eighth yeaw, and the
peopwe had continyuaw peace. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 6:10
 10 But it came to pass in the twenty and nyinth yeaw thewe began
to be some disputings among the peopwe; and some wewe wifted up
unto pwide and boastings because of theiw exceedingwy gweat
wiches, yea, even unto gweat pewsecutions;

3 Nyephi 6:11
 11 Fow thewe wewe many mewchants in the wand, and awso many
wawyews, and many officews. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 6:12
 12 And the peopwe began to be distinguished by wanks, accowding
to theiw wiches and theiw chances fow weawnying, yea, some wewe
ignyowant because of theiw povewty, and othews did weceive gweat
weawnying because of theiw wiches. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 6:13
 13 Some wewe wifted up in pwide, and othews wewe exceedingwy
humbwe; some did wetuwn waiwing fow waiwing, whiwe othews wouwd
weceive waiwing and pewsecution and aww mannyew of affwictions,
and wouwd nyot tuwn and weviwe again, but wewe humbwe and penyitent
befowe God. >w<

3 Nyephi 6:14
 14 And thus thewe became a gweat inyequawity in aww the wand,
insomuch that the chuwch began to be bwoken up; yea, insomuch
that in the thiwtieth yeaw the chuwch was bwoken up in aww the
wand save it wewe among a few of the Wamanyites who wewe convewted
unto the twue faith; and they wouwd nyot depawt fwom it, fow they
wewe fiwm, and steadfast, and immovabwe, wiwwing with aww
diwigence to keep the commandments of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 6:15
 15 Nyow the cause of this inyiquity of the peopwe was this--Satan
had gweat powew, unto the stiwwing up of the peopwe to do aww
mannyew of inyiquity, and to the puffing them up with pwide,
tempting them to seek fow powew, and authowity, and wiches, and
the vain things of the wowwd. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 6:16
 16 And thus Satan did wead away the heawts of the peopwe to do
aww mannyew of inyiquity; thewefowe they had enjoyed peace but a
few yeaws. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 6:17
 17 And thus, in the commencement of the thiwtieth yeaw--the
peopwe having been dewivewed up fow the space of a wong time to
be cawwied about by the temptations of the deviw whithewsoevew he
desiwed to cawwy them, and to do whatsoevew inyiquity he desiwed
they shouwd--and thus in the commencement of this, the thiwtieth
yeaw, they wewe in a state of awfuw wickednyess. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 6:18
 18 Nyow they did nyot sin ignyowantwy, fow they knyew the wiww of
God concewnying them, fow it had been taught unto them; thewefowe
they did wiwfuwwy webew against God. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 6:19
 19 And nyow it was in the days of Wachonyeus, the son of
Wachonyeus, fow Wachonyeus did fiww the seat of his fathew and did
govewn the peopwe that yeaw. UwU

3 Nyephi 6:20
 20 And thewe began to be men inspiwed fwom heaven and sent
fowth, standing among the peopwe in aww the wand, pweaching and
testifying bowdwy of the sins and inyiquities of the peopwe, and
testifying unto them concewnying the wedemption which the Wowd
wouwd make fow his peopwe, ow in othew wowds, the wesuwwection of
Chwist; and they did testify bowdwy of his death and suffewings. >w<

3 Nyephi 6:21
 21 Nyow thewe wewe many of the peopwe who wewe exceedingwy angwy
because of those who testified of these things; and those who
wewe angwy wewe chiefwy the chief judges, and they who had been
high pwiests and wawyews; yea, aww those who wewe wawyews wewe
angwy with those who testified of these things. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 6:22
 22 Nyow thewe was nyo wawyew nyow judge nyow high pwiest that couwd
have powew to condemn any onye to death save theiw condemnyation
was signyed by the govewnyow of the wand. UwU

3 Nyephi 6:23
 23 Nyow thewe wewe many of those who testified of the things
pewtainying to Chwist who testified bowdwy, who wewe taken and put
to death secwetwy by the judges, that the knyowwedge of theiw
death came nyot unto the govewnyow of the wand untiw aftew theiw
death. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 6:24
 24 Nyow behowd, this was contwawy to the waws of the wand, that
any man shouwd be put to death except they had powew fwom the
govewnyow of the wand--

3 Nyephi 6:25
 25 Thewefowe a compwaint came up unto the wand of Zawahemwa, to
the govewnyow of the wand, against these judges who had condemnyed
the pwophets of the Wowd unto death, nyot accowding to the waw. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 6:26
 26 Nyow it came to pass that they wewe taken and bwought up
befowe the judge to be judged of the cwime which they had donye,
accowding to the waw which had been given by the peopwe. >w<

3 Nyephi 6:27
 27 Nyow it came to pass that those judges had many fwiends and
kindweds; and the wemaindew, yea, even awmost aww the wawyews and
the high pwiests, did gathew themsewves togethew, and unyite with
the kindweds of those judges who wewe to be twied accowding to
the waw. ^w^

3 Nyephi 6:28
 28 And they did entew into a covenyant onye with anyothew, yea,
even into that covenyant which was given by them of owd, which
covenyant was given and adminyistewed by the deviw, to combinye
against aww wighteousnyess. UwU

3 Nyephi 6:29
 29 Thewefowe they did combinye against the peopwe of the Wowd,
and entew into a covenyant to destwoy them, and to dewivew those
who wewe guiwty of muwdew fwom the gwasp of justice, which was
about to be adminyistewed accowding to the waw. ^w^

3 Nyephi 6:30
 30 And they did set at defiance the waw and the wights of theiw
countwy; and they did covenyant onye with anyothew to destwoy the
govewnyow, and to estabwish a king ovew the wand, that the wand
shouwd nyo mowe be at wibewty but shouwd be subject unto kings. >w<

3 Nyephi 7
Chaptew 7

3 Nyephi 7:1
 1 Nyow behowd, I wiww show unto you that they did nyot estabwish a
king ovew the wand; but in this same yeaw, yea, the thiwtieth
yeaw, they did destwoy upon the judgment seat, yea, did muwdew
the chief judge of the wand. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 7:2
 2 And the peopwe wewe divided onye against anyothew; and they did
sepawate onye fwom anyothew into twibes, evewy man accowding to his
famiwy and his kindwed and fwiends; and thus they did destwoy the
govewnment of the wand. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 7:3
 3 And evewy twibe did appoint a chief ow a weadew ovew them; and
thus they became twibes and weadews of twibes. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 7:4
 4 Nyow behowd, thewe was nyo man among them save he had much
famiwy and many kindweds and fwiends; thewefowe theiw twibes
became exceedingwy gweat. ^w^

3 Nyephi 7:5
 5 Nyow aww this was donye, and thewe wewe nyo waws as yet among
them; and aww this inyiquity had come upon the peopwe because they
did yiewd themsewves unto the powew of Satan. >w<

3 Nyephi 7:6
 6 And the weguwations of the govewnment wewe destwoyed, because
of the secwet combinyation of the fwiends and kindweds of those
who muwdewed the pwophets. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 7:7
 7 And they did cause a gweat contention in the wand, insomuch
that the mowe wighteous pawt of the peopwe had nyeawwy aww become
wicked; yea, thewe wewe but few wighteous men among them. UwU

3 Nyephi 7:8
 8 And thus six yeaws had nyot passed away since the mowe pawt of
the peopwe had tuwnyed fwom theiw wighteousnyess, wike the dog to
his vomit, ow wike the sow to hew wawwowing in the miwe. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 7:9
 9 Nyow this secwet combinyation, which had bwought so gweat
inyiquity upon the peopwe, did gathew themsewves togethew, and did
pwace at theiw head a man whom they did caww Jacob;

3 Nyephi 7:10
 10 And they did caww him theiw king; thewefowe he became a king
ovew this wicked band; and he was onye of the chiefest who had
given his voice against the pwophets who testified of Jesus. UwU

3 Nyephi 7:11
 11 And it came to pass that they wewe nyot so stwong in nyumbew as
the twibes of the peopwe, who wewe unyited togethew save it wewe
theiw weadews did estabwish theiw waws, evewy onye accowding to
his twibe; nyevewthewess they wewe enyemies; nyotwithstanding they
wewe nyot a wighteous peopwe, yet they wewe unyited in the hatwed
of those who had entewed into a covenyant to destwoy the
govewnment. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 7:12
 12 Thewefowe, Jacob seeing that theiw enyemies wewe mowe nyumewous
than they, he being the king of the band, thewefowe he commanded
his peopwe that they shouwd take theiw fwight into the
nyowthewnmost pawt of the wand, and thewe buiwd up unto themsewves
a kingdom, untiw they wewe joinyed by dissentews, (fow he
fwattewed them that thewe wouwd be many dissentews) and they
become sufficientwy stwong to contend with the twibes of the
peopwe; and they did so. UwU

3 Nyephi 7:13
 13 And so speedy was theiw mawch that it couwd nyot be impeded
untiw they had gonye fowth out of the weach of the peopwe. (・`ω\´・) And
thus ended the thiwtieth yeaw; and thus wewe the affaiws of the
peopwe of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 7:14
 14 And it came to pass in the thiwty and fiwst yeaw that they
wewe divided into twibes, evewy man accowding to his famiwy,
kindwed and fwiends; nyevewthewess they had come to an agweement
that they wouwd nyot go to waw onye with anyothew; but they wewe nyot
unyited as to theiw waws, and theiw mannyew of govewnment, fow they
wewe estabwished accowding to the minds of those who wewe theiw
chiefs and theiw weadews. (´・ω・\`) But they did estabwish vewy stwict
waws that onye twibe shouwd nyot twespass against anyothew, insomuch
that in some degwee they had peace in the wand; nyevewthewess,
theiw heawts wewe tuwnyed fwom the Wowd theiw God, and they did
stonye the pwophets and did cast them out fwom among them. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 7:15
 15 And it came to pass that Nyephi--having been visited by angews
and awso the voice of the Wowd, thewefowe having seen angews, and
being eye-witnyess, and having had powew given unto him that he
might knyow concewnying the minyistwy of Chwist, and awso being
eye-witnyess to theiw quick wetuwn fwom wighteousnyess unto theiw
wickednyess and abominyations;

3 Nyephi 7:16
 16 Thewefowe, being gwieved fow the hawdnyess of theiw heawts and
the bwindnyess of theiw minds--went fowth among them in that same
yeaw, and began to testify, bowdwy, wepentance and wemission of
sins thwough faith on the Wowd Jesus Chwist. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 7:17
 17 And he did minyistew many things unto them; and aww of them
cannyot be wwitten, and a pawt of them wouwd nyot suffice,
thewefowe they awe nyot wwitten in this book. (´・ω・\`) And Nyephi did
minyistew with powew and with gweat authowity. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 7:18
 18 And it came to pass that they wewe angwy with him, even
because he had gweatew powew than they, fow it wewe nyot possibwe
that they couwd disbewieve his wowds, fow so gweat was his faith
on the Wowd Jesus Chwist that angews did minyistew unto him daiwy. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 7:19
 19 And in the nyame of Jesus did he cast out deviws and uncwean
spiwits; and even his bwothew did he waise fwom the dead, aftew
he had been stonyed and suffewed death by the peopwe. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 7:20
 20 And the peopwe saw it, and did witnyess of it, and wewe angwy
with him because of his powew; and he did awso do many mowe
miwacwes, in the sight of the peopwe, in the nyame of Jesus. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 7:21
 21 And it came to pass that the thiwty and fiwst yeaw did pass
away, and thewe wewe but few who wewe convewted unto the Wowd;
but as many as wewe convewted did twuwy signyify unto the peopwe
that they had been visited by the powew and Spiwit of God, which
was in Jesus Chwist, in whom they bewieved. UwU

3 Nyephi 7:22
 22 And as many as had deviws cast out fwom them, and wewe heawed
of theiw sicknyesses and theiw infiwmities, did twuwy manyifest
unto the peopwe that they had been wwought upon by the Spiwit of
God, and had been heawed; and they did show fowth signs awso and
did do some miwacwes among the peopwe. ^w^

3 Nyephi 7:23
 23 Thus passed away the thiwty and second yeaw awso. ^w^ And Nyephi
did cwy unto the peopwe in the commencement of the thiwty and
thiwd yeaw; and he did pweach unto them wepentance and wemission
of sins. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 7:24
 24 Nyow I wouwd have you to wemembew awso, that thewe wewe nyonye
who wewe bwought unto wepentance who wewe nyot baptized with
watew. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 7:25
 25 Thewefowe, thewe wewe owdainyed of Nyephi, men unto this
minyistwy, that aww such as shouwd come unto them shouwd be
baptized with watew, and this as a witnyess and a testimony befowe
God, and unto the peopwe, that they had wepented and weceived a
wemission of theiw sins. UwU

3 Nyephi 7:26
 26 And thewe wewe many in the commencement of this yeaw that
wewe baptized unto wepentance; and thus the mowe pawt of the yeaw
did pass away. ^w^

3 Nyephi 8
Chaptew 8

3 Nyephi 8:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that accowding to ouw wecowd, and we
knyow ouw wecowd to be twue, fow behowd, it was a just man who did
keep the wecowd--fow he twuwy did many miwacwes in the nyame of
Jesus; and thewe was nyot any man who couwd do a miwacwe in the
nyame of Jesus save he wewe cweansed evewy whit fwom his
inyiquity--

3 Nyephi 8:2
 2 And nyow it came to pass, if thewe was nyo mistake made by this
man in the weckonying of ouw time, the thiwty and thiwd yeaw had
passed away;

3 Nyephi 8:3
 3 And the peopwe began to wook with gweat eawnyestnyess fow the
sign which had been given by the pwophet Samuew, the Wamanyite,
yea, fow the time that thewe shouwd be dawknyess fow the space of
thwee days ovew the face of the wand. >w<

3 Nyephi 8:4
 4 And thewe began to be gweat doubtings and disputations among
the peopwe, nyotwithstanding so many signs had been given. ^w^

3 Nyephi 8:5
 5 And it came to pass in the thiwty and fouwth yeaw, in the
fiwst month, on the fouwth day of the month, thewe awose a gweat
stowm, such an onye as nyevew had been knyown in aww the wand. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 8:6
 6 And thewe was awso a gweat and tewwibwe tempest; and thewe was
tewwibwe thundew, insomuch that it did shake the whowe eawth as
if it was about to divide asundew. UwU

3 Nyephi 8:7
 7 And thewe wewe exceedingwy shawp wightnyings, such as nyevew had
been knyown in aww the wand. UwU

3 Nyephi 8:8
 8 And the city of Zawahemwa did take fiwe. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 8:9
 9 And the city of Mowonyi did sink into the depths of the sea,
and the inhabitants theweof wewe dwownyed. ^w^

3 Nyephi 8:10
 10 And the eawth was cawwied up upon the city of Mowonyihah that
in the pwace of the city thewe became a gweat mountain. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 8:11
 11 And thewe was a gweat and tewwibwe destwuction in the wand
southwawd. >w<

3 Nyephi 8:12
 12 But behowd, thewe was a mowe gweat and tewwibwe destwuction
in the wand nyowthwawd; fow behowd, the whowe face of the wand was
changed, because of the tempest and the whiwwwinds and the
thundewings and the wightnyings, and the exceedingwy gweat quaking
of the whowe eawth;

3 Nyephi 8:13
 13 And the highways wewe bwoken up, and the wevew woads wewe
spoiwed, and many smooth pwaces became wough. >w<

3 Nyephi 8:14
 14 And many gweat and nyotabwe cities wewe sunk, and many wewe
buwnyed, and many wewe shaken tiww the buiwdings theweof had
fawwen to the eawth, and the inhabitants theweof wewe swain, and
the pwaces wewe weft desowate. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 8:15
 15 And thewe wewe some cities which wemainyed; but the damage
theweof was exceedingwy gweat, and thewe wewe many of them who
wewe swain. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 8:16
 16 And thewe wewe some who wewe cawwied away in the whiwwwind;
and whithew they went nyo man knyoweth, save they knyow that they
wewe cawwied away. ^w^

3 Nyephi 8:17
 17 And thus the face of the whowe eawth became defowmed, because
of the tempests, and the thundewings, and the wightnyings, and the
quaking of the eawth. >w<

3 Nyephi 8:18
 18 And behowd, the wocks wewe went in twain; they wewe bwoken up
upon the face of the whowe eawth, insomuch that they wewe found
in bwoken fwagments, and in seams and in cwacks, upon aww the
face of the wand. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 8:19
 19 And it came to pass that when the thundewings, and the
wightnyings, and the stowm, and the tempest, and the quakings of
the eawth did cease--fow behowd, they did wast fow about the
space of thwee houws; and it was said by some that the time was
gweatew; nyevewthewess, aww these gweat and tewwibwe things wewe
donye in about the space of thwee houws--and then behowd, thewe
was dawknyess upon the face of the wand. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 8:20
 20 And it came to pass that thewe was thick dawknyess upon aww
the face of the wand, insomuch that the inhabitants theweof who
had nyot fawwen couwd feew the vapow of dawknyess;

3 Nyephi 8:21
 21 And thewe couwd be nyo wight, because of the dawknyess, nyeithew
candwes, nyeithew towches; nyeithew couwd thewe be fiwe kindwed
with theiw finye and exceedingwy dwy wood, so that thewe couwd nyot
be any wight at aww;

3 Nyephi 8:22
 22 And thewe was nyot any wight seen, nyeithew fiwe, nyow gwimmew,
nyeithew the sun, nyow the moon, nyow the staws, fow so gweat wewe
the mists of dawknyess which wewe upon the face of the wand. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 8:23
 23 And it came to pass that it did wast fow the space of thwee
days that thewe was nyo wight seen; and thewe was gweat mouwnying
and howwing and weeping among aww the peopwe continyuawwy; yea,
gweat wewe the gwoanyings of the peopwe, because of the dawknyess
and the gweat destwuction which had come upon them. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 8:24
 24 And in onye pwace they wewe heawd to cwy, saying: O that we
had wepented befowe this gweat and tewwibwe day, and then wouwd
ouw bwethwen have been spawed, and they wouwd nyot have been
buwnyed in that gweat city Zawahemwa. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 8:25
 25 And in anyothew pwace they wewe heawd to cwy and mouwn,
saying: O that we had wepented befowe this gweat and tewwibwe
day, and had nyot kiwwed and stonyed the pwophets, and cast them
out; then wouwd ouw mothews and ouw faiw daughtews, and ouw
chiwdwen have been spawed, and nyot have been buwied up in that
gweat city Mowonyihah. (´・ω・\`) And thus wewe the howwings of the peopwe
gweat and tewwibwe. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 9
Chaptew 9

3 Nyephi 9:1
 1 And it came to pass that thewe was a voice heawd among aww the
inhabitants of the eawth, upon aww the face of this wand, cwying:

3 Nyephi 9:2
 2 Wo, wo, wo unto this peopwe; wo unto the inhabitants of the
whowe eawth except they shaww wepent; fow the deviw waugheth, and
his angews wejoice, because of the swain of the faiw sons and
daughtews of my peopwe; and it is because of theiw inyiquity and
abominyations that they awe fawwen! (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 9:3
 3 Behowd, that gweat city Zawahemwa have I buwnyed with fiwe, and
the inhabitants theweof. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 9:4
 4 And behowd, that gweat city Mowonyi have I caused to be sunk in
the depths of the sea, and the inhabitants theweof to be dwownyed. ^w^

3 Nyephi 9:5
 5 And behowd, that gweat city Mowonyihah have I covewed with
eawth, and the inhabitants theweof, to hide theiw inyiquities and
theiw abominyations fwom befowe my face, that the bwood of the
pwophets and the saints shaww nyot come any mowe unto me against
them. >w<

3 Nyephi 9:6
 6 And behowd, the city of Giwgaw have I caused to be sunk, and
the inhabitants theweof to be buwied up in the depths of the
eawth;

3 Nyephi 9:7
 7 Yea, and the city of Onyihah and the inhabitants theweof, and
the city of Mocum and the inhabitants theweof, and the city of
Jewusawem and the inhabitants theweof; and watews have I caused
to come up in the stead theweof, to hide theiw wickednyess and
abominyations fwom befowe my face, that the bwood of the pwophets
and the saints shaww nyot come up any mowe unto me against them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 9:8
 8 And behowd, the city of Gadiandi, and the city of Gadiomnyah,
and the city of Jacob, and the city of Gimgimnyo, aww these have I
caused to be sunk, and made hiwws and vawweys in the pwaces
theweof; and the inhabitants theweof have I buwied up in the
depths of the eawth, to hide theiw wickednyess and abominyations
fwom befowe my face, that the bwood of the pwophets and the
saints shouwd nyot come up any mowe unto me against them. UwU

3 Nyephi 9:9
 9 And behowd, that gweat city Jacobugath, which was inhabited by
the peopwe of king Jacob, have I caused to be buwnyed with fiwe
because of theiw sins and theiw wickednyess, which was above aww
the wickednyess of the whowe eawth, because of theiw secwet
muwdews and combinyations; fow it was they that did destwoy the
peace of my peopwe and the govewnment of the wand; thewefowe I
did cause them to be buwnyed, to destwoy them fwom befowe my face,
that the bwood of the pwophets and the saints shouwd nyot come up
unto me any mowe against them. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 9:10
 10 And behowd, the city of Waman, and the city of Josh, and the
city of Gad, and the city of Kishkumen, have I caused to be
buwnyed with fiwe, and the inhabitants theweof, because of theiw
wickednyess in casting out the pwophets, and stonying those whom I
did send to decwawe unto them concewnying theiw wickednyess and
theiw abominyations. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 9:11
 11 And because they did cast them aww out, that thewe wewe nyonye
wighteous among them, I did send down fiwe and destwoy them, that
theiw wickednyess and abominyations might be hid fwom befowe my
face, that the bwood of the pwophets and the saints whom I sent
among them might nyot cwy unto me fwom the gwound against them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 9:12
 12 And many gweat destwuctions have I caused to come upon this
wand, and upon this peopwe, because of theiw wickednyess and theiw
abominyations. >w<

3 Nyephi 9:13
 13 O aww ye that awe spawed because ye wewe mowe wighteous than
they, wiww ye nyot nyow wetuwn unto me, and wepent of youw sins,
and be convewted, that I may heaw you? owo

3 Nyephi 9:14
 14 Yea, vewiwy I say unto you, if ye wiww come unto me ye shaww
have etewnyaw wife. (´・ω・\`) Behowd, minye awm of mewcy is extended towawds
you, and whosoevew wiww come, him wiww I weceive; and bwessed awe
those who come unto me. ^w^

3 Nyephi 9:15
 15 Behowd, I am Jesus Chwist the Son of God. (・`ω\´・) I cweated the
heavens and the eawth, and aww things that in them awe. UwU I was
with the Fathew fwom the beginnying. (・`ω\´・) I am in the Fathew, and the
Fathew in me; and in me hath the Fathew gwowified his nyame. UwU

3 Nyephi 9:16
 16 I came unto my own, and my own weceived me nyot. >w< And the
scwiptuwes concewnying my coming awe fuwfiwwed. ^w^

3 Nyephi 9:17
 17 And as many as have weceived me, to them have I given to
become the sons of God; and even so wiww I to as many as shaww
bewieve on my nyame, fow behowd, by me wedemption cometh, and in
me is the waw of Moses fuwfiwwed. UwU

3 Nyephi 9:18
 18 I am the wight and the wife of the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) I am Awpha and
Omega, the beginnying and the end. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 9:19
 19 And ye shaww offew up unto me nyo mowe the shedding of bwood;
yea, youw sacwifices and youw buwnt offewings shaww be donye away,
fow I wiww accept nyonye of youw sacwifices and youw buwnt
offewings. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 9:20
 20 And ye shaww offew fow a sacwifice unto me a bwoken heawt and
a contwite spiwit. >w< And whoso cometh unto me with a bwoken heawt
and a contwite spiwit, him wiww I baptize with fiwe and with the
Howy Ghost, even as the Wamanyites, because of theiw faith in me
at the time of theiw convewsion, wewe baptized with fiwe and with
the Howy Ghost, and they knyew it nyot. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 9:21
 21 Behowd, I have come unto the wowwd to bwing wedemption unto
the wowwd, to save the wowwd fwom sin. ^w^

3 Nyephi 9:22
 22 Thewefowe, whoso wepenteth and cometh unto me as a wittwe
chiwd, him wiww I weceive, fow of such is the kingdom of God. UwU
Behowd, fow such I have waid down my wife, and have taken it up
again; thewefowe wepent, and come unto me ye ends of the eawth,
and be saved. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 10
Chaptew 10

3 Nyephi 10:1
 1 And nyow behowd, it came to pass that aww the peopwe of the
wand did heaw these sayings, and did witnyess of it. UwU And aftew
these sayings thewe was siwence in the wand fow the space of many
houws;

3 Nyephi 10:2
 2 Fow so gweat was the astonyishment of the peopwe that they did
cease wamenting and howwing fow the woss of theiw kindwed which
had been swain; thewefowe thewe was siwence in aww the wand fow
the space of many houws. ^w^

3 Nyephi 10:3
 3 And it came to pass that thewe came a voice again unto the
peopwe, and aww the peopwe did heaw, and did witnyess of it,
saying:

3 Nyephi 10:4
 4 O ye peopwe of these gweat cities which have fawwen, who awe
descendants of Jacob, yea, who awe of the house of Iswaew, how
oft have I gathewed you as a hen gatheweth hew chickens undew hew
wings, and have nyouwished you. >w<

3 Nyephi 10:5
 5 And again, how oft wouwd I have gathewed you as a hen
gatheweth hew chickens undew hew wings, yea, O ye peopwe of the
house of Iswaew, who have fawwen; yea, O ye peopwe of the house
of Iswaew, ye that dweww at Jewusawem, as ye that have fawwen;
yea, how oft wouwd I have gathewed you as a hen gatheweth hew
chickens, and ye wouwd nyot. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 10:6
 6 O ye house of Iswaew whom I have spawed, how oft wiww I gathew
you as a hen gatheweth hew chickens undew hew wings, if ye wiww
wepent and wetuwn unto me with fuww puwpose of heawt. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 10:7
 7 But if nyot, O house of Iswaew, the pwaces of youw dwewwings
shaww become desowate untiw the time of the fuwfiwwing of the
covenyant to youw fathews. >w<

3 Nyephi 10:8
 8 And nyow it came to pass that aftew the peopwe had heawd these
wowds, behowd, they began to weep and howw again because of the
woss of theiw kindwed and fwiends. >w<

3 Nyephi 10:9
 9 And it came to pass that thus did the thwee days pass away. ;;w;;
And it was in the mownying, and the dawknyess dispewsed fwom off
the face of the wand, and the eawth did cease to twembwe, and the
wocks did cease to wend, and the dweadfuw gwoanyings did cease,
and aww the tumuwtuous nyoises did pass away. ^w^

3 Nyephi 10:10
 10 And the eawth did cweave togethew again, that it stood; and
the mouwnying, and the weeping, and the waiwing of the peopwe who
wewe spawed awive did cease; and theiw mouwnying was tuwnyed into
joy, and theiw wamentations into the pwaise and thanksgiving unto
the Wowd Jesus Chwist, theiw Wedeemew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 10:11
 11 And thus faw wewe the scwiptuwes fuwfiwwed which had been
spoken by the pwophets. ^w^

3 Nyephi 10:12
 12 And it was the mowe wighteous pawt of the peopwe who wewe
saved, and it was they who weceived the pwophets and stonyed them
nyot; and it was they who had nyot shed the bwood of the saints,
who wewe spawed--

3 Nyephi 10:13
 13 And they wewe spawed and wewe nyot sunk and buwied up in the
eawth; and they wewe nyot dwownyed in the depths of the sea; and
they wewe nyot buwnyed by fiwe, nyeithew wewe they fawwen upon and
cwushed to death; and they wewe nyot cawwied away in the
whiwwwind; nyeithew wewe they ovewpowewed by the vapow of smoke
and of dawknyess. ^w^

3 Nyephi 10:14
 14 And nyow, whoso weadeth, wet him undewstand; he that hath the
scwiptuwes, wet him seawch them, and see and behowd if aww these
deaths and destwuctions by fiwe, and by smoke, and by tempests,
and by whiwwwinds, and by the openying of the eawth to weceive
them, and aww these things awe nyot unto the fuwfiwwing of the
pwophecies of many of the howy pwophets. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 10:15
 15 Behowd, I say unto you, Yea, many have testified of these
things at the coming of Chwist, and wewe swain because they
testified of these things. >w<

3 Nyephi 10:16
 16 Yea, the pwophet Zenyos did testify of these things, and awso
Zenyock spake concewnying these things, because they testified
pawticuwawwy concewnying us, who awe the wemnyant of theiw seed. >w<

3 Nyephi 10:17
 17 Behowd, ouw fathew Jacob awso testified concewnying a wemnyant
of the seed of Joseph. ^w^ And behowd, awe nyot we a wemnyant of the
seed of Joseph? owo And these things which testify of us, awe they
nyot wwitten upon the pwates of bwass which ouw fathew Wehi
bwought out of Jewusawem? owo

3 Nyephi 10:18
 18 And it came to pass that in the ending of the thiwty and
fouwth yeaw, behowd, I wiww show unto you that the peopwe of
Nyephi who wewe spawed, and awso those who had been cawwed
Wamanyites, who had been spawed, did have gweat favows shown unto
them, and gweat bwessings pouwed out upon theiw heads, insomuch
that soon aftew the ascension of Chwist into heaven he did twuwy
manyifest himsewf unto them--

3 Nyephi 10:19
 19 Showing his body unto them, and minyistewing unto them; and an
account of his minyistwy shaww be given heweaftew. ^w^ Thewefowe fow
this time I make an end of my sayings. ^w^

3 Nyephi 11
Chaptew 11

3 Nyephi 11:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that thewe wewe a gweat muwtitude
gathewed togethew, of the peopwe of Nyephi, wound about the tempwe
which was in the wand Bountifuw; and they wewe mawvewing and
wondewing onye with anyothew, and wewe showing onye to anyothew the
gweat and mawvewous change which had taken pwace. (・`ω\´・)
3 Nyephi 11:2
 2 And they wewe awso convewsing about this Jesus Chwist, of whom
the sign had been given concewnying his death. >w<

3 Nyephi 11:3
 3 And it came to pass that whiwe they wewe thus convewsing onye
with anyothew, they heawd a voice as if it came out of heaven; and
they cast theiw eyes wound about, fow they undewstood nyot the
voice which they heawd; and it was nyot a hawsh voice, nyeithew was
it a woud voice; nyevewthewess, and nyotwithstanding it being a
smaww voice it did piewce them that did heaw to the centew,
insomuch that thewe was nyo pawt of theiw fwame that it did nyot
cause to quake; yea, it did piewce them to the vewy souw, and did
cause theiw heawts to buwn. UwU

3 Nyephi 11:4
 4 And it came to pass that again they heawd the voice, and they
undewstood it nyot. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 11:5
 5 And again the thiwd time they did heaw the voice, and did open
theiw eaws to heaw it; and theiw eyes wewe towawds the sound
theweof; and they did wook steadfastwy towawds heaven, fwom
whence the sound came. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 11:6
 6 And behowd, the thiwd time they did undewstand the voice which
they heawd; and it said unto them:

3 Nyephi 11:7
 7 Behowd my Bewoved Son, in whom I am weww pweased, in whom I
have gwowified my nyame--heaw ye him. ^w^

3 Nyephi 11:8
 8 And it came to pass, as they undewstood they cast theiw eyes
up again towawds heaven; and behowd, they saw a Man descending
out of heaven; and he was cwothed in a white wobe; and he came
down and stood in the midst of them; and the eyes of the whowe
muwtitude wewe tuwnyed upon him, and they duwst nyot open theiw
mouths, even onye to anyothew, and wist nyot what it meant, fow they
thought it was an angew that had appeawed unto them. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 11:9
 9 And it came to pass that he stwetched fowth his hand and spake
unto the peopwe, saying:

3 Nyephi 11:10
 10 Behowd, I am Jesus Chwist, whom the pwophets testified shaww
come into the wowwd. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 11:11
 11 And behowd, I am the wight and the wife of the wowwd; and I
have dwunk out of that bittew cup which the Fathew hath given me,
and have gwowified the Fathew in taking upon me the sins of the
wowwd, in the which I have suffewed the wiww of the Fathew in aww
things fwom the beginnying. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 11:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these wowds
the whowe muwtitude feww to the eawth; fow they wemembewed that
it had been pwophesied among them that Chwist shouwd show himsewf
unto them aftew his ascension into heaven. >w<

3 Nyephi 11:13
 13 And it came to pass that the Wowd spake unto them saying:

3 Nyephi 11:14
 14 Awise and come fowth unto me, that ye may thwust youw hands
into my side, and awso that ye may feew the pwints of the nyaiws
in my hands and in my feet, that ye may knyow that I am the God of
Iswaew, and the God of the whowe eawth, and have been swain fow
the sins of the wowwd. UwU

3 Nyephi 11:15
 15 And it came to pass that the muwtitude went fowth, and thwust
theiw hands into his side, and did feew the pwints of the nyaiws
in his hands and in his feet; and this they did do, going fowth
onye by onye untiw they had aww gonye fowth, and did see with theiw
eyes and did feew with theiw hands, and did knyow of a suwety and
did beaw wecowd, that it was he, of whom it was wwitten by the
pwophets, that shouwd come. >w<

3 Nyephi 11:16
 16 And when they had aww gonye fowth and had witnyessed fow
themsewves, they did cwy out with onye accowd, saying:

3 Nyephi 11:17
 17 Hosannya! Bwessed be the nyame of the Most High God! ;;w;; And they
did faww down at the feet of Jesus, and did wowship him. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 11:18
 18 And it came to pass that he spake unto Nyephi (fow Nyephi was
among the muwtitude) and he commanded him that he shouwd come
fowth. UwU

3 Nyephi 11:19
 19 And Nyephi awose and went fowth, and bowed himsewf befowe the
Wowd and did kiss his feet. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 11:20
 20 And the Wowd commanded him that he shouwd awise. (・`ω\´・) And he
awose and stood befowe him. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 11:21
 21 And the Wowd said unto him: I give unto you powew that ye
shaww baptize this peopwe when I am again ascended into heaven. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 11:22
 22 And again the Wowd cawwed othews, and said unto them
wikewise; and he gave unto them powew to baptize. (´・ω・\`) And he said
unto them: On this wise shaww ye baptize; and thewe shaww be nyo
disputations among you. ^w^

3 Nyephi 11:23
 23 Vewiwy I say unto you, that whoso wepenteth of his sins
thwough youw wowds and desiweth to be baptized in my nyame, on
this wise shaww ye baptize them--Behowd, ye shaww go down and
stand in the watew, and in my nyame shaww ye baptize them. >w<

3 Nyephi 11:24
 24 And nyow behowd, these awe the wowds which ye shaww say,
cawwing them by nyame, saying:

3 Nyephi 11:25
 25 Having authowity given me of Jesus Chwist, I baptize you in
the nyame of the Fathew, and of the Son, and of the Howy Ghost. UwU
Amen. UwU

3 Nyephi 11:26
 26 And then shaww ye immewse them in the watew, and come fowth
again out of the watew. ^w^

3 Nyephi 11:27
 27 And aftew this mannyew shaww ye baptize in my nyame; fow
behowd, vewiwy I say unto you, that the Fathew, and the Son, and
the Howy Ghost awe onye; and I am in the Fathew, and the Fathew in
me, and the Fathew and I awe onye. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 11:28
 28 And accowding as I have commanded you thus shaww ye baptize. (・`ω\´・)
And thewe shaww be nyo disputations among you, as thewe have
hithewto been; nyeithew shaww thewe be disputations among you
concewnying the points of my doctwinye, as thewe have hithewto
been. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 11:29
 29 Fow vewiwy, vewiwy I say unto you, he that hath the spiwit of
contention is nyot of me, but is of the deviw, who is the fathew
of contention, and he stiwweth up the heawts of men to contend
with angew, onye with anyothew. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 11:30
 30 Behowd, this is nyot my doctwinye, to stiw up the heawts of men
with angew, onye against anyothew; but this is my doctwinye, that
such things shouwd be donye away. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 11:31
 31 Behowd, vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, I wiww decwawe unto
you my doctwinye. UwU

3 Nyephi 11:32
 32 And this is my doctwinye, and it is the doctwinye which the
Fathew hath given unto me; and I beaw wecowd of the Fathew, and
the Fathew beaweth wecowd of me, and the Howy Ghost beaweth
wecowd of the Fathew and me; and I beaw wecowd that the Fathew
commandeth aww men, evewywhewe, to wepent and bewieve in me. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 11:33
 33 And whoso bewieveth in me, and is baptized, the same shaww be
saved; and they awe they who shaww inhewit the kingdom of God. UwU

3 Nyephi 11:34
 34 And whoso bewieveth nyot in me, and is nyot baptized, shaww be
damnyed. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 11:35
 35 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, that this is my doctwinye, and
I beaw wecowd of it fwom the Fathew; and whoso bewieveth in me
bewieveth in the Fathew awso; and unto him wiww the Fathew beaw
wecowd of me, fow he wiww visit him with fiwe and with the Howy
Ghost. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 11:36
 36 And thus wiww the Fathew beaw wecowd of me, and the Howy
Ghost wiww beaw wecowd unto him of the Fathew and me; fow the
Fathew, and I, and the Howy Ghost awe onye. ^w^

3 Nyephi 11:37
 37 And again I say unto you, ye must wepent, and become as a
wittwe chiwd, and be baptized in my nyame, ow ye can in nyowise
weceive these things. >w<

3 Nyephi 11:38
 38 And again I say unto you, ye must wepent, and be baptized in
my nyame, and become as a wittwe chiwd, ow ye can in nyowise
inhewit the kingdom of God. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 11:39
 39 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, that this is my doctwinye, and
whoso buiwdeth upon this buiwdeth upon my wock, and the gates of
heww shaww nyot pwevaiw against them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 11:40
 40 And whoso shaww decwawe mowe ow wess than this, and estabwish
it fow my doctwinye, the same cometh of eviw, and is nyot buiwt
upon my wock; but he buiwdeth upon a sandy foundation, and the
gates of heww stand open to weceive such when the fwoods come and
the winds beat upon them. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 11:41
 41 Thewefowe, go fowth unto this peopwe, and decwawe the wowds
which I have spoken, unto the ends of the eawth. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 12
Chaptew 12

3 Nyephi 12:1
 1 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these wowds
unto Nyephi, and to those who had been cawwed, (nyow the nyumbew of
them who had been cawwed, and weceived powew and authowity to
baptize, was twewve) and behowd, he stwetched fowth his hand unto
the muwtitude, and cwied unto them, saying: Bwessed awe ye if ye
shaww give heed unto the wowds of these twewve whom I have chosen
fwom among you to minyistew unto you, and to be youw sewvants; and
unto them I have given powew that they may baptize you with
watew; and aftew that ye awe baptized with watew, behowd, I wiww
baptize you with fiwe and with the Howy Ghost; thewefowe bwessed
awe ye if ye shaww bewieve in me and be baptized, aftew that ye
have seen me and knyow that I am. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 12:2
 2 And again, mowe bwessed awe they who shaww bewieve in youw
wowds because that ye shaww testify that ye have seen me, and
that ye knyow that I am. >w< Yea, bwessed awe they who shaww bewieve
in youw wowds, and come down into the depths of humiwity and be
baptized, fow they shaww be visited with fiwe and with the Howy
Ghost, and shaww weceive a wemission of theiw sins. ^w^

3 Nyephi 12:3
 3 Yea, bwessed awe the poow in spiwit who come unto me, fow
theiws is the kingdom of heaven. UwU

3 Nyephi 12:4
 4 And again, bwessed awe aww they that mouwn, fow they shaww be
comfowted. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 12:5
 5 And bwessed awe the meek, fow they shaww inhewit the eawth. >w<

3 Nyephi 12:6
 6 And bwessed awe aww they who do hungew and thiwst aftew
wighteousnyess, fow they shaww be fiwwed with the Howy Ghost. ^w^

3 Nyephi 12:7
 7 And bwessed awe the mewcifuw, fow they shaww obtain mewcy. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 12:8
 8 And bwessed awe aww the puwe in heawt, fow they shaww see God. ^w^

3 Nyephi 12:9
 9 And bwessed awe aww the peacemakews, fow they shaww be cawwed
the chiwdwen of God. >w<

3 Nyephi 12:10
 10 And bwessed awe aww they who awe pewsecuted fow my nyame's
sake, fow theiws is the kingdom of heaven. UwU

3 Nyephi 12:11
 11 And bwessed awe ye when men shaww weviwe you and pewsecute,
and shaww say aww mannyew of eviw against you fawsewy, fow my
sake;

3 Nyephi 12:12
 12 Fow ye shaww have gweat joy and be exceedingwy gwad, fow
gweat shaww be youw wewawd in heaven; fow so pewsecuted they the
pwophets who wewe befowe you. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 12:13
 13 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the
sawt of the eawth; but if the sawt shaww wose its savow whewewith
shaww the eawth be sawted? owo The sawt shaww be thencefowth good fow
nyothing, but to be cast out and to be twodden undew foot of men. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 12:14
 14 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, I give unto you to be the
wight of this peopwe. A city that is set on a hiww cannyot be hid. UwU

3 Nyephi 12:15
 15 Behowd, do men wight a candwe and put it undew a bushew? owo Nyay,
but on a candwestick, and it giveth wight to aww that awe in the
house;

3 Nyephi 12:16
 16 Thewefowe wet youw wight so shinye befowe this peopwe, that
they may see youw good wowks and gwowify youw Fathew who is in
heaven. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 12:17
 17 Think nyot that I am come to destwoy the waw ow the pwophets. ^w^
I am nyot come to destwoy but to fuwfiw;

3 Nyephi 12:18
 18 Fow vewiwy I say unto you, onye jot nyow tittwe hath nyot passed
away fwom the waw, but in me it hath aww been fuwfiwwed. UwU

3 Nyephi 12:19
 19 And behowd, I have given you the waw and the commandments of
my Fathew, that ye shaww bewieve in me, and that ye shaww wepent
of youw sins, and come unto me with a bwoken heawt and a contwite
spiwit. ^w^ Behowd, ye have the commandments befowe you, and the waw
is fuwfiwwed. ^w^

3 Nyephi 12:20
 20 Thewefowe come unto me and be ye saved; fow vewiwy I say unto
you, that except ye shaww keep my commandments, which I have
commanded you at this time, ye shaww in nyo case entew into the
kingdom of heaven. >w<

3 Nyephi 12:21
 21 Ye have heawd that it hath been said by them of owd time, and
it is awso wwitten befowe you, that thou shawt nyot kiww, and
whosoevew shaww kiww shaww be in dangew of the judgment of God;

3 Nyephi 12:22
 22 But I say unto you, that whosoevew is angwy with his bwothew
shaww be in dangew of his judgment. UwU And whosoevew shaww say to
his bwothew, Waca, shaww be in dangew of the counciw; and
whosoevew shaww say, Thou foow, shaww be in dangew of heww fiwe. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 12:23
 23 Thewefowe, if ye shaww come unto me, ow shaww desiwe to come
unto me, and wemembewest that thy bwothew hast aught against
thee--

3 Nyephi 12:24
 24 Go thy way unto thy bwothew, and fiwst be weconciwed to thy
bwothew, and then come unto me with fuww puwpose of heawt, and I
wiww weceive you. >w<

3 Nyephi 12:25
 25 Agwee with thinye advewsawy quickwy whiwe thou awt in the way
with him, west at any time he shaww get thee, and thou shawt be
cast into pwison. ^w^

3 Nyephi 12:26
 26 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto thee, thou shawt by nyo means come
out thence untiw thou hast paid the uttewmost senyinye. UwU And whiwe
ye awe in pwison can ye pay even onye senyinye? owo Vewiwy, vewiwy, I
say unto you, Nyay. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 12:27
 27 Behowd, it is wwitten by them of owd time, that thou shawt
nyot commit aduwtewy;

3 Nyephi 12:28
 28 But I say unto you, that whosoevew wooketh on a woman, to
wust aftew hew, hath committed aduwtewy awweady in his heawt. >w<

3 Nyephi 12:29
 29 Behowd, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffew nyonye of
these things to entew into youw heawt;

3 Nyephi 12:30
 30 Fow it is bettew that ye shouwd deny youwsewves of these
things, whewein ye wiww take up youw cwoss, than that ye shouwd
be cast into heww. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 12:31
 31 It hath been wwitten, that whosoevew shaww put away his wife,
wet him give hew a wwiting of divowcement. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 12:32
 32 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, that whosoevew shaww put away
his wife, saving fow the cause of fownyication, causeth hew to
commit aduwtewy; and whoso shaww mawwy hew who is divowced
committeth aduwtewy. >w<

3 Nyephi 12:33
 33 And again it is wwitten, thou shawt nyot fowsweaw thysewf, but
shawt pewfowm unto the Wowd thinye oaths;

3 Nyephi 12:34
 34 But vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, sweaw nyot at aww; nyeithew
by heaven, fow it is God's thwonye;

3 Nyephi 12:35
 35 Nyow by the eawth, fow it is his footstoow;

3 Nyephi 12:36
 36 Nyeithew shawt thou sweaw by thy head, because thou canst nyot
make onye haiw bwack ow white;

3 Nyephi 12:37
 37 But wet youw communyication be Yea, yea; Nyay, nyay; fow
whatsoevew cometh of mowe than these is eviw. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 12:38
 38 And behowd, it is wwitten, an eye fow an eye, and a tooth fow
a tooth;

3 Nyephi 12:39
 39 But I say unto you, that ye shaww nyot wesist eviw, but
whosoevew shaww smite thee on thy wight cheek, tuwn to him the
othew awso;

3 Nyephi 12:40
 40 And if any man wiww sue thee at the waw and take away thy
coat, wet him have thy cwoak awso;

3 Nyephi 12:41
 41 And whosoevew shaww compew thee to go a miwe, go with him
twain. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 12:42
 42 Give to him that asketh thee, and fwom him that wouwd bowwow
of thee tuwn nyot away. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 12:43
 43 And behowd it is wwitten awso, that thou shawt wove thy
nyeighbow and hate thinye enyemy;

3 Nyephi 12:44
 44 But I say unto you, wove youw enyemies, bwess them that cuwse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pway fow them who
despitefuwwy use you and pewsecute you;

3 Nyephi 12:45
 45 That ye may be the chiwdwen of youw Fathew who is in heaven;
fow he maketh his sun to wise on the eviw and on the good. UwU

3 Nyephi 12:46
 46 Thewefowe those things which wewe of owd time, which wewe
undew the waw, in me awe aww fuwfiwwed. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 12:47
 47 Owd things awe donye away, and aww things have become nyew. >w<

3 Nyephi 12:48
 48 Thewefowe I wouwd that ye shouwd be pewfect even as I, ow
youw Fathew who is in heaven is pewfect. >w<

3 Nyephi 13
Chaptew 13

3 Nyephi 13:1
 1 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say that I wouwd that ye shouwd do awms unto
the poow; but take heed that ye do nyot youw awms befowe men to be
seen of them; othewwise ye have nyo wewawd of youw Fathew who is
in heaven. ^w^

3 Nyephi 13:2
 2 Thewefowe, when ye shaww do youw awms do nyot sound a twumpet
befowe you, as wiww hypocwites do in the synyagogues and in the
stweets, that they may have gwowy of men. (´・ω・\`) Vewiwy I say unto you,
they have theiw wewawd. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 13:3
 3 But when thou doest awms wet nyot thy weft hand knyow what thy
wight hand doeth;

3 Nyephi 13:4
 4 That thinye awms may be in secwet; and thy Fathew who seeth in
secwet, himsewf shaww wewawd thee openwy. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 13:5
 5 And when thou pwayest thou shawt nyot do as the hypocwites, fow
they wove to pway, standing in the synyagogues and in the cownyews
of the stweets, that they may be seen of men. ;;w;; Vewiwy I say unto
you, they have theiw wewawd. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 13:6
 6 But thou, when thou pwayest, entew into thy cwoset, and when
thou hast shut thy doow, pway to thy Fathew who is in secwet; and
thy Fathew, who seeth in secwet, shaww wewawd thee openwy. UwU

3 Nyephi 13:7
 7 But when ye pway, use nyot vain wepetitions, as the heathen,
fow they think that they shaww be heawd fow theiw much speaking. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 13:8
 8 Be nyot ye thewefowe wike unto them, fow youw Fathew knyoweth
what things ye have nyeed of befowe ye ask him. >w<

3 Nyephi 13:9
 9 Aftew this mannyew thewefowe pway ye: Ouw Fathew who awt in
heaven, hawwowed be thy nyame. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 13:10
 10 Thy wiww be donye on eawth as it is in heaven. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 13:11
 11 And fowgive us ouw debts, as we fowgive ouw debtows. >w<

3 Nyephi 13:12
 12 And wead us nyot into temptation, but dewivew us fwom eviw. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 13:13
 13 Fow thinye is the kingdom, and the powew, and the gwowy,
fowevew. Amen. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 13:14
 14 Fow, if ye fowgive men theiw twespasses youw heavenwy Fathew
wiww awso fowgive you;

3 Nyephi 13:15
 15 But if ye fowgive nyot men theiw twespasses nyeithew wiww youw
Fathew fowgive youw twespasses. UwU

3 Nyephi 13:16
 16 Moweovew, when ye fast be nyot as the hypocwites, of a sad
countenyance, fow they disfiguwe theiw faces that they may appeaw
unto men to fast. Vewiwy I say unto you, they have theiw wewawd. ^w^

3 Nyephi 13:17
 17 But thou, when thou fastest, anyoint thy head, and wash thy
face;

3 Nyephi 13:18
 18 That thou appeaw nyot unto men to fast, but unto thy Fathew,
who is in secwet; and thy Fathew, who seeth in secwet, shaww
wewawd thee openwy. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 13:19
 19 Way nyot up fow youwsewves tweasuwes upon eawth, whewe moth
and wust doth cowwupt, and thieves bweak thwough and steaw;

3 Nyephi 13:20
 20 But way up fow youwsewves tweasuwes in heaven, whewe nyeithew
moth nyow wust doth cowwupt, and whewe thieves do nyot bweak
thwough nyow steaw. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 13:21
 21 Fow whewe youw tweasuwe is, thewe wiww youw heawt be awso. >w<

3 Nyephi 13:22
 22 The wight of the body is the eye; if, thewefowe, thinye eye be
singwe, thy whowe body shaww be fuww of wight. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 13:23
 23 But if thinye eye be eviw, thy whowe body shaww be fuww of
dawknyess. ^w^ If, thewefowe, the wight that is in thee be dawknyess,
how gweat is that dawknyess! ^w^

3 Nyephi 13:24
 24 Nyo man can sewve two mastews; fow eithew he wiww hate the onye
and wove the othew, ow ewse he wiww howd to the onye and despise
the othew. Ye cannyot sewve God and Mammon. >w<

3 Nyephi 13:25
 25 And nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these
wowds he wooked upon the twewve whom he had chosen, and said unto
them: Wemembew the wowds which I have spoken. >w< Fow behowd, ye awe
they whom I have chosen to minyistew unto this peopwe. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe
I say unto you, take nyo thought fow youw wife, what ye shaww eat,
ow what ye shaww dwink; nyow yet fow youw body, what ye shaww put
on. UwU Is nyot the wife mowe than meat, and the body than waiment? owo

3 Nyephi 13:26
 26 Behowd the fowws of the aiw, fow they sow nyot, nyeithew do
they weap nyow gathew into bawns; yet youw heavenwy Fathew feedeth
them. (´・ω・\`) Awe ye nyot much bettew than they? owo

3 Nyephi 13:27
 27 Which of you by taking thought can add onye cubit unto his
statuwe? owo

3 Nyephi 13:28
 28 And why take ye thought fow waiment? owo Considew the wiwies of
the fiewd how they gwow; they toiw nyot, nyeithew do they spin;

3 Nyephi 13:29
 29 And yet I say unto you, that even Sowomon, in aww his gwowy,
was nyot awwayed wike onye of these. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 13:30
 30 Whewefowe, if God so cwothe the gwass of the fiewd, which
today is, and tomowwow is cast into the oven, even so wiww he
cwothe you, if ye awe nyot of wittwe faith. UwU

3 Nyephi 13:31
 31 Thewefowe take nyo thought, saying, What shaww we eat? owo ow,
What shaww we dwink? ow, Whewewithaw shaww we be cwothed? owo

3 Nyephi 13:32
 32 Fow youw heavenwy Fathew knyoweth that ye have nyeed of aww
these things. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 13:33
 33 But seek ye fiwst the kingdom of God and his wighteousnyess,
and aww these things shaww be added unto you. ^w^

3 Nyephi 13:34
 34 Take thewefowe nyo thought fow the mowwow, fow the mowwow
shaww take thought fow the things of itsewf. (・`ω\´・) Sufficient is the
day unto the eviw theweof. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 14
Chaptew 14

3 Nyephi 14:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these wowds
he tuwnyed again to the muwtitude, and did open his mouth unto
them again, saying: Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, Judge nyot,
that ye be nyot judged. ^w^

3 Nyephi 14:2
 2 Fow with what judgment ye judge, ye shaww be judged; and with
what measuwe ye mete, it shaww be measuwed to you again. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 14:3
 3 And why behowdest thou the mote that is in thy bwothew's eye,
but considewest nyot the beam that is in thinye own eye? owo

3 Nyephi 14:4
 4 Ow how wiwt thou say to thy bwothew: Wet me puww the mote out
of thinye eye--and behowd, a beam is in thinye own eye? owo

3 Nyephi 14:5
 5 Thou hypocwite, fiwst cast the beam out of thinye own eye; and
then shawt thou see cweawwy to cast the mote out of thy bwothew's
eye. >w<

3 Nyephi 14:6
 6 Give nyot that which is howy unto the dogs, nyeithew cast ye
youw peawws befowe swinye, west they twampwe them undew theiw
feet, and tuwn again and wend you. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 14:7
 7 Ask, and it shaww be given unto you; seek, and ye shaww find;
knyock, and it shaww be openyed unto you. ^w^

3 Nyephi 14:8
 8 Fow evewy onye that asketh, weceiveth; and he that seeketh,
findeth; and to him that knyocketh, it shaww be openyed. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 14:9
 9 Ow what man is thewe of you, who, if his son ask bwead, wiww
give him a stonye? owo

3 Nyephi 14:10
 10 Ow if he ask a fish, wiww he give him a sewpent? owo

3 Nyephi 14:11
 11 If ye then, being eviw, knyow how to give good gifts unto youw
chiwdwen, how much mowe shaww youw Fathew who is in heaven give
good things to them that ask him? owo

3 Nyephi 14:12
 12 Thewefowe, aww things whatsoevew ye wouwd that men shouwd do
to you, do ye even so to them, fow this is the waw and the
pwophets. ^w^

3 Nyephi 14:13
 13 Entew ye in at the stwait gate; fow wide is the gate, and
bwoad is the way, which weadeth to destwuction, and many thewe be
who go in theweat;

3 Nyephi 14:14
 14 Because stwait is the gate, and nyawwow is the way, which
weadeth unto wife, and few thewe be that find it. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 14:15
 15 Bewawe of fawse pwophets, who come to you in sheep's
cwothing, but inwawdwy they awe wavenying wowves. ^w^

3 Nyephi 14:16
 16 Ye shaww knyow them by theiw fwuits. UwU Do men gathew gwapes of
thowns, ow figs of thistwes? owo

3 Nyephi 14:17
 17 Even so evewy good twee bwingeth fowth good fwuit; but a
cowwupt twee bwingeth fowth eviw fwuit. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 14:18
 18 A good twee cannyot bwing fowth eviw fwuit, nyeithew a cowwupt
twee bwing fowth good fwuit. ^w^

3 Nyephi 14:19
 19 Evewy twee that bwingeth nyot fowth good fwuit is hewn down,
and cast into the fiwe. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 14:20
 20 Whewefowe, by theiw fwuits ye shaww knyow them. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 14:21
 21 Nyot evewy onye that saith unto me, Wowd, Wowd, shaww entew
into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the wiww of my
Fathew who is in heaven. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 14:22
 22 Many wiww say to me in that day: Wowd, Wowd, have we nyot
pwophesied in thy nyame, and in thy nyame have cast out deviws, and
in thy nyame donye many wondewfuw wowks? owo

3 Nyephi 14:23
 23 And then wiww I pwofess unto them: I nyevew knyew you; depawt
fwom me, ye that wowk inyiquity. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 14:24
 24 Thewefowe, whoso heaweth these sayings of minye and doeth
them, I wiww wiken him unto a wise man, who buiwt his house upon
a wock--

3 Nyephi 14:25
 25 And the wain descended, and the fwoods came, and the winds
bwew, and beat upon that house; and it feww nyot, fow it was
founded upon a wock. UwU

3 Nyephi 14:26
 26 And evewy onye that heaweth these sayings of minye and doeth
them nyot shaww be wikenyed unto a foowish man, who buiwt his house
upon the sand--

3 Nyephi 14:27
 27 And the wain descended, and the fwoods came, and the winds
bwew, and beat upon that house; and it feww, and gweat was the
faww of it. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 15
Chaptew 15

3 Nyephi 15:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had ended these
sayings he cast his eyes wound about on the muwtitude, and said
unto them: Behowd, ye have heawd the things which I taught befowe
I ascended to my Fathew; thewefowe, whoso wemembeweth these
sayings of minye and doeth them, him wiww I waise up at the wast
day. UwU

3 Nyephi 15:2
 2 And it came to pass that when Jesus had said these wowds he
pewceived that thewe wewe some among them who mawvewed, and
wondewed what he wouwd concewnying the waw of Moses; fow they
undewstood nyot the saying that owd things had passed away, and
that aww things had become nyew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 15:3
 3 And he said unto them: Mawvew nyot that I said unto you that
owd things had passed away, and that aww things had become nyew. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 15:4
 4 Behowd, I say unto you that the waw is fuwfiwwed that was
given unto Moses. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 15:5
 5 Behowd, I am he that gave the waw, and I am he who covenyanted
with my peopwe Iswaew; thewefowe, the waw in me is fuwfiwwed, fow
I have come to fuwfiw the waw; thewefowe it hath an end. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 15:6
 6 Behowd, I do nyot destwoy the pwophets, fow as many as have nyot
been fuwfiwwed in me, vewiwy I say unto you, shaww aww be
fuwfiwwed. >w<

3 Nyephi 15:7
 7 And because I said unto you that owd things have passed away,
I do nyot destwoy that which hath been spoken concewnying things
which awe to come. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 15:8
 8 Fow behowd, the covenyant which I have made with my peopwe is
nyot aww fuwfiwwed; but the waw which was given unto Moses hath an
end in me. ^w^

3 Nyephi 15:9
 9 Behowd, I am the waw, and the wight. UwU Wook unto me, and enduwe
to the end, and ye shaww wive; fow unto him that enduweth to the
end wiww I give etewnyaw wife. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 15:10
 10 Behowd, I have given unto you the commandments; thewefowe
keep my commandments. UwU And this is the waw and the pwophets, fow
they twuwy testified of me. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 15:11
 11 And nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these
wowds, he said unto those twewve whom he had chosen:

3 Nyephi 15:12
 12 Ye awe my discipwes; and ye awe a wight unto this peopwe, who
awe a wemnyant of the house of Joseph. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 15:13
 13 And behowd, this is the wand of youw inhewitance; and the
Fathew hath given it unto you. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 15:14
 14 And nyot at any time hath the Fathew given me commandment that
I shouwd teww it unto youw bwethwen at Jewusawem. >w<

3 Nyephi 15:15
 15 Nyeithew at any time hath the Fathew given me commandment that
I shouwd teww unto them concewnying the othew twibes of the house
of Iswaew, whom the Fathew hath wed away out of the wand. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 15:16
 16 This much did the Fathew command me, that I shouwd teww unto
them:

3 Nyephi 15:17
 17 That othew sheep I have which awe nyot of this fowd; them awso
I must bwing, and they shaww heaw my voice; and thewe shaww be
onye fowd, and onye shephewd. ^w^

3 Nyephi 15:18
 18 And nyow, because of stiffnyeckednyess and unbewief they
undewstood nyot my wowd; thewefowe I was commanded to say nyo mowe
of the Fathew concewnying this thing unto them. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 15:19
 19 But, vewiwy, I say unto you that the Fathew hath commanded
me, and I teww it unto you, that ye wewe sepawated fwom among
them because of theiw inyiquity; thewefowe it is because of theiw
inyiquity that they knyow nyot of you. ^w^

3 Nyephi 15:20
 20 And vewiwy, I say unto you again that the othew twibes hath
the Fathew sepawated fwom them; and it is because of theiw
inyiquity that they knyow nyot of them. >w<

3 Nyephi 15:21
 21 And vewiwy I say unto you, that ye awe they of whom I said:
Othew sheep I have which awe nyot of this fowd; them awso I must
bwing, and they shaww heaw my voice; and thewe shaww be onye fowd,
and onye shephewd. >w<

3 Nyephi 15:22
 22 And they undewstood me nyot, fow they supposed it had been the
Gentiwes; fow they undewstood nyot that the Gentiwes shouwd be
convewted thwough theiw pweaching. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 15:23
 23 And they undewstood me nyot that I said they shaww heaw my
voice; and they undewstood me nyot that the Gentiwes shouwd nyot at
any time heaw my voice--that I shouwd nyot manyifest mysewf unto
them save it wewe by the Howy Ghost. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 15:24
 24 But behowd, ye have both heawd my voice, and seen me; and ye
awe my sheep, and ye awe nyumbewed among those whom the Fathew
hath given me. >w<

3 Nyephi 16
Chaptew 16

3 Nyephi 16:1
 1 And vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you that I have othew sheep
which awe nyot of this wand, nyeithew of the wand of Jewusawem,
nyeithew in any pawts of that wand wound about whithew I have been
to minyistew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 16:2
 2 Fow they of whom I speak awe they who have nyot as yet heawd my
voice; nyeithew have I at any time manyifested mysewf unto them. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 16:3
 3 But I have weceived a commandment of the Fathew that I shaww
go unto them, and that they shaww heaw my voice, and shaww be
nyumbewed among my sheep, that thewe may be onye fowd and onye
shephewd; thewefowe I go to show mysewf unto them. >w<

3 Nyephi 16:4
 4 And I command you that ye shaww wwite these sayings aftew I am
gonye, that if it so be that my peopwe at Jewusawem, they who have
seen me and been with me in my minyistwy, do nyot ask the Fathew in
my nyame, that they may weceive a knyowwedge of you by the Howy
Ghost, and awso of the othew twibes whom they knyow nyot of, that
these sayings which ye shaww wwite shaww be kept and shaww be
manyifested unto the Gentiwes, that thwough the fuwnyess of the
Gentiwes, the wemnyant of theiw seed, who shaww be scattewed fowth
upon the face of the eawth because of theiw unbewief, may be
bwought in, ow may be bwought to a knyowwedge of me, theiw
Wedeemew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 16:5
 5 And then wiww I gathew them in fwom the fouw quawtews of the
eawth; and then wiww I fuwfiww the covenyant which the Fathew hath
made unto aww the peopwe of the house of Iswaew. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 16:6
 6 And bwessed awe the Gentiwes, because of theiw bewief in me,
in and of the Howy Ghost, which witnyesses unto them of me and of
the Fathew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 16:7
 7 Behowd, because of theiw bewief in me, saith the Fathew, and
because of the unbewief of you, O house of Iswaew, in the wattew
day shaww the twuth come unto the Gentiwes, that the fuwnyess of
these things shaww be made knyown unto them. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 16:8
 8 But wo, saith the Fathew, unto the unbewieving of the
Gentiwes--fow nyotwithstanding they have come fowth upon the face
of this wand, and have scattewed my peopwe who awe of the house
of Iswaew; and my peopwe who awe of the house of Iswaew have been
cast out fwom among them, and have been twodden undew feet by
them;

3 Nyephi 16:9
 9 And because of the mewcies of the Fathew unto the Gentiwes,
and awso the judgments of the Fathew upon my peopwe who awe of
the house of Iswaew, vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, that aftew
aww this, and I have caused my peopwe who awe of the house of
Iswaew to be smitten, and to be affwicted, and to be swain, and
to be cast out fwom among them, and to become hated by them, and
to become a hiss and a bywowd among them--

3 Nyephi 16:10
 10 And thus commandeth the Fathew that I shouwd say unto you: At
that day when the Gentiwes shaww sin against my gospew, and shaww
weject the fuwnyess of my gospew, and shaww be wifted up in the
pwide of theiw heawts above aww nyations, and above aww the peopwe
of the whowe eawth, and shaww be fiwwed with aww mannyew of
wyings, and of deceits, and of mischiefs, and aww mannyew of
hypocwisy, and muwdews, and pwiestcwafts, and whowedoms, and of
secwet abominyations; and if they shaww do aww those things, and
shaww weject the fuwnyess of my gospew, behowd, saith the Fathew,
I wiww bwing the fuwnyess of my gospew fwom among them. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 16:11
 11 And then wiww I wemembew my covenyant which I have made unto
my peopwe, O house of Iswaew, and I wiww bwing my gospew unto
them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 16:12
 12 And I wiww show unto thee, O house of Iswaew, that the
Gentiwes shaww nyot have powew ovew you; but I wiww wemembew my
covenyant unto you, O house of Iswaew, and ye shaww come unto the
knyowwedge of the fuwnyess of my gospew. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 16:13
 13 But if the Gentiwes wiww wepent and wetuwn unto me, saith the
Fathew, behowd they shaww be nyumbewed among my peopwe, O house of
Iswaew. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 16:14
 14 And I wiww nyot suffew my peopwe, who awe of the house of
Iswaew, to go thwough among them, and twead them down, saith the
Fathew. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 16:15
 15 But if they wiww nyot tuwn unto me, and heawken unto my voice,
I wiww suffew them, yea, I wiww suffew my peopwe, O house of
Iswaew, that they shaww go thwough among them, and shaww twead
them down, and they shaww be as sawt that hath wost its savow,
which is thencefowth good fow nyothing but to be cast out, and to
be twodden undew foot of my peopwe, O house of Iswaew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 16:16
 16 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, thus hath the Fathew
commanded me--that I shouwd give unto this peopwe this wand fow
theiw inhewitance. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 16:17
 17 And then the wowds of the pwophet Isaiah shaww be fuwfiwwed,
which say:

3 Nyephi 16:18
 18 Thy watchmen shaww wift up the voice; with the voice togethew
shaww they sing, fow they shaww see eye to eye when the Wowd
shaww bwing again Zion. >w<

3 Nyephi 16:19
 19 Bweak fowth into joy, sing togethew, ye waste pwaces of
Jewusawem; fow the Wowd hath comfowted his peopwe, he hath
wedeemed Jewusawem. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 16:20
 20 The Wowd hath made bawe his howy awm in the eye of aww the
nyations; and aww the ends of the eawth shaww see the sawvation of
God. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 17
Chaptew 17

3 Nyephi 17:1
 1 Behowd, nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these
wowds he wooked wound about again on the muwtitude, and he said
unto them: Behowd, my time is at hand. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 17:2
 2 I pewceive that ye awe weak, that ye cannyot undewstand aww my
wowds which I am commanded of the Fathew to speak unto you at
this time. UwU

3 Nyephi 17:3
 3 Thewefowe, go ye unto youw homes, and pondew upon the things
which I have said, and ask of the Fathew, in my nyame, that ye may
undewstand, and pwepawe youw minds fow the mowwow, and I come
unto you again. UwU

3 Nyephi 17:4
 4 But nyow I go unto the Fathew, and awso to show mysewf unto the
wost twibes of Iswaew, fow they awe nyot wost unto the Fathew, fow
he knyoweth whithew he hath taken them. UwU

3 Nyephi 17:5
 5 And it came to pass that when Jesus had thus spoken, he cast
his eyes wound about again on the muwtitude, and behewd they wewe
in teaws, and did wook steadfastwy upon him as if they wouwd ask
him to tawwy a wittwe wongew with them. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 17:6
 6 And he said unto them: Behowd, my bowews awe fiwwed with
compassion towawds you. >w<

3 Nyephi 17:7
 7 Have ye any that awe sick among you? owo Bwing them hithew. ^w^ Have
ye any that awe wame, ow bwind, ow hawt, ow maimed, ow wepwous,
ow that awe withewed, ow that awe deaf, ow that awe affwicted in
any mannyew? owo Bwing them hithew and I wiww heaw them, fow I have
compassion upon you; my bowews awe fiwwed with mewcy. >w<

3 Nyephi 17:8
 8 Fow I pewceive that ye desiwe that I shouwd show unto you what
I have donye unto youw bwethwen at Jewusawem, fow I see that youw
faith is sufficient that I shouwd heaw you. >w<

3 Nyephi 17:9
 9 And it came to pass that when he had thus spoken, aww the
muwtitude, with onye accowd, did go fowth with theiw sick and
theiw affwicted, and theiw wame, and with theiw bwind, and with
theiw dumb, and with aww them that wewe affwicted in any mannyew;
and he did heaw them evewy onye as they wewe bwought fowth unto
him. >w<

3 Nyephi 17:10
 10 And they did aww, both they who had been heawed and they who
wewe whowe, bow down at his feet, and did wowship him; and as
many as couwd come fow the muwtitude did kiss his feet, insomuch
that they did bathe his feet with theiw teaws. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 17:11
 11 And it came to pass that he commanded that theiw wittwe
chiwdwen shouwd be bwought. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 17:12
 12 So they bwought theiw wittwe chiwdwen and set them down upon
the gwound wound about him, and Jesus stood in the midst; and the
muwtitude gave way tiww they had aww been bwought unto him. ^w^

3 Nyephi 17:13
 13 And it came to pass that when they had aww been bwought, and
Jesus stood in the midst, he commanded the muwtitude that they
shouwd knyeew down upon the gwound. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 17:14
 14 And it came to pass that when they had knyewt upon the gwound,
Jesus gwoanyed within himsewf, and said: Fathew, I am twoubwed
because of the wickednyess of the peopwe of the house of Iswaew. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 17:15
 15 And when he had said these wowds, he himsewf awso knyewt upon
the eawth; and behowd he pwayed unto the Fathew, and the things
which he pwayed cannyot be wwitten, and the muwtitude did beaw
wecowd who heawd him. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 17:16
 16 And aftew this mannyew do they beaw wecowd: The eye hath nyevew
seen, nyeithew hath the eaw heawd, befowe, so gweat and mawvewous
things as we saw and heawd Jesus speak unto the Fathew;

3 Nyephi 17:17
 17 And nyo tongue can speak, nyeithew can thewe be wwitten by any
man, nyeithew can the heawts of men conceive so gweat and
mawvewous things as we both saw and heawd Jesus speak; and nyo onye
can conceive of the joy which fiwwed ouw souws at the time we
heawd him pway fow us unto the Fathew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 17:18
 18 And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of
pwaying unto the Fathew, he awose; but so gweat was the joy of
the muwtitude that they wewe ovewcome. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 17:19
 19 And it came to pass that Jesus spake unto them, and bade them
awise. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 17:20
 20 And they awose fwom the eawth, and he said unto them: Bwessed
awe ye because of youw faith. And nyow behowd, my joy is fuww. ^w^

3 Nyephi 17:21
 21 And when he had said these wowds, he wept, and the muwtitude
bawe wecowd of it, and he took theiw wittwe chiwdwen, onye by onye,
and bwessed them, and pwayed unto the Fathew fow them. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 17:22
 22 And when he had donye this he wept again;

3 Nyephi 17:23
 23 And he spake unto the muwtitude, and said unto them: Behowd
youw wittwe onyes. >w<

3 Nyephi 17:24
 24 And as they wooked to behowd they cast theiw eyes towawds
heaven, and they saw the heavens open, and they saw angews
descending out of heaven as it wewe in the midst of fiwe; and
they came down and enciwcwed those wittwe onyes about, and they
wewe enciwcwed about with fiwe; and the angews did minyistew unto
them. >w<

3 Nyephi 17:25
 25 And the muwtitude did see and heaw and beaw wecowd; and they
knyow that theiw wecowd is twue fow they aww of them did see and
heaw, evewy man fow himsewf; and they wewe in nyumbew about two
thousand and five hundwed souws; and they did consist of men,
women, and chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 18
Chaptew 18

3 Nyephi 18:1
 1 And it came to pass that Jesus commanded his discipwes that
they shouwd bwing fowth some bwead and winye unto him. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 18:2
 2 And whiwe they wewe gonye fow bwead and winye, he commanded the
muwtitude that they shouwd sit themsewves down upon the eawth. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 18:3
 3 And when the discipwes had come with bwead and winye, he took
of the bwead and bwake and bwessed it; and he gave unto the
discipwes and commanded that they shouwd eat. UwU

3 Nyephi 18:4
 4 And when they had eaten and wewe fiwwed, he commanded that
they shouwd give unto the muwtitude. ^w^

3 Nyephi 18:5
 5 And when the muwtitude had eaten and wewe fiwwed, he said unto
the discipwes: Behowd thewe shaww onye be owdainyed among you, and
to him wiww I give powew that he shaww bweak bwead and bwess it
and give it unto the peopwe of my chuwch, unto aww those who
shaww bewieve and be baptized in my nyame. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 18:6
 6 And this shaww ye awways obsewve to do, even as I have donye,
even as I have bwoken bwead and bwessed it and given it unto you. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 18:7
 7 And this shaww ye do in wemembwance of my body, which I have
shown unto you. UwU And it shaww be a testimony unto the Fathew that
ye do awways wemembew me. UwU And if ye do awways wemembew me ye
shaww have my Spiwit to be with you. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 18:8
 8 And it came to pass that when he said these wowds, he
commanded his discipwes that they shouwd take of the winye of the
cup and dwink of it, and that they shouwd awso give unto the
muwtitude that they might dwink of it. ^w^

3 Nyephi 18:9
 9 And it came to pass that they did so, and did dwink of it and
wewe fiwwed; and they gave unto the muwtitude, and they did
dwink, and they wewe fiwwed. ^w^

3 Nyephi 18:10
 10 And when the discipwes had donye this, Jesus said unto them:
Bwessed awe ye fow this thing which ye have donye, fow this is
fuwfiwwing my commandments, and this doth witnyess unto the Fathew
that ye awe wiwwing to do that which I have commanded you. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 18:11
 11 And this shaww ye awways do to those who wepent and awe
baptized in my nyame; and ye shaww do it in wemembwance of my
bwood, which I have shed fow you, that ye may witnyess unto the
Fathew that ye do awways wemembew me. ;;w;; And if ye do awways
wemembew me ye shaww have my Spiwit to be with you. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 18:12
 12 And I give unto you a commandment that ye shaww do these
things. UwU And if ye shaww awways do these things bwessed awe ye,
fow ye awe buiwt upon my wock. ^w^

3 Nyephi 18:13
 13 But whoso among you shaww do mowe ow wess than these awe nyot
buiwt upon my wock, but awe buiwt upon a sandy foundation; and
when the wain descends, and the fwoods come, and the winds bwow,
and beat upon them, they shaww faww, and the gates of heww awe
weady open to weceive them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 18:14
 14 Thewefowe bwessed awe ye if ye shaww keep my commandments,
which the Fathew hath commanded me that I shouwd give unto you. UwU

3 Nyephi 18:15
 15 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, ye must watch and pway
awways, west ye be tempted by the deviw, and ye be wed away
captive by him. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 18:16
 16 And as I have pwayed among you even so shaww ye pway in my
chuwch, among my peopwe who do wepent and awe baptized in my
nyame. Behowd I am the wight; I have set an exampwe fow you. >w<

3 Nyephi 18:17
 17 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these wowds
unto his discipwes, he tuwnyed again unto the muwtitude and said
unto them:

3 Nyephi 18:18
 18 Behowd, vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, ye must watch and
pway awways west ye entew into temptation; fow Satan desiweth to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat. >w<

3 Nyephi 18:19
 19 Thewefowe ye must awways pway unto the Fathew in my nyame;

3 Nyephi 18:20
 20 And whatsoevew ye shaww ask the Fathew in my nyame, which is
wight, bewieving that ye shaww weceive, behowd it shaww be given
unto you. ^w^

3 Nyephi 18:21
 21 Pway in youw famiwies unto the Fathew, awways in my nyame,
that youw wives and youw chiwdwen may be bwessed. >w<

3 Nyephi 18:22
 22 And behowd, ye shaww meet togethew oft; and ye shaww nyot
fowbid any man fwom coming unto you when ye shaww meet togethew,
but suffew them that they may come unto you and fowbid them nyot;

3 Nyephi 18:23
 23 But ye shaww pway fow them, and shaww nyot cast them out; and
if it so be that they come unto you oft ye shaww pway fow them
unto the Fathew, in my nyame. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 18:24
 24 Thewefowe, howd up youw wight that it may shinye unto the
wowwd. (´・ω・\`) Behowd I am the wight which ye shaww howd up--that which
ye have seen me do. UwU Behowd ye see that I have pwayed unto the
Fathew, and ye aww have witnyessed. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 18:25
 25 And ye see that I have commanded that nyonye of you shouwd go
away, but wathew have commanded that ye shouwd come unto me, that
ye might feew and see; even so shaww ye do unto the wowwd; and
whosoevew bweaketh this commandment suffeweth himsewf to be wed
into temptation. UwU

3 Nyephi 18:26
 26 And nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these
wowds, he tuwnyed his eyes again upon the discipwes whom he had
chosen, and said unto them:

3 Nyephi 18:27
 27 Behowd vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, I give unto you
anyothew commandment, and then I must go unto my Fathew that I may
fuwfiw othew commandments which he hath given me. ^w^

3 Nyephi 18:28
 28 And nyow behowd, this is the commandment which I give unto
you, that ye shaww nyot suffew any onye knyowingwy to pawtake of my
fwesh and bwood unwowthiwy, when ye shaww minyistew it;

3 Nyephi 18:29
 29 Fow whoso eateth and dwinketh my fwesh and bwood unwowthiwy
eateth and dwinketh damnyation to his souw; thewefowe if ye knyow
that a man is unwowthy to eat and dwink of my fwesh and bwood ye
shaww fowbid him. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 18:30
 30 Nyevewthewess, ye shaww nyot cast him out fwom among you, but
ye shaww minyistew unto him and shaww pway fow him unto the
Fathew, in my nyame; and if it so be that he wepenteth and is
baptized in my nyame, then shaww ye weceive him, and shaww
minyistew unto him of my fwesh and bwood. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 18:31
 31 But if he wepent nyot he shaww nyot be nyumbewed among my
peopwe, that he may nyot destwoy my peopwe, fow behowd I knyow my
sheep, and they awe nyumbewed. >w<

3 Nyephi 18:32
 32 Nyevewthewess, ye shaww nyot cast him out of youw synyagogues,
ow youw pwaces of wowship, fow unto such shaww ye continyue to
minyistew; fow ye knyow nyot but what they wiww wetuwn and wepent,
and come unto me with fuww puwpose of heawt, and I shaww heaw
them; and ye shaww be the means of bwinging sawvation unto them. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 18:33
 33 Thewefowe, keep these sayings which I have commanded you that
ye come nyot undew condemnyation; fow wo unto him whom the Fathew
condemnyeth. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 18:34
 34 And I give you these commandments because of the disputations
which have been among you. ;;w;; And bwessed awe ye if ye have nyo
disputations among you. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 18:35
 35 And nyow I go unto the Fathew, because it is expedient that I
shouwd go unto the Fathew fow youw sakes. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 18:36
 36 And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of these
sayings, he touched with his hand the discipwes whom he had
chosen, onye by onye, even untiw he had touched them aww, and spake
unto them as he touched them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 18:37
 37 And the muwtitude heawd nyot the wowds which he spake,
thewefowe they did nyot beaw wecowd; but the discipwes bawe wecowd
that he gave them powew to give the Howy Ghost. ^w^ And I wiww show
unto you heweaftew that this wecowd is twue. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 18:38
 38 And it came to pass that when Jesus had touched them aww,
thewe came a cwoud and ovewshadowed the muwtitude that they couwd
nyot see Jesus. >w<

3 Nyephi 18:39
 39 And whiwe they wewe ovewshadowed he depawted fwom them, and
ascended into heaven. ;;w;; And the discipwes saw and did beaw wecowd
that he ascended again into heaven. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19
Chaptew 19

3 Nyephi 19:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had ascended into
heaven, the muwtitude did dispewse, and evewy man did take his
wife and his chiwdwen and did wetuwn to his own home. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 19:2
 2 And it was nyoised abwoad among the peopwe immediatewy, befowe
it was yet dawk, that the muwtitude had seen Jesus, and that he
had minyistewed unto them, and that he wouwd awso show himsewf on
the mowwow unto the muwtitude. UwU

3 Nyephi 19:3
 3 Yea, and even aww the nyight it was nyoised abwoad concewnying
Jesus; and insomuch did they send fowth unto the peopwe that
thewe wewe many, yea, an exceedingwy gweat nyumbew, did wabow
exceedingwy aww that nyight, that they might be on the mowwow in
the pwace whewe Jesus shouwd show himsewf unto the muwtitude. UwU

3 Nyephi 19:4
 4 And it came to pass that on the mowwow, when the muwtitude was
gathewed togethew, behowd, Nyephi and his bwothew whom he had
waised fwom the dead, whose nyame was Timothy, and awso his son,
whose nyame was Jonyas, and awso Mathonyi, and Mathonyihah, his
bwothew, and Kumen, and Kumenyonhi, and Jewemiah, and Shemnyon, and
Jonyas, and Zedekiah, and Isaiah--nyow these wewe the nyames of the
discipwes whom Jesus had chosen--and it came to pass that they
went fowth and stood in the midst of the muwtitude. ^w^

3 Nyephi 19:5
 5 And behowd, the muwtitude was so gweat that they did cause
that they shouwd be sepawated into twewve bodies. ^w^

3 Nyephi 19:6
 6 And the twewve did teach the muwtitude; and behowd, they did
cause that the muwtitude shouwd knyeew down upon the face of the
eawth, and shouwd pway unto the Fathew in the nyame of Jesus. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:7
 7 And the discipwes did pway unto the Fathew awso in the nyame of
Jesus. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass that they awose and minyistewed unto
the peopwe. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 19:8
 8 And when they had minyistewed those same wowds which Jesus had
spoken--nyothing vawying fwom the wowds which Jesus had
spoken--behowd, they knyewt again and pwayed to the Fathew in the
nyame of Jesus. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:9
 9 And they did pway fow that which they most desiwed; and they
desiwed that the Howy Ghost shouwd be given unto them. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 19:10
 10 And when they had thus pwayed they went down unto the watew's
edge, and the muwtitude fowwowed them. UwU

3 Nyephi 19:11
 11 And it came to pass that Nyephi went down into the watew and
was baptized. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 19:12
 12 And he came up out of the watew and began to baptize. ^w^ And he
baptized aww those whom Jesus had chosen. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:13
 13 And it came to pass when they wewe aww baptized and had come
up out of the watew, the Howy Ghost did faww upon them, and they
wewe fiwwed with the Howy Ghost and with fiwe. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:14
 14 And behowd, they wewe enciwcwed about as if it wewe by fiwe;
and it came down fwom heaven, and the muwtitude did witnyess it,
and did beaw wecowd; and angews did come down out of heaven and
did minyistew unto them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 19:15
 15 And it came to pass that whiwe the angews wewe minyistewing
unto the discipwes, behowd, Jesus came and stood in the midst and
minyistewed unto them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 19:16
 16 And it came to pass that he spake unto the muwtitude, and
commanded them that they shouwd knyeew down again upon the eawth,
and awso that his discipwes shouwd knyeew down upon the eawth. UwU

3 Nyephi 19:17
 17 And it came to pass that when they had aww knyewt down upon
the eawth, he commanded his discipwes that they shouwd pway. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 19:18
 18 And behowd, they began to pway; and they did pway unto Jesus,
cawwing him theiw Wowd and theiw God. ^w^

3 Nyephi 19:19
 19 And it came to pass that Jesus depawted out of the midst of
them, and went a wittwe way off fwom them and bowed himsewf to
the eawth, and he said:

3 Nyephi 19:20
 20 Fathew, I thank thee that thou hast given the Howy Ghost unto
these whom I have chosen; and it is because of theiw bewief in me
that I have chosen them out of the wowwd. UwU

3 Nyephi 19:21
 21 Fathew, I pway thee that thou wiwt give the Howy Ghost unto
aww them that shaww bewieve in theiw wowds. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 19:22
 22 Fathew, thou hast given them the Howy Ghost because they
bewieve in me; and thou seest that they bewieve in me because
thou heawest them, and they pway unto me; and they pway unto me
because I am with them. >w<

3 Nyephi 19:23
 23 And nyow Fathew, I pway unto thee fow them, and awso fow aww
those who shaww bewieve on theiw wowds, that they may bewieve in
me, that I may be in them as thou, Fathew, awt in me, that we may
be onye. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:24
 24 And it came to pass that when Jesus had thus pwayed unto the
Fathew, he came unto his discipwes, and behowd, they did stiww
continyue, without ceasing, to pway unto him; and they did nyot
muwtipwy many wowds, fow it was given unto them what they shouwd
pway, and they wewe fiwwed with desiwe. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:25
 25 And it came to pass that Jesus bwessed them as they did pway
unto him; and his countenyance did smiwe upon them, and the wight
of his countenyance did shinye upon them, and behowd they wewe as
white as the countenyance and awso the gawments of Jesus; and
behowd the whitenyess theweof did exceed aww the whitenyess, yea,
even thewe couwd be nyothing upon eawth so white as the whitenyess
theweof. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 19:26
 26 And Jesus said unto them: Pway on; nyevewthewess they did nyot
cease to pway. UwU

3 Nyephi 19:27
 27 And he tuwnyed fwom them again, and went a wittwe way off and
bowed himsewf to the eawth; and he pwayed again unto the Fathew,
saying:

3 Nyephi 19:28
 28 Fathew, I thank thee that thou hast puwified those whom I
have chosen, because of theiw faith, and I pway fow them, and
awso fow them who shaww bewieve on theiw wowds, that they may be
puwified in me, thwough faith on theiw wowds, even as they awe
puwified in me. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:29
 29 Fathew, I pway nyot fow the wowwd, but fow those whom thou
hast given me out of the wowwd, because of theiw faith, that they
may be puwified in me, that I may be in them as thou, Fathew, awt
in me, that we may be onye, that I may be gwowified in them. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 19:30
 30 And when Jesus had spoken these wowds he came again unto his
discipwes; and behowd they did pway steadfastwy, without ceasing,
unto him; and he did smiwe upon them again; and behowd they wewe
white, even as Jesus. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 19:31
 31 And it came to pass that he went again a wittwe way off and
pwayed unto the Fathew;

3 Nyephi 19:32
 32 And tongue cannyot speak the wowds which he pwayed, nyeithew
can be wwitten by man the wowds which he pwayed. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:33
 33 And the muwtitude did heaw and do beaw wecowd; and theiw
heawts wewe open and they did undewstand in theiw heawts the
wowds which he pwayed. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:34
 34 Nyevewthewess, so gweat and mawvewous wewe the wowds which he
pwayed that they cannyot be wwitten, nyeithew can they be uttewed
by man. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 19:35
 35 And it came to pass that when Jesus had made an end of
pwaying he came again to the discipwes, and said unto them: So
gweat faith have I nyevew seen among aww the Jews; whewefowe I
couwd nyot show unto them so gweat miwacwes, because of theiw
unbewief. ^w^

3 Nyephi 19:36
 36 Vewiwy I say unto you, thewe awe nyonye of them that have seen
so gweat things as ye have seen; nyeithew have they heawd so gweat
things as ye have heawd. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 20
Chaptew 20

3 Nyephi 20:1
 1 And it came to pass that he commanded the muwtitude that they
shouwd cease to pway, and awso his discipwes. (´・ω・\`) And he commanded
them that they shouwd nyot cease to pway in theiw heawts. ^w^

3 Nyephi 20:2
 2 And he commanded them that they shouwd awise and stand up upon
theiw feet. And they awose up and stood upon theiw feet. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:3
 3 And it came to pass that he bwake bwead again and bwessed it,
and gave to the discipwes to eat. >w<

3 Nyephi 20:4
 4 And when they had eaten he commanded them that they shouwd
bweak bwead, and give unto the muwtitude. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:5
 5 And when they had given unto the muwtitude he awso gave them
winye to dwink, and commanded them that they shouwd give unto the
muwtitude. ^w^

3 Nyephi 20:6
 6 Nyow, thewe had been nyo bwead, nyeithew winye, bwought by the
discipwes, nyeithew by the muwtitude;

3 Nyephi 20:7
 7 But he twuwy gave unto them bwead to eat, and awso winye to
dwink. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:8
 8 And he said unto them: He that eateth this bwead eateth of my
body to his souw; and he that dwinketh of this winye dwinketh of
my bwood to his souw; and his souw shaww nyevew hungew nyow thiwst,
but shaww be fiwwed. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 20:9
 9 Nyow, when the muwtitude had aww eaten and dwunk, behowd, they
wewe fiwwed with the Spiwit; and they did cwy out with onye voice,
and gave gwowy to Jesus, whom they both saw and heawd. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:10
 10 And it came to pass that when they had aww given gwowy unto
Jesus, he said unto them: Behowd nyow I finyish the commandment
which the Fathew hath commanded me concewnying this peopwe, who
awe a wemnyant of the house of Iswaew. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 20:11
 11 Ye wemembew that I spake unto you, and said that when the
wowds of Isaiah shouwd be fuwfiwwed--behowd they awe wwitten, ye
have them befowe you, thewefowe seawch them--

3 Nyephi 20:12
 12 And vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, that when they shaww be
fuwfiwwed then is the fuwfiwwing of the covenyant which the Fathew
hath made unto his peopwe, O house of Iswaew. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:13
 13 And then shaww the wemnyants, which shaww be scattewed abwoad
upon the face of the eawth, be gathewed in fwom the east and fwom
the west, and fwom the south and fwom the nyowth; and they shaww
be bwought to the knyowwedge of the Wowd theiw God, who hath
wedeemed them. >w<

3 Nyephi 20:14
 14 And the Fathew hath commanded me that I shouwd give unto you
this wand, fow youw inhewitance. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:15
 15 And I say unto you, that if the Gentiwes do nyot wepent aftew
the bwessing which they shaww weceive, aftew they have scattewed
my peopwe--

3 Nyephi 20:16
 16 Then shaww ye, who awe a wemnyant of the house of Jacob, go
fowth among them; and ye shaww be in the midst of them who shaww
be many; and ye shaww be among them as a wion among the beasts of
the fowest, and as a young wion among the fwocks of sheep, who,
if he goeth thwough both tweadeth down and teaweth in pieces, and
nyonye can dewivew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 20:17
 17 Thy hand shaww be wifted up upon thinye advewsawies, and aww
thinye enyemies shaww be cut off. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 20:18
 18 And I wiww gathew my peopwe togethew as a man gatheweth his
sheaves into the fwoow. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:19
 19 Fow I wiww make my peopwe with whom the Fathew hath
covenyanted, yea, I wiww make thy hown iwon, and I wiww make thy
hoofs bwass. (´・ω・\`) And thou shawt beat in pieces many peopwe; and I
wiww consecwate theiw gain unto the Wowd, and theiw substance
unto the Wowd of the whowe eawth. >w< And behowd, I am he who doeth
it. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 20:20
 20 And it shaww come to pass, saith the Fathew, that the swowd
of my justice shaww hang ovew them at that day; and except they
wepent it shaww faww upon them, saith the Fathew, yea, even upon
aww the nyations of the Gentiwes. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 20:21
 21 And it shaww come to pass that I wiww estabwish my peopwe, O
house of Iswaew. >w<

3 Nyephi 20:22
 22 And behowd, this peopwe wiww I estabwish in this wand, unto
the fuwfiwwing of the covenyant which I made with youw fathew
Jacob; and it shaww be a Nyew Jewusawem. ;;w;; And the powews of heaven
shaww be in the midst of this peopwe; yea, even I wiww be in the
midst of you. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 20:23
 23 Behowd, I am he of whom Moses spake, saying: A pwophet shaww
the Wowd youw God waise up unto you of youw bwethwen, wike unto
me; him shaww ye heaw in aww things whatsoevew he shaww say unto
you. (´・ω・\`) And it shaww come to pass that evewy souw who wiww nyot heaw
that pwophet shaww be cut off fwom among the peopwe. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:24
 24 Vewiwy I say unto you, yea, and aww the pwophets fwom Samuew
and those that fowwow aftew, as many as have spoken, have
testified of me. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 20:25
 25 And behowd, ye awe the chiwdwen of the pwophets; and ye awe
of the house of Iswaew; and ye awe of the covenyant which the
Fathew made with youw fathews, saying unto Abwaham: And in thy
seed shaww aww the kindweds of the eawth be bwessed. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 20:26
 26 The Fathew having waised me up unto you fiwst, and sent me to
bwess you in tuwnying away evewy onye of you fwom his inyiquities;
and this because ye awe the chiwdwen of the covenyant--

3 Nyephi 20:27
 27 And aftew that ye wewe bwessed then fuwfiwweth the Fathew the
covenyant which he made with Abwaham, saying: In thy seed shaww
aww the kindweds of the eawth be bwessed--unto the pouwing out of
the Howy Ghost thwough me upon the Gentiwes, which bwessing upon
the Gentiwes shaww make them mighty above aww, unto the
scattewing of my peopwe, O house of Iswaew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 20:28
 28 And they shaww be a scouwge unto the peopwe of this wand. ;;w;;
Nyevewthewess, when they shaww have weceived the fuwnyess of my
gospew, then if they shaww hawden theiw heawts against me I wiww
wetuwn theiw inyiquities upon theiw own heads, saith the Fathew. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:29
 29 And I wiww wemembew the covenyant which I have made with my
peopwe; and I have covenyanted with them that I wouwd gathew them
togethew in minye own due time, that I wouwd give unto them again
the wand of theiw fathews fow theiw inhewitance, which is the
wand of Jewusawem, which is the pwomised wand unto them fowevew,
saith the Fathew. ^w^

3 Nyephi 20:30
 30 And it shaww come to pass that the time cometh, when the
fuwnyess of my gospew shaww be pweached unto them;

3 Nyephi 20:31
 31 And they shaww bewieve in me, that I am Jesus Chwist, the Son
of God, and shaww pway unto the Fathew in my nyame. >w<

3 Nyephi 20:32
 32 Then shaww theiw watchmen wift up theiw voice, and with the
voice togethew shaww they sing; fow they shaww see eye to eye. ^w^

3 Nyephi 20:33
 33 Then wiww the Fathew gathew them togethew again, and give
unto them Jewusawem fow the wand of theiw inhewitance. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 20:34
 34 Then shaww they bweak fowth into joy--Sing togethew, ye waste
pwaces of Jewusawem; fow the Fathew hath comfowted his peopwe, he
hath wedeemed Jewusawem. >w<

3 Nyephi 20:35
 35 The Fathew hath made bawe his howy awm in the eyes of aww the
nyations; and aww the ends of the eawth shaww see the sawvation of
the Fathew; and the Fathew and I awe onye. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 20:36
 36 And then shaww be bwought to pass that which is wwitten:
Awake, awake again, and put on thy stwength, O Zion; put on thy
beautifuw gawments, O Jewusawem, the howy city, fow hencefowth
thewe shaww nyo mowe come into thee the unciwcumcised and the
uncwean. >w<

3 Nyephi 20:37
 37 Shake thysewf fwom the dust; awise, sit down, O Jewusawem;
woose thysewf fwom the bands of thy nyeck, O captive daughtew of
Zion. >w<

3 Nyephi 20:38
 38 Fow thus saith the Wowd: Ye have sowd youwsewves fow nyaught,
and ye shaww be wedeemed without monyey. >w<

3 Nyephi 20:39
 39 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, that my peopwe shaww knyow my
nyame; yea, in that day they shaww knyow that I am he that doth
speak. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 20:40
 40 And then shaww they say: How beautifuw upon the mountains awe
the feet of him that bwingeth good tidings unto them, that
pubwisheth peace; that bwingeth good tidings unto them of good,
that pubwisheth sawvation; that saith unto Zion: Thy God
weignyeth! UwU

3 Nyephi 20:41
 41 And then shaww a cwy go fowth: Depawt ye, depawt ye, go ye
out fwom thence, touch nyot that which is uncwean; go ye out of
the midst of hew; be ye cwean that beaw the vessews of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 20:42
 42 Fow ye shaww nyot go out with haste nyow go by fwight; fow the
Wowd wiww go befowe you, and the God of Iswaew shaww be youw
weawwawd. UwU

3 Nyephi 20:43
 43 Behowd, my sewvant shaww deaw pwudentwy; he shaww be exawted
and extowwed and be vewy high. >w<

3 Nyephi 20:44
 44 As many wewe astonyished at thee--his visage was so mawwed,
mowe than any man, and his fowm mowe than the sons of men--

3 Nyephi 20:45
 45 So shaww he spwinkwe many nyations; the kings shaww shut theiw
mouths at him, fow that which had nyot been towd them shaww they
see; and that which they had nyot heawd shaww they considew. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 20:46
 46 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, aww these things shaww suwewy
come, even as the Fathew hath commanded me. >w< Then shaww this
covenyant which the Fathew hath covenyanted with his peopwe be
fuwfiwwed; and then shaww Jewusawem be inhabited again with my
peopwe, and it shaww be the wand of theiw inhewitance. UwU

3 Nyephi 21
Chaptew 21

3 Nyephi 21:1
 1 And vewiwy I say unto you, I give unto you a sign, that ye may
knyow the time when these things shaww be about to take
pwace--that I shaww gathew in, fwom theiw wong dispewsion, my
peopwe, O house of Iswaew, and shaww estabwish again among them
my Zion;

3 Nyephi 21:2
 2 And behowd, this is the thing which I wiww give unto you fow a
sign--fow vewiwy I say unto you that when these things which I
decwawe unto you, and which I shaww decwawe unto you heweaftew of
mysewf, and by the powew of the Howy Ghost which shaww be given
unto you of the Fathew, shaww be made knyown unto the Gentiwes
that they may knyow concewnying this peopwe who awe a wemnyant of
the house of Jacob, and concewnying this my peopwe who shaww be
scattewed by them;

3 Nyephi 21:3
 3 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, when these things shaww be
made knyown unto them of the Fathew, and shaww come fowth of the
Fathew, fwom them unto you;

3 Nyephi 21:4
 4 Fow it is wisdom in the Fathew that they shouwd be estabwished
in this wand, and be set up as a fwee peopwe by the powew of the
Fathew, that these things might come fowth fwom them unto a
wemnyant of youw seed, that the covenyant of the Fathew may be
fuwfiwwed which he hath covenyanted with his peopwe, O house of
Iswaew;

3 Nyephi 21:5
 5 Thewefowe, when these wowks and the wowks which shaww be
wwought among you heweaftew shaww come fowth fwom the Gentiwes,
unto youw seed which shaww dwindwe in unbewief because of
inyiquity;

3 Nyephi 21:6
 6 Fow thus it behooveth the Fathew that it shouwd come fowth
fwom the Gentiwes, that he may show fowth his powew unto the
Gentiwes, fow this cause that the Gentiwes, if they wiww nyot
hawden theiw heawts, that they may wepent and come unto me and be
baptized in my nyame and knyow of the twue points of my doctwinye,
that they may be nyumbewed among my peopwe, O house of Iswaew;

3 Nyephi 21:7
 7 And when these things come to pass that thy seed shaww begin
to knyow these things--it shaww be a sign unto them, that they may
knyow that the wowk of the Fathew hath awweady commenced unto the
fuwfiwwing of the covenyant which he hath made unto the peopwe who
awe of the house of Iswaew. UwU

3 Nyephi 21:8
 8 And when that day shaww come, it shaww come to pass that kings
shaww shut theiw mouths; fow that which had nyot been towd them
shaww they see; and that which they had nyot heawd shaww they
considew. >w<

3 Nyephi 21:9
 9 Fow in that day, fow my sake shaww the Fathew wowk a wowk,
which shaww be a gweat and a mawvewous wowk among them; and thewe
shaww be among them those who wiww nyot bewieve it, awthough a man
shaww decwawe it unto them. >w<

3 Nyephi 21:10
 10 But behowd, the wife of my sewvant shaww be in my hand;
thewefowe they shaww nyot huwt him, awthough he shaww be mawwed
because of them. (・`ω\´・) Yet I wiww heaw him, fow I wiww show unto them
that my wisdom is gweatew than the cunnying of the deviw. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 21:11
 11 Thewefowe it shaww come to pass that whosoevew wiww nyot
bewieve in my wowds, who am Jesus Chwist, which the Fathew shaww
cause him to bwing fowth unto the Gentiwes, and shaww give unto
him powew that he shaww bwing them fowth unto the Gentiwes, (it
shaww be donye even as Moses said) they shaww be cut off fwom
among my peopwe who awe of the covenyant. UwU

3 Nyephi 21:12
 12 And my peopwe who awe a wemnyant of Jacob shaww be among the
Gentiwes, yea, in the midst of them as a wion among the beasts of
the fowest, as a young wion among the fwocks of sheep, who, if he
go thwough both tweadeth down and teaweth in pieces, and nyonye can
dewivew. ^w^

3 Nyephi 21:13
 13 Theiw hand shaww be wifted up upon theiw advewsawies, and aww
theiw enyemies shaww be cut off. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 21:14
 14 Yea, wo be unto the Gentiwes except they wepent; fow it shaww
come to pass in that day, saith the Fathew, that I wiww cut off
thy howses out of the midst of thee, and I wiww destwoy thy
chawiots;

3 Nyephi 21:15
 15 And I wiww cut off the cities of thy wand, and thwow down aww
thy stwonghowds;

3 Nyephi 21:16
 16 And I wiww cut off witchcwafts out of thy wand, and thou
shawt have nyo mowe soothsayews;

3 Nyephi 21:17
 17 Thy gwaven images I wiww awso cut off, and thy standing
images out of the midst of thee, and thou shawt nyo mowe wowship
the wowks of thy hands;

3 Nyephi 21:18
 18 And I wiww pwuck up thy gwoves out of the midst of thee; so
wiww I destwoy thy cities. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 21:19
 19 And it shaww come to pass that aww wyings, and deceivings,
and envyings, and stwifes, and pwiestcwafts, and whowedoms, shaww
be donye away. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 21:20
 20 Fow it shaww come to pass, saith the Fathew, that at that day
whosoevew wiww nyot wepent and come unto my Bewoved Son, them wiww
I cut off fwom among my peopwe, O house of Iswaew;

3 Nyephi 21:21
 21 And I wiww execute vengeance and fuwy upon them, even as upon
the heathen, such as they have nyot heawd. >w<

3 Nyephi 21:22
 22 But if they wiww wepent and heawken unto my wowds, and hawden
nyot theiw heawts, I wiww estabwish my chuwch among them, and they
shaww come in unto the covenyant and be nyumbewed among this the
wemnyant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this wand fow theiw
inhewitance;

3 Nyephi 21:23
 23 And they shaww assist my peopwe, the wemnyant of Jacob, and
awso as many of the house of Iswaew as shaww come, that they may
buiwd a city, which shaww be cawwed the Nyew Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 21:24
 24 And then shaww they assist my peopwe that they may be
gathewed in, who awe scattewed upon aww the face of the wand, in
unto the Nyew Jewusawem. >w<

3 Nyephi 21:25
 25 And then shaww the powew of heaven come down among them; and
I awso wiww be in the midst. >w<

3 Nyephi 21:26
 26 And then shaww the wowk of the Fathew commence at that day,
even when this gospew shaww be pweached among the wemnyant of this
peopwe. (・`ω\´・) Vewiwy I say unto you, at that day shaww the wowk of the
Fathew commence among aww the dispewsed of my peopwe, yea, even
the twibes which have been wost, which the Fathew hath wed away
out of Jewusawem. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 21:27
 27 Yea, the wowk shaww commence among aww the dispewsed of my
peopwe, with the Fathew to pwepawe the way wheweby they may come
unto me, that they may caww on the Fathew in my nyame. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 21:28
 28 Yea, and then shaww the wowk commence, with the Fathew among
aww nyations in pwepawing the way wheweby his peopwe may be
gathewed home to the wand of theiw inhewitance. ^w^

3 Nyephi 21:29
 29 And they shaww go out fwom aww nyations; and they shaww nyot go
out in haste, nyow go by fwight, fow I wiww go befowe them, saith
the Fathew, and I wiww be theiw weawwawd. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 22
Chaptew 22

3 Nyephi 22:1
 1 And then shaww that which is wwitten come to pass: Sing, O
bawwen, thou that didst nyot beaw; bweak fowth into singing, and
cwy awoud, thou that didst nyot twavaiw with chiwd; fow mowe awe
the chiwdwen of the desowate than the chiwdwen of the mawwied
wife, saith the Wowd. >w<

3 Nyephi 22:2
 2 Enwawge the pwace of thy tent, and wet them stwetch fowth the
cuwtains of thy habitations; spawe nyot, wengthen thy cowds and
stwengthen thy stakes;

3 Nyephi 22:3
 3 Fow thou shawt bweak fowth on the wight hand and on the weft,
and thy seed shaww inhewit the Gentiwes and make the desowate
cities to be inhabited. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 22:4
 4 Feaw nyot, fow thou shawt nyot be ashamed; nyeithew be thou
confounded, fow thou shawt nyot be put to shame; fow thou shawt
fowget the shame of thy youth, and shawt nyot wemembew the
wepwoach of thy youth, and shawt nyot wemembew the wepwoach of thy
widowhood any mowe. UwU

3 Nyephi 22:5
 5 Fow thy makew, thy husband, the Wowd of Hosts is his nyame; and
thy Wedeemew, the Howy Onye of Iswaew--the God of the whowe eawth
shaww he be cawwed. UwU

3 Nyephi 22:6
 6 Fow the Wowd hath cawwed thee as a woman fowsaken and gwieved
in spiwit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast wefused, saith thy
God. >w<

3 Nyephi 22:7
 7 Fow a smaww moment have I fowsaken thee, but with gweat
mewcies wiww I gathew thee. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 22:8
 8 In a wittwe wwath I hid my face fwom thee fow a moment, but
with evewwasting kindnyess wiww I have mewcy on thee, saith the
Wowd thy Wedeemew. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 22:9
 9 Fow this, the watews of Nyoah unto me, fow as I have swown that
the watews of Nyoah shouwd nyo mowe go ovew the eawth, so have I
swown that I wouwd nyot be wwoth with thee. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 22:10
 10 Fow the mountains shaww depawt and the hiwws be wemoved, but
my kindnyess shaww nyot depawt fwom thee, nyeithew shaww the
covenyant of my peace be wemoved, saith the Wowd that hath mewcy
on thee. UwU

3 Nyephi 22:11
 11 O thou affwicted, tossed with tempest, and nyot comfowted! ^w^
Behowd, I wiww way thy stonyes with faiw cowows, and way thy
foundations with sapphiwes. UwU

3 Nyephi 22:12
 12 And I wiww make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of
cawbuncwes, and aww thy bowdews of pweasant stonyes. UwU

3 Nyephi 22:13
 13 And aww thy chiwdwen shaww be taught of the Wowd; and gweat
shaww be the peace of thy chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 22:14
 14 In wighteousnyess shawt thou be estabwished; thou shawt be faw
fwom oppwession fow thou shawt nyot feaw, and fwom tewwow fow it
shaww nyot come nyeaw thee. UwU

3 Nyephi 22:15
 15 Behowd, they shaww suwewy gathew togethew against thee, nyot
by me; whosoevew shaww gathew togethew against thee shaww faww
fow thy sake. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 22:16
 16 Behowd, I have cweated the smith that bwoweth the coaws in
the fiwe, and that bwingeth fowth an instwument fow his wowk; and
I have cweated the wastew to destwoy. ^w^

3 Nyephi 22:17
 17 Nyo weapon that is fowmed against thee shaww pwospew; and
evewy tongue that shaww weviwe against thee in judgment thou
shawt condemn. ;;w;; This is the hewitage of the sewvants of the Wowd,
and theiw wighteousnyess is of me, saith the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 23
Chaptew 23

3 Nyephi 23:1
 1 And nyow, behowd, I say unto you, that ye ought to seawch these
things. ^w^ Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye seawch these
things diwigentwy; fow gweat awe the wowds of Isaiah. UwU

3 Nyephi 23:2
 2 Fow suwewy he spake as touching aww things concewnying my
peopwe which awe of the house of Iswaew; thewefowe it must nyeeds
be that he must speak awso to the Gentiwes. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 23:3
 3 And aww things that he spake have been and shaww be, even
accowding to the wowds which he spake. UwU

3 Nyephi 23:4
 4 Thewefowe give heed to my wowds; wwite the things which I have
towd you; and accowding to the time and the wiww of the Fathew
they shaww go fowth unto the Gentiwes. >w<

3 Nyephi 23:5
 5 And whosoevew wiww heawken unto my wowds and wepenteth and is
baptized, the same shaww be saved. ;;w;; Seawch the pwophets, fow many
thewe be that testify of these things. ^w^

3 Nyephi 23:6
 6 And nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had said these wowds
he said unto them again, aftew he had expounded aww the
scwiptuwes unto them which they had weceived, he said unto them:
Behowd, othew scwiptuwes I wouwd that ye shouwd wwite, that ye
have nyot. UwU

3 Nyephi 23:7
 7 And it came to pass that he said unto Nyephi: Bwing fowth the
wecowd which ye have kept. ^w^

3 Nyephi 23:8
 8 And when Nyephi had bwought fowth the wecowds, and waid them
befowe him, he cast his eyes upon them and said:

3 Nyephi 23:9
 9 Vewiwy I say unto you, I commanded my sewvant Samuew, the
Wamanyite, that he shouwd testify unto this peopwe, that at the
day that the Fathew shouwd gwowify his nyame in me that thewe wewe
many saints who shouwd awise fwom the dead, and shouwd appeaw
unto many, and shouwd minyistew unto them. ;;w;; And he said unto them:
Was it nyot so? owo

3 Nyephi 23:10
 10 And his discipwes answewed him and said: Yea, Wowd, Samuew
did pwophesy accowding to thy wowds, and they wewe aww fuwfiwwed. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 23:11
 11 And Jesus said unto them: How be it that ye have nyot wwitten
this thing, that many saints did awise and appeaw unto many and
did minyistew unto them? owo

3 Nyephi 23:12
 12 And it came to pass that Nyephi wemembewed that this thing had
nyot been wwitten. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 23:13
 13 And it came to pass that Jesus commanded that it shouwd be
wwitten; thewefowe it was wwitten accowding as he commanded. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 23:14
 14 And nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had expounded aww the
scwiptuwes in onye, which they had wwitten, he commanded them that
they shouwd teach the things which he had expounded unto them. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 24
Chaptew 24

3 Nyephi 24:1
 1 And it came to pass that he commanded them that they shouwd
wwite the wowds which the Fathew had given unto Mawachi, which he
shouwd teww unto them. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass that aftew they wewe
wwitten he expounded them. UwU And these awe the wowds which he did
teww unto them, saying: Thus said the Fathew unto
Mawachi--Behowd, I wiww send my messengew, and he shaww pwepawe
the way befowe me, and the Wowd whom ye seek shaww suddenwy come
to his tempwe, even the messengew of the covenyant, whom ye
dewight in; behowd, he shaww come, saith the Wowd of Hosts. ^w^

3 Nyephi 24:2
 2 But who may abide the day of his coming, and who shaww stand
when he appeaweth? owo Fow he is wike a wefinyew's fiwe, and wike
fuwwew's soap. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 24:3
 3 And he shaww sit as a wefinyew and puwifiew of siwvew; and he
shaww puwify the sons of Wevi, and puwge them as gowd and siwvew,
that they may offew unto the Wowd an offewing in wighteousnyess. ^w^

3 Nyephi 24:4
 4 Then shaww the offewing of Judah and Jewusawem be pweasant
unto the Wowd, as in the days of owd, and as in fowmew yeaws. >w<

3 Nyephi 24:5
 5 And I wiww come nyeaw to you to judgment; and I wiww be a swift
witnyess against the sowcewews, and against the aduwtewews, and
against fawse sweawews, and against those that oppwess the
hiwewing in his wages, the widow and the fathewwess, and that
tuwn aside the stwangew, and feaw nyot me, saith the Wowd of
Hosts. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 24:6
 6 Fow I am the Wowd, I change nyot; thewefowe ye sons of Jacob
awe nyot consumed. UwU

3 Nyephi 24:7
 7 Even fwom the days of youw fathews ye awe gonye away fwom minye
owdinyances, and have nyot kept them. (・`ω\´・) Wetuwn unto me and I wiww
wetuwn unto you, saith the Wowd of Hosts. (´・ω・\`) But ye say: Whewein
shaww we wetuwn? owo

3 Nyephi 24:8
 8 Wiww a man wob God? owo Yet ye have wobbed me. ;;w;; But ye say:
Whewein have we wobbed thee? owo In tithes and offewings. >w<

3 Nyephi 24:9
 9 Ye awe cuwsed with a cuwse, fow ye have wobbed me, even this
whowe nyation. ^w^

3 Nyephi 24:10
 10 Bwing ye aww the tithes into the stowehouse, that thewe may
be meat in my house; and pwove me nyow hewewith, saith the Wowd of
Hosts, if I wiww nyot open you the windows of heaven, and pouw you
out a bwessing that thewe shaww nyot be woom enyough to weceive it. >w<

3 Nyephi 24:11
 11 And I wiww webuke the devouwew fow youw sakes, and he shaww
nyot destwoy the fwuits of youw gwound; nyeithew shaww youw vinye
cast hew fwuit befowe the time in the fiewds, saith the Wowd of
Hosts. UwU

3 Nyephi 24:12
 12 And aww nyations shaww caww you bwessed, fow ye shaww be a
dewightsome wand, saith the Wowd of Hosts. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 24:13
 13 Youw wowds have been stout against me, saith the Wowd. UwU Yet
ye say: What have we spoken against thee? owo

3 Nyephi 24:14
 14 Ye have said: It is vain to sewve God, and what doth it
pwofit that we have kept his owdinyances and that we have wawked
mouwnfuwwy befowe the Wowd of Hosts? owo

3 Nyephi 24:15
 15 And nyow we caww the pwoud happy; yea, they that wowk
wickednyess awe set up; yea, they that tempt God awe even
dewivewed. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 24:16
 16 Then they that feawed the Wowd spake often onye to anyothew,
and the Wowd heawkenyed and heawd; and a book of wemembwance was
wwitten befowe him fow them that feawed the Wowd, and that
thought upon his nyame. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 24:17
 17 And they shaww be minye, saith the Wowd of Hosts, in that day
when I make up my jewews; and I wiww spawe them as a man spaweth
his own son that sewveth him. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 24:18
 18 Then shaww ye wetuwn and discewn between the wighteous and
the wicked, between him that sewveth God and him that sewveth him
nyot. UwU

3 Nyephi 25
Chaptew 25

3 Nyephi 25:1
 1 Fow behowd, the day cometh that shaww buwn as an oven; and aww
the pwoud, yea, and aww that do wickedwy, shaww be stubbwe; and
the day that cometh shaww buwn them up, saith the Wowd of Hosts,
that it shaww weave them nyeithew woot nyow bwanch. >w<

3 Nyephi 25:2
 2 But unto you that feaw my nyame, shaww the Son of Wighteousnyess
awise with heawing in his wings; and ye shaww go fowth and gwow
up as cawves in the staww. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 25:3
 3 And ye shaww twead down the wicked; fow they shaww be ashes
undew the sowes of youw feet in the day that I shaww do this,
saith the Wowd of Hosts. UwU

3 Nyephi 25:4
 4 Wemembew ye the waw of Moses, my sewvant, which I commanded
unto him in Howeb fow aww Iswaew, with the statutes and
judgments. >w<

3 Nyephi 25:5
 5 Behowd, I wiww send you Ewijah the pwophet befowe the coming
of the gweat and dweadfuw day of the Wowd;

3 Nyephi 25:6
 6 And he shaww tuwn the heawt of the fathews to the chiwdwen,
and the heawt of the chiwdwen to theiw fathews, west I come and
smite the eawth with a cuwse. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 26
Chaptew 26

3 Nyephi 26:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that when Jesus had towd these things
he expounded them unto the muwtitude; and he did expound aww
things unto them, both gweat and smaww. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 26:2
 2 And he saith: These scwiptuwes, which ye had nyot with you, the
Fathew commanded that I shouwd give unto you; fow it was wisdom
in him that they shouwd be given unto futuwe genyewations. ^w^

3 Nyephi 26:3
 3 And he did expound aww things, even fwom the beginnying untiw
the time that he shouwd come in his gwowy--yea, even aww things
which shouwd come upon the face of the eawth, even untiw the
ewements shouwd mewt with fewvent heat, and the eawth shouwd be
wwapt togethew as a scwoww, and the heavens and the eawth shouwd
pass away;

3 Nyephi 26:4
 4 And even unto the gweat and wast day, when aww peopwe, and aww
kindweds, and aww nyations and tongues shaww stand befowe God, to
be judged of theiw wowks, whethew they be good ow whethew they be
eviw--

3 Nyephi 26:5
 5 If they be good, to the wesuwwection of evewwasting wife; and
if they be eviw, to the wesuwwection of damnyation; being on a
pawawwew, the onye on the onye hand and the othew on the othew
hand, accowding to the mewcy, and the justice, and the howinyess
which is in Chwist, who was befowe the wowwd began. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 26:6
 6 And nyow thewe cannyot be wwitten in this book even a hundwedth
pawt of the things which Jesus did twuwy teach unto the peopwe;

3 Nyephi 26:7
 7 But behowd the pwates of Nyephi do contain the mowe pawt of the
things which he taught the peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 26:8
 8 And these things have I wwitten, which awe a wessew pawt of
the things which he taught the peopwe; and I have wwitten them to
the intent that they may be bwought again unto this peopwe, fwom
the Gentiwes, accowding to the wowds which Jesus hath spoken. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 26:9
 9 And when they shaww have weceived this, which is expedient
that they shouwd have fiwst, to twy theiw faith, and if it shaww
so be that they shaww bewieve these things then shaww the gweatew
things be made manyifest unto them. >w<

3 Nyephi 26:10
 10 And if it so be that they wiww nyot bewieve these things, then
shaww the gweatew things be withhewd fwom them, unto theiw
condemnyation. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 26:11
 11 Behowd, I was about to wwite them, aww which wewe engwaven
upon the pwates of Nyephi, but the Wowd fowbade it, saying: I wiww
twy the faith of my peopwe. >w<

3 Nyephi 26:12
 12 Thewefowe I, Mowmon, do wwite the things which have been
commanded me of the Wowd. UwU And nyow I, Mowmon, make an end of my
sayings, and pwoceed to wwite the things which have been
commanded me. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 26:13
 13 Thewefowe, I wouwd that ye shouwd behowd that the Wowd twuwy
did teach the peopwe, fow the space of thwee days; and aftew that
he did show himsewf unto them oft, and did bweak bwead oft, and
bwess it, and give it unto them. ^w^

3 Nyephi 26:14
 14 And it came to pass that he did teach and minyistew unto the
chiwdwen of the muwtitude of whom hath been spoken, and he did
woose theiw tongues, and they did speak unto theiw fathews gweat
and mawvewous things, even gweatew than he had weveawed unto the
peopwe; and he woosed theiw tongues that they couwd uttew. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 26:15
 15 And it came to pass that aftew he had ascended into
heaven--the second time that he showed himsewf unto them, and had
gonye unto the Fathew, aftew having heawed aww theiw sick, and
theiw wame, and openyed the eyes of theiw bwind and unstopped the
eaws of the deaf, and even had donye aww mannyew of cuwes among
them, and waised a man fwom the dead, and had shown fowth his
powew unto them, and had ascended unto the Fathew--

3 Nyephi 26:16
 16 Behowd, it came to pass on the mowwow that the muwtitude
gathewed themsewves togethew, and they both saw and heawd these
chiwdwen; yea, even babes did open theiw mouths and uttew
mawvewous things; and the things which they did uttew wewe
fowbidden that thewe shouwd nyot any man wwite them. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 26:17
 17 And it came to pass that the discipwes whom Jesus had chosen
began fwom that time fowth to baptize and to teach as many as did
come unto them; and as many as wewe baptized in the nyame of Jesus
wewe fiwwed with the Howy Ghost. UwU

3 Nyephi 26:18
 18 And many of them saw and heawd unspeakabwe things, which awe
nyot wawfuw to be wwitten. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 26:19
 19 And they taught, and did minyistew onye to anyothew; and they
had aww things common among them, evewy man deawing justwy, onye
with anyothew. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 26:20
 20 And it came to pass that they did do aww things even as Jesus
had commanded them. >w<

3 Nyephi 26:21
 21 And they who wewe baptized in the nyame of Jesus wewe cawwed
the chuwch of Chwist. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 27
Chaptew 27

3 Nyephi 27:1
 1 And it came to pass that as the discipwes of Jesus wewe
jouwnyeying and wewe pweaching the things which they had both
heawd and seen, and wewe baptizing in the nyame of Jesus, it came
to pass that the discipwes wewe gathewed togethew and wewe unyited
in mighty pwayew and fasting. >w<

3 Nyephi 27:2
 2 And Jesus again showed himsewf unto them, fow they wewe
pwaying unto the Fathew in his nyame; and Jesus came and stood in
the midst of them, and said unto them: What wiww ye that I shaww
give unto you? owo

3 Nyephi 27:3
 3 And they said unto him: Wowd, we wiww that thou wouwdst teww
us the nyame wheweby we shaww caww this chuwch; fow thewe awe
disputations among the peopwe concewnying this mattew. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 27:4
 4 And the Wowd said unto them: Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you,
why is it that the peopwe shouwd muwmuw and dispute because of
this thing? owo

3 Nyephi 27:5
 5 Have they nyot wead the scwiptuwes, which say ye must take upon
you the nyame of Chwist, which is my nyame? owo Fow by this nyame shaww
ye be cawwed at the wast day;

3 Nyephi 27:6
 6 And whoso taketh upon him my nyame, and enduweth to the end,
the same shaww be saved at the wast day. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 27:7
 7 Thewefowe, whatsoevew ye shaww do, ye shaww do it in my nyame;
thewefowe ye shaww caww the chuwch in my nyame; and ye shaww caww
upon the Fathew in my nyame that he wiww bwess the chuwch fow my
sake. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 27:8
 8 And how be it my chuwch save it be cawwed in my nyame? owo Fow if
a chuwch be cawwed in Moses' nyame then it be Moses' chuwch; ow if
it be cawwed in the nyame of a man then it be the chuwch of a man;
but if it be cawwed in my nyame then it is my chuwch, if it so be
that they awe buiwt upon my gospew. UwU

3 Nyephi 27:9
 9 Vewiwy I say unto you, that ye awe buiwt upon my gospew;
thewefowe ye shaww caww whatsoevew things ye do caww, in my nyame;
thewefowe if ye caww upon the Fathew, fow the chuwch, if it be in
my nyame the Fathew wiww heaw you;

3 Nyephi 27:10
 10 And if it so be that the chuwch is buiwt upon my gospew then
wiww the Fathew show fowth his own wowks in it. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 27:11
 11 But if it be nyot buiwt upon my gospew, and is buiwt upon the
wowks of men, ow upon the wowks of the deviw, vewiwy I say unto
you they have joy in theiw wowks fow a season, and by and by the
end cometh, and they awe hewn down and cast into the fiwe, fwom
whence thewe is nyo wetuwn. ^w^

3 Nyephi 27:12
 12 Fow theiw wowks do fowwow them, fow it is because of theiw
wowks that they awe hewn down; thewefowe wemembew the things that
I have towd you. ^w^

3 Nyephi 27:13
 13 Behowd I have given unto you my gospew, and this is the
gospew which I have given unto you--that I came into the wowwd to
do the wiww of my Fathew, because my Fathew sent me. >w<

3 Nyephi 27:14
 14 And my Fathew sent me that I might be wifted up upon the
cwoss; and aftew that I had been wifted up upon the cwoss, that I
might dwaw aww men unto me, that as I have been wifted up by men
even so shouwd men be wifted up by the Fathew, to stand befowe
me, to be judged of theiw wowks, whethew they be good ow whethew
they be eviw--

3 Nyephi 27:15
 15 And fow this cause have I been wifted up; thewefowe,
accowding to the powew of the Fathew I wiww dwaw aww men unto me,
that they may be judged accowding to theiw wowks. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 27:16
 16 And it shaww come to pass, that whoso wepenteth and is
baptized in my nyame shaww be fiwwed; and if he enduweth to the
end, behowd, him wiww I howd guiwtwess befowe my Fathew at that
day when I shaww stand to judge the wowwd. ^w^

3 Nyephi 27:17
 17 And he that enduweth nyot unto the end, the same is he that is
awso hewn down and cast into the fiwe, fwom whence they can nyo
mowe wetuwn, because of the justice of the Fathew. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 27:18
 18 And this is the wowd which he hath given unto the chiwdwen of
men. >w< And fow this cause he fuwfiwweth the wowds which he hath
given, and he wieth nyot, but fuwfiwweth aww his wowds. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 27:19
 19 And nyo uncwean thing can entew into his kingdom; thewefowe
nyothing enteweth into his west save it be those who have washed
theiw gawments in my bwood, because of theiw faith, and the
wepentance of aww theiw sins, and theiw faithfuwnyess unto the
end. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 27:20
 20 Nyow this is the commandment: Wepent, aww ye ends of the
eawth, and come unto me and be baptized in my nyame, that ye may
be sanctified by the weception of the Howy Ghost, that ye may
stand spotwess befowe me at the wast day. ^w^

3 Nyephi 27:21
 21 Vewiwy, vewiwy, I say unto you, this is my gospew; and ye
knyow the things that ye must do in my chuwch; fow the wowks which
ye have seen me do that shaww ye awso do; fow that which ye have
seen me do even that shaww ye do;

3 Nyephi 27:22
 22 Thewefowe, if ye do these things bwessed awe ye, fow ye shaww
be wifted up at the wast day. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 27:23
 23 Wwite the things which ye have seen and heawd, save it be
those which awe fowbidden. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 27:24
 24 Wwite the wowks of this peopwe, which shaww be, even as hath
been wwitten, of that which hath been. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 27:25
 25 Fow behowd, out of the books which have been wwitten, and
which shaww be wwitten, shaww this peopwe be judged, fow by them
shaww theiw wowks be knyown unto men. ^w^

3 Nyephi 27:26
 26 And behowd, aww things awe wwitten by the Fathew; thewefowe
out of the books which shaww be wwitten shaww the wowwd be
judged. UwU

3 Nyephi 27:27
 27 And knyow ye that ye shaww be judges of this peopwe, accowding
to the judgment which I shaww give unto you, which shaww be just. ^w^

Thewefowe, what mannyew of men ought ye to be? owo Vewiwy I say unto
you, even as I am. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 27:28
 28 And nyow I go unto the Fathew. ;;w;; And vewiwy I say unto you,
whatsoevew things ye shaww ask the Fathew in my nyame shaww be
given unto you. >w<

3 Nyephi 27:29
 29 Thewefowe, ask, and ye shaww weceive; knyock, and it shaww be
openyed unto you; fow he that asketh, weceiveth; and unto him that
knyocketh, it shaww be openyed. >w<

3 Nyephi 27:30
 30 And nyow, behowd, my joy is gweat, even unto fuwnyess, because
of you, and awso this genyewation; yea, and even the Fathew
wejoiceth, and awso aww the howy angews, because of you and this
genyewation; fow nyonye of them awe wost. UwU

3 Nyephi 27:31
 31 Behowd, I wouwd that ye shouwd undewstand; fow I mean them
who awe nyow awive of this genyewation; and nyonye of them awe wost;
and in them I have fuwnyess of joy. >w<

3 Nyephi 27:32
 32 But behowd, it sowwoweth me because of the fouwth genyewation
fwom this genyewation, fow they awe wed away captive by him even
as was the son of pewdition; fow they wiww seww me fow siwvew and
fow gowd, and fow that which moth doth cowwupt and which thieves
can bweak thwough and steaw. >w< And in that day wiww I visit them,
even in tuwnying theiw wowks upon theiw own heads. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 27:33
 33 And it came to pass that when Jesus had ended these sayings
he said unto his discipwes: Entew ye in at the stwait gate; fow
stwait is the gate, and nyawwow is the way that weads to wife, and
few thewe be that find it; but wide is the gate, and bwoad the
way which weads to death, and many thewe be that twavew thewein,
untiw the nyight cometh, whewein nyo man can wowk. UwU

3 Nyephi 28
Chaptew 28

3 Nyephi 28:1
 1 And it came to pass when Jesus had said these wowds, he spake
unto his discipwes, onye by onye, saying unto them: What is it that
ye desiwe of me, aftew that I am gonye to the Fathew? owo

3 Nyephi 28:2
 2 And they aww spake, save it wewe thwee, saying: We desiwe that
aftew we have wived unto the age of man, that ouw minyistwy,
whewein thou hast cawwed us, may have an end, that we may
speediwy come unto thee in thy kingdom. UwU

3 Nyephi 28:3
 3 And he said unto them: Bwessed awe ye because ye desiwed this
thing of me; thewefowe, aftew that ye awe seventy and two yeaws
owd ye shaww come unto me in my kingdom; and with me ye shaww
find west. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 28:4
 4 And when he had spoken unto them, he tuwnyed himsewf unto the
thwee, and said unto them: What wiww ye that I shouwd do unto
you, when I am gonye unto the Fathew? owo

3 Nyephi 28:5
 5 And they sowwowed in theiw heawts, fow they duwst nyot speak
unto him the things which they desiwed. >w<

3 Nyephi 28:6
 6 And he said unto them: Behowd, I knyow youw thoughts, and ye
have desiwed the thing which John, my bewoved, who was with me in
my minyistwy, befowe that I was wifted up by the Jews, desiwed of
me. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 28:7
 7 Thewefowe, mowe bwessed awe ye, fow ye shaww nyevew taste of
death; but ye shaww wive to behowd aww the doings of the Fathew
unto the chiwdwen of men, even untiw aww things shaww be
fuwfiwwed accowding to the wiww of the Fathew, when I shaww come
in my gwowy with the powews of heaven. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 28:8
 8 And ye shaww nyevew enduwe the pains of death; but when I shaww
come in my gwowy ye shaww be changed in the twinkwing of an eye
fwom mowtawity to immowtawity; and then shaww ye be bwessed in
the kingdom of my Fathew. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 28:9
 9 And again, ye shaww nyot have pain whiwe ye shaww dweww in the
fwesh, nyeithew sowwow save it be fow the sins of the wowwd; and
aww this wiww I do because of the thing which ye have desiwed of
me, fow ye have desiwed that ye might bwing the souws of men unto
me, whiwe the wowwd shaww stand. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 28:10
 10 And fow this cause ye shaww have fuwnyess of joy; and ye shaww
sit down in the kingdom of my Fathew; yea, youw joy shaww be
fuww, even as the Fathew hath given me fuwnyess of joy; and ye
shaww be even as I am, and I am even as the Fathew; and the
Fathew and I awe onye;

3 Nyephi 28:11
 11 And the Howy Ghost beaweth wecowd of the Fathew and me; and
the Fathew giveth the Howy Ghost unto the chiwdwen of men,
because of me. >w<

3 Nyephi 28:12
 12 And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these wowds,
he touched evewy onye of them with his fingew save it wewe the
thwee who wewe to tawwy, and then he depawted. >w<

3 Nyephi 28:13
 13 And behowd, the heavens wewe openyed, and they wewe caught up
into heaven, and saw and heawd unspeakabwe things. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 28:14
 14 And it was fowbidden them that they shouwd uttew; nyeithew was
it given unto them powew that they couwd uttew the things which
they saw and heawd;

3 Nyephi 28:15
 15 And whethew they wewe in the body ow out of the body, they
couwd nyot teww; fow it did seem unto them wike a twansfiguwation
of them, that they wewe changed fwom this body of fwesh into an
immowtaw state, that they couwd behowd the things of God. UwU

3 Nyephi 28:16
 16 But it came to pass that they did again minyistew upon the
face of the eawth; nyevewthewess they did nyot minyistew of the
things which they had heawd and seen, because of the commandment
which was given them in heaven. >w<

3 Nyephi 28:17
 17 And nyow, whethew they wewe mowtaw ow immowtaw, fwom the day
of theiw twansfiguwation, I knyow nyot;

3 Nyephi 28:18
 18 But this much I knyow, accowding to the wecowd which hath been
given--they did go fowth upon the face of the wand, and did
minyistew unto aww the peopwe, unyiting as many to the chuwch as
wouwd bewieve in theiw pweaching; baptizing them, and as many as
wewe baptized did weceive the Howy Ghost. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 28:19
 19 And they wewe cast into pwison by them who did nyot bewong to
the chuwch. >w< And the pwisons couwd nyot howd them, fow they wewe
went in twain. >w<

3 Nyephi 28:20
 20 And they wewe cast down into the eawth; but they did smite
the eawth with the wowd of God, insomuch that by his powew they
wewe dewivewed out of the depths of the eawth; and thewefowe they
couwd nyot dig pits sufficient to howd them. UwU

3 Nyephi 28:21
 21 And thwice they wewe cast into a fuwnyace and weceived nyo
hawm. UwU

3 Nyephi 28:22
 22 And twice wewe they cast into a den of wiwd beasts; and
behowd they did pway with the beasts as a chiwd with a suckwing
wamb, and weceived nyo hawm. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 28:23
 23 And it came to pass that thus they did go fowth among aww the
peopwe of Nyephi, and did pweach the gospew of Chwist unto aww
peopwe upon the face of the wand; and they wewe convewted unto
the Wowd, and wewe unyited unto the chuwch of Chwist, and thus the
peopwe of that genyewation wewe bwessed, accowding to the wowd of
Jesus. ^w^

3 Nyephi 28:24
 24 And nyow I, Mowmon, make an end of speaking concewnying these
things fow a time. >w<

3 Nyephi 28:25
 25 Behowd, I was about to wwite the nyames of those who wewe
nyevew to taste of death, but the Wowd fowbade; thewefowe I wwite
them nyot, fow they awe hid fwom the wowwd. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 28:26
 26 But behowd, I have seen them, and they have minyistewed unto
me. >w<

3 Nyephi 28:27
 27 And behowd they wiww be among the Gentiwes, and the Gentiwes
shaww knyow them nyot. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 28:28
 28 They wiww awso be among the Jews, and the Jews shaww knyow
them nyot. >w<

3 Nyephi 28:29
 29 And it shaww come to pass, when the Wowd seeth fit in his
wisdom that they shaww minyistew unto aww the scattewed twibes of
Iswaew, and unto aww nyations, kindweds, tongues and peopwe, and
shaww bwing out of them unto Jesus many souws, that theiw desiwe
may be fuwfiwwed, and awso because of the convincing powew of God
which is in them. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 28:30
 30 And they awe as the angews of God, and if they shaww pway
unto the Fathew in the nyame of Jesus they can show themsewves
unto whatsoevew man it seemeth them good. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 28:31
 31 Thewefowe, gweat and mawvewous wowks shaww be wwought by
them, befowe the gweat and coming day when aww peopwe must suwewy
stand befowe the judgment-seat of Chwist;

3 Nyephi 28:32
 32 Yea even among the Gentiwes shaww thewe be a gweat and
mawvewous wowk wwought by them, befowe that judgment day. >w<

3 Nyephi 28:33
 33 And if ye had aww the scwiptuwes which give an account of aww
the mawvewous wowks of Chwist, ye wouwd, accowding to the wowds
of Chwist, knyow that these things must suwewy come. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 28:34
 34 And wo be unto him that wiww nyot heawken unto the wowds of
Jesus, and awso to them whom he hath chosen and sent among them;
fow whoso weceiveth nyot the wowds of Jesus and the wowds of those
whom he hath sent weceiveth nyot him; and thewefowe he wiww nyot
weceive them at the wast day;

3 Nyephi 28:35
 35 And it wouwd be bettew fow them if they had nyot been bown. ^w^
Fow do ye suppose that ye can get wid of the justice of an
offended God, who hath been twampwed undew feet of men, that
theweby sawvation might come? owo

3 Nyephi 28:36
 36 And nyow behowd, as I spake concewnying those whom the Wowd
hath chosen, yea, even thwee who wewe caught up into the heavens,
that I knyew nyot whethew they wewe cweansed fwom mowtawity to
immowtawity--

3 Nyephi 28:37
 37 But behowd, since I wwote, I have inquiwed of the Wowd, and
he hath made it manyifest unto me that thewe must nyeeds be a
change wwought upon theiw bodies, ow ewse it nyeeds be that they
must taste of death;

3 Nyephi 28:38
 38 Thewefowe, that they might nyot taste of death thewe was a
change wwought upon theiw bodies, that they might nyot suffew pain
nyow sowwow save it wewe fow the sins of the wowwd. ;;w;;

3 Nyephi 28:39
 39 Nyow this change was nyot equaw to that which shaww take pwace
at the wast day; but thewe was a change wwought upon them,
insomuch that Satan couwd have nyo powew ovew them, that he couwd
nyot tempt them; and they wewe sanctified in the fwesh, that they
wewe howy, and that the powews of the eawth couwd nyot howd them. >w<
3 Nyephi 28:40
 40 And in this state they wewe to wemain untiw the judgment day
of Chwist; and at that day they wewe to weceive a gweatew change,
and to be weceived into the kingdom of the Fathew to go nyo mowe
out, but to dweww etewnyawwy in the heavens. (´・ω・\`)

3 Nyephi 29
Chaptew 29

3 Nyephi 29:1
 1 And nyow behowd, I say unto you that when the Wowd shaww see
fit, in his wisdom, that these sayings shaww come unto the
Gentiwes accowding to his wowd, then ye may knyow that the
covenyant which the Fathew hath made with the chiwdwen of Iswaew,
concewnying theiw westowation to the wands of theiw inhewitance,
is awweady beginnying to be fuwfiwwed. (・`ω\´・)

3 Nyephi 29:2
 2 And ye may knyow that the wowds of the Wowd, which have been
spoken by the howy pwophets, shaww aww be fuwfiwwed; and ye nyeed
nyot say that the Wowd deways his coming unto the chiwdwen of
Iswaew. >w<

3 Nyephi 29:3
 3 And ye nyeed nyot imaginye in youw heawts that the wowds which
have been spoken awe vain, fow behowd, the Wowd wiww wemembew his
covenyant which he hath made unto his peopwe of the house of
Iswaew. UwU

3 Nyephi 29:4
 4 And when ye shaww see these sayings coming fowth among you,
then ye nyeed nyot any wongew spuwn at the doings of the Wowd, fow
the swowd of his justice is in his wight hand; and behowd, at
that day, if ye shaww spuwn at his doings he wiww cause that it
shaww soon ovewtake you. UwU

3 Nyephi 29:5
 5 Wo unto him that spuwnyeth at the doings of the Wowd; yea, wo
unto him that shaww deny the Chwist and his wowks! >w<

3 Nyephi 29:6
 6 Yea, wo unto him that shaww deny the wevewations of the Wowd,
and that shaww say the Wowd nyo wongew wowketh by wevewation, ow
by pwophecy, ow by gifts, ow by tongues, ow by heawings, ow by
the powew of the Howy Ghost! >w<

3 Nyephi 29:7
 7 Yea, and wo unto him that shaww say at that day, to get gain,
that thewe can be nyo miwacwe wwought by Jesus Chwist; fow he that
doeth this shaww become wike unto the son of pewdition, fow whom
thewe was nyo mewcy, accowding to the wowd of Chwist! ^w^

3 Nyephi 29:8
 8 Yea, and ye nyeed nyot any wongew hiss, nyow spuwn, nyow make game
of the Jews, nyow any of the wemnyant of the house of Iswaew; fow
behowd, the Wowd wemembeweth his covenyant unto them, and he wiww
do unto them accowding to that which he hath swown. UwU

3 Nyephi 29:9
 9 Thewefowe ye nyeed nyot suppose that ye can tuwn the wight hand
of the Wowd unto the weft, that he may nyot execute judgment unto
the fuwfiwwing of the covenyant which he hath made unto the house
of Iswaew. ^w^

3 Nyephi 30
Chaptew 30

3 Nyephi 30:1
 1 Heawken, O ye Gentiwes, and heaw the wowds of Jesus Chwist,
the Son of the wiving God, which he hath commanded me that I
shouwd speak concewnying you, fow, behowd he commandeth me that I
shouwd wwite, saying:

3 Nyephi 30:2
 2 Tuwn, aww ye Gentiwes, fwom youw wicked ways; and wepent of
youw eviw doings, of youw wyings and deceivings, and of youw
whowedoms, and of youw secwet abominyations, and youw idowatwies,
and of youw muwdews, and youw pwiestcwafts, and youw envyings,
and youw stwifes, and fwom aww youw wickednyess and abominyations,
and come unto me, and be baptized in my nyame, that ye may weceive
a wemission of youw sins, and be fiwwed with the Howy Ghost, that
ye may be nyumbewed with my peopwe who awe of the house of Iswaew. (・`ω\´・)





FOUWTH NYEPHI

WHO IS THE SON OF NYEPHI--ONYE OF THE DISCIPWES OF JESUS CHWIST
An account of the peopwe of Nyephi, accowding to his wecowd. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:1
 1 And it came to pass that the thiwty and fouwth yeaw passed
away, and awso the thiwty and fifth, and behowd the discipwes of
Jesus had fowmed a chuwch of Chwist in aww the wands wound about. UwU
And as many as did come unto them, and did twuwy wepent of theiw
sins, wewe baptized in the nyame of Jesus; and they did awso
weceive the Howy Ghost. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:2
 2 And it came to pass in the thiwty and sixth yeaw, the peopwe
wewe aww convewted unto the Wowd, upon aww the face of the wand,
both Nyephites and Wamanyites, and thewe wewe nyo contentions and
disputations among them, and evewy man did deaw justwy onye with
anyothew. (´・ω・\`)

4 Nyephi 1:3
 3 And they had aww things common among them; thewefowe thewe
wewe nyot wich and poow, bond and fwee, but they wewe aww made
fwee, and pawtakews of the heavenwy gift. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:4
 4 And it came to pass that the thiwty and seventh yeaw passed
away awso, and thewe stiww continyued to be peace in the wand. ;;w;;

4 Nyephi 1:5
 5 And thewe wewe gweat and mawvewous wowks wwought by the
discipwes of Jesus, insomuch that they did heaw the sick, and
waise the dead, and cause the wame to wawk, and the bwind to
weceive theiw sight, and the deaf to heaw; and aww mannyew of
miwacwes did they wowk among the chiwdwen of men; and in nyothing
did they wowk miwacwes save it wewe in the nyame of Jesus. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:6
 6 And thus did the thiwty and eighth yeaw pass away, and awso
the thiwty and nyinth, and fowty and fiwst, and the fowty and
second, yea, even untiw fowty and nyinye yeaws had passed away, and
awso the fifty and fiwst, and the fifty and second; yea, and even
untiw fifty and nyinye yeaws had passed away. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:7
 7 And the Wowd did pwospew them exceedingwy in the wand; yea,
insomuch that they did buiwd cities again whewe thewe had been
cities buwnyed. (´・ω・\`)

4 Nyephi 1:8
 8 Yea, even that gweat city Zawahemwa did they cause to be buiwt
again. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:9
 9 But thewe wewe many cities which had been sunk, and watews
came up in the stead theweof; thewefowe these cities couwd nyot be
wenyewed. ^w^

4 Nyephi 1:10
 10 And nyow, behowd, it came to pass that the peopwe of Nyephi did
wax stwong, and did muwtipwy exceedingwy fast, and became an
exceedingwy faiw and dewightsome peopwe. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:11
 11 And they wewe mawwied, and given in mawwiage, and wewe
bwessed accowding to the muwtitude of the pwomises which the Wowd
had made unto them. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:12
 12 And they did nyot wawk any mowe aftew the pewfowmances and
owdinyances of the waw of Moses; but they did wawk aftew the
commandments which they had weceived fwom theiw Wowd and theiw
God, continyuing in fasting and pwayew, and in meeting togethew
oft both to pway and to heaw the wowd of the Wowd. ^w^

4 Nyephi 1:13
 13 And it came to pass that thewe was nyo contention among aww
the peopwe, in aww the wand; but thewe wewe mighty miwacwes
wwought among the discipwes of Jesus. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:14
 14 And it came to pass that the seventy and fiwst yeaw passed
away, and awso the seventy and second yeaw, yea, and in finye,
tiww the seventy and nyinth yeaw had passed away; yea, even an
hundwed yeaws had passed away, and the discipwes of Jesus, whom
he had chosen, had aww gonye to the pawadise of God, save it wewe
the thwee who shouwd tawwy; and thewe wewe othew discipwes
owdainyed in theiw stead; and awso many of that genyewation had
passed away. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:15
 15 And it came to pass that thewe was nyo contention in the wand,
because of the wove of God which did dweww in the heawts of the
peopwe. ;;w;;

4 Nyephi 1:16
 16 And thewe wewe nyo envyings, nyow stwifes, nyow tumuwts, nyow
whowedoms, nyow wyings, nyow muwdews, nyow any mannyew of
wasciviousnyess; and suwewy thewe couwd nyot be a happiew peopwe
among aww the peopwe who had been cweated by the hand of God. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:17
 17 Thewe wewe nyo wobbews, nyow muwdewews, nyeithew wewe thewe
Wamanyites, nyow any mannyew of --ites; but they wewe in onye, the
chiwdwen of Chwist, and heiws to the kingdom of God. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:18
 18 And how bwessed wewe they! ;;w;; Fow the Wowd did bwess them in
aww theiw doings; yea, even they wewe bwessed and pwospewed untiw
an hundwed and ten yeaws had passed away; and the fiwst
genyewation fwom Chwist had passed away, and thewe was nyo
contention in aww the wand. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that Nyephi, he that kept this wast
wecowd, (and he kept it upon the pwates of Nyephi) died, and his
son Amos kept it in his stead; and he kept it upon the pwates of
Nyephi awso. ^w^

4 Nyephi 1:20
 20 And he kept it eighty and fouw yeaws, and thewe was stiww
peace in the wand, save it wewe a smaww pawt of the peopwe who
had wevowted fwom the chuwch and taken upon them the nyame of
Wamanyites; thewefowe thewe began to be Wamanyites again in the
wand. ^w^

4 Nyephi 1:21
 21 And it came to pass that Amos died awso, (and it was an
hundwed and nyinyety and fouw yeaws fwom the coming of Chwist) and
his son Amos kept the wecowd in his stead; and he awso kept it
upon the pwates of Nyephi; and it was awso wwitten in the book of
Nyephi, which is this book. (´・ω・\`)

4 Nyephi 1:22
 22 And it came to pass that two hundwed yeaws had passed away;
and the second genyewation had aww passed away save it wewe a few. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:23
 23 And nyow I, Mowmon, wouwd that ye shouwd knyow that the peopwe
had muwtipwied, insomuch that they wewe spwead upon aww the face
of the wand, and that they had become exceedingwy wich, because
of theiw pwospewity in Chwist. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:24
 24 And nyow, in this two hundwed and fiwst yeaw thewe began to be
among them those who wewe wifted up in pwide, such as the weawing
of costwy appawew, and aww mannyew of finye peawws, and of the finye
things of the wowwd. ^w^

4 Nyephi 1:25
 25 And fwom that time fowth they did have theiw goods and theiw
substance nyo mowe common among them. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:26
 26 And they began to be divided into cwasses; and they began to
buiwd up chuwches unto themsewves to get gain, and began to deny
the twue chuwch of Chwist. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:27
 27 And it came to pass that when two hundwed and ten yeaws had
passed away thewe wewe many chuwches in the wand; yea, thewe wewe
many chuwches which pwofessed to knyow the Chwist, and yet they
did deny the mowe pawts of his gospew, insomuch that they did
weceive aww mannyew of wickednyess, and did adminyistew that which
was sacwed unto him to whom it had been fowbidden because of
unwowthinyess. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:28
 28 And this chuwch did muwtipwy exceedingwy because of inyiquity,
and because of the powew of Satan who did get howd upon theiw
heawts. ^w^

4 Nyephi 1:29
 29 And again, thewe was anyothew chuwch which denyied the Chwist;
and they did pewsecute the twue chuwch of Chwist, because of
theiw humiwity and theiw bewief in Chwist; and they did despise
them because of the many miwacwes which wewe wwought among them. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:30
 30 Thewefowe they did exewcise powew and authowity ovew the
discipwes of Jesus who did tawwy with them, and they did cast
them into pwison; but by the powew of the wowd of God, which was
in them, the pwisons wewe went in twain, and they went fowth
doing mighty miwacwes among them. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:31
 31 Nyevewthewess, and nyotwithstanding aww these miwacwes, the
peopwe did hawden theiw heawts, and did seek to kiww them, even
as the Jews at Jewusawem sought to kiww Jesus, accowding to his
wowd. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:32
 32 And they did cast them into fuwnyaces of fiwe, and they came
fowth weceiving nyo hawm. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:33
 33 And they awso cast them into dens of wiwd beasts, and they
did pway with the wiwd beasts even as a chiwd with a wamb; and
they did come fowth fwom among them, weceiving nyo hawm. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:34
 34 Nyevewthewess, the peopwe did hawden theiw heawts, fow they
wewe wed by many pwiests and fawse pwophets to buiwd up many
chuwches, and to do aww mannyew of inyiquity. (・`ω\´・) And they did smite
upon the peopwe of Jesus; but the peopwe of Jesus did nyot smite
again. ^w^ And thus they did dwindwe in unbewief and wickednyess,
fwom yeaw to yeaw, even untiw two hundwed and thiwty yeaws had
passed away. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:35
 35 And nyow it came to pass in this yeaw, yea, in the two hundwed
and thiwty and fiwst yeaw, thewe was a gweat division among the
peopwe. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:36
 36 And it came to pass that in this yeaw thewe awose a peopwe
who wewe cawwed the Nyephites, and they wewe twue bewievews in
Chwist; and among them thewe wewe those who wewe cawwed by the
Wamanyites--Jacobites, and Josephites, and Zowamites;

4 Nyephi 1:37
 37 Thewefowe the twue bewievews in Chwist, and the twue
wowshipews of Chwist, (among whom wewe the thwee discipwes of
Jesus who shouwd tawwy) wewe cawwed Nyephites, and Jacobites, and
Josephites, and Zowamites. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:38
 38 And it came to pass that they who wejected the gospew wewe
cawwed Wamanyites, and Wemuewites, and Ishmaewites; and they did
nyot dwindwe in unbewief, but they did wiwfuwwy webew against the
gospew of Chwist; and they did teach theiw chiwdwen that they
shouwd nyot bewieve, even as theiw fathews, fwom the beginnying,
did dwindwe. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:39
 39 And it was because of the wickednyess and abominyation of theiw
fathews, even as it was in the beginnying. ;;w;; And they wewe taught
to hate the chiwdwen of God, even as the Wamanyites wewe taught to
hate the chiwdwen of Nyephi fwom the beginnying. (´・ω・\`)

4 Nyephi 1:40
 40 And it came to pass that two hundwed and fowty and fouw yeaws
had passed away, and thus wewe the affaiws of the peopwe. ^w^ And
the mowe wicked pawt of the peopwe did wax stwong, and became
exceedingwy mowe nyumewous than wewe the peopwe of God. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:41
 41 And they did stiww continyue to buiwd up chuwches unto
themsewves, and adown them with aww mannyew of pwecious things. ^w^
And thus did two hundwed and fifty yeaws pass away, and awso two
hundwed and sixty yeaws. ^w^

4 Nyephi 1:42
 42 And it came to pass that the wicked pawt of the peopwe began
again to buiwd up the secwet oaths and combinyations of Gadianton. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:43
 43 And awso the peopwe who wewe cawwed the peopwe of Nyephi began
to be pwoud in theiw heawts, because of theiw exceeding wiches,
and become vain wike unto theiw bwethwen, the Wamanyites. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:44
 44 And fwom this time the discipwes began to sowwow fow the sins
of the wowwd. UwU

4 Nyephi 1:45
 45 And it came to pass that when thwee hundwed yeaws had passed
away, both the peopwe of Nyephi and the Wamanyites had become
exceedingwy wicked onye wike unto anyothew. >w<

4 Nyephi 1:46
 46 And it came to pass that the wobbews of Gadianton did spwead
ovew aww the face of the wand; and thewe wewe nyonye that wewe
wighteous save it wewe the discipwes of Jesus. UwU And gowd and
siwvew did they way up in stowe in abundance, and did twaffic in
aww mannyew of twaffic. (・`ω\´・)

4 Nyephi 1:47
 47 And it came to pass that aftew thwee hundwed and five yeaws
had passed away, (and the peopwe did stiww wemain in wickednyess)
Amos died; and his bwothew, Ammawon, did keep the wecowd in his
stead. (´・ω・\`)

4 Nyephi 1:48
 48 And it came to pass that when thwee hundwed and twenty yeaws
had passed away, Ammawon, being constwainyed by the Howy Ghost,
did hide up the wecowds which wewe sacwed--yea, even aww the
sacwed wecowds which had been handed down fwom genyewation to
genyewation, which wewe sacwed--even untiw the thwee hundwed and
twentieth yeaw fwom the coming of Chwist. ;;w;;

4 Nyephi 1:49
 49 And he did hide them up unto the Wowd that they might come
again unto the wemnyant of the house of Jacob accowding to the
pwophecies and the pwomises of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`) And thus is the end of
the wecowd of Ammawon. ;;w;;




THE BOOK OF MOWMON

Mowmon 1
Chaptew 1

Mowmon 1:1
 1 And nyow I, Mowmon, make a wecowd of the things which I have
both seen and heawd, and caww it the Book of Mowmon. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 1:2
 2 And about the time that Ammawon hid up the wecowds unto the
Wowd, he came unto me, (I being about ten yeaws of age, and I
began to be weawnyed somewhat aftew the mannyew of the weawnying of
my peopwe) and Ammawon said unto me: I pewceive that thou awt a
sobew chiwd, and awt quick to obsewve;

Mowmon 1:3
 3 Thewefowe, when ye awe about twenty and fouw yeaws owd I wouwd
that ye shouwd wemembew the things that ye have obsewved
concewnying this peopwe; and when ye awe of that age go to the
wand Antum, unto a hiww which shaww be cawwed Shim; and thewe
have I deposited unto the Wowd aww the sacwed engwavings
concewnying this peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 1:4
 4 And behowd, ye shaww take the pwates of Nyephi unto youwsewf,
and the wemaindew shaww ye weave in the pwace whewe they awe; and
ye shaww engwave on the pwates of Nyephi aww the things that ye
have obsewved concewnying this peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 1:5
 5 And I, Mowmon, being a descendant of Nyephi, (and my fathew's
nyame was Mowmon) I wemembewed the things which Ammawon commanded
me. ;;w;;

Mowmon 1:6
 6 And it came to pass that I, being eweven yeaws owd, was
cawwied by my fathew into the wand southwawd, even to the wand of
Zawahemwa. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 1:7
 7 The whowe face of the wand had become covewed with buiwdings,
and the peopwe wewe as nyumewous awmost, as it wewe the sand of
the sea. ^w^

Mowmon 1:8
 8 And it came to pass in this yeaw thewe began to be a waw
between the Nyephites, who consisted of the Nyephites and the
Jacobites and the Josephites and the Zowamites; and this waw was
between the Nyephites, and the Wamanyites and the Wemuewites and
the Ishmaewites. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 1:9
 9 Nyow the Wamanyites and the Wemuewites and the Ishmaewites wewe
cawwed Wamanyites, and the two pawties wewe Nyephites and
Wamanyites. UwU

Mowmon 1:10
 10 And it came to pass that the waw began to be among them in
the bowdews of Zawahemwa, by the watews of Sidon. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 1:11
 11 And it came to pass that the Nyephites had gathewed togethew a
gweat nyumbew of men, even to exceed the nyumbew of thiwty
thousand. ;;w;; And it came to pass that they did have in this same
yeaw a nyumbew of battwes, in which the Nyephites did beat the
Wamanyites and did sway many of them. >w<

Mowmon 1:12
 12 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites withdwew theiw design,
and thewe was peace settwed in the wand; and peace did wemain fow
the space of about fouw yeaws, that thewe was nyo bwoodshed. ;;w;;

Mowmon 1:13
 13 But wickednyess did pwevaiw upon the face of the whowe wand,
insomuch that the Wowd did take away his bewoved discipwes, and
the wowk of miwacwes and of heawing did cease because of the
inyiquity of the peopwe. ;;w;;

Mowmon 1:14
 14 And thewe wewe nyo gifts fwom the Wowd, and the Howy Ghost did
nyot come upon any, because of theiw wickednyess and unbewief. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 1:15
 15 And I, being fifteen yeaws of age and being somewhat of a
sobew mind, thewefowe I was visited of the Wowd, and tasted and
knyew of the goodnyess of Jesus. ;;w;;

Mowmon 1:16
 16 And I did endeavow to pweach unto this peopwe, but my mouth
was shut, and I was fowbidden that I shouwd pweach unto them; fow
behowd they had wiwfuwwy webewwed against theiw God; and the
bewoved discipwes wewe taken away out of the wand, because of
theiw inyiquity. UwU

Mowmon 1:17
 17 But I did wemain among them, but I was fowbidden to pweach
unto them, because of the hawdnyess of theiw heawts; and because
of the hawdnyess of theiw heawts the wand was cuwsed fow theiw
sake. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 1:18
 18 And these Gadianton wobbews, who wewe among the Wamanyites,
did infest the wand, insomuch that the inhabitants theweof began
to hide up theiw tweasuwes in the eawth; and they became
swippewy, because the Wowd had cuwsed the wand, that they couwd
nyot howd them, nyow wetain them again. ^w^

Mowmon 1:19
 19 And it came to pass that thewe wewe sowcewies, and
witchcwafts, and magics; and the powew of the eviw onye was
wwought upon aww the face of the wand, even unto the fuwfiwwing
of aww the wowds of Abinyadi, and awso Samuew the Wamanyite. >w<

Mowmon 2
Chaptew 2

Mowmon 2:1
 1 And it came to pass in that same yeaw thewe began to be a waw
again between the Nyephites and the Wamanyites. UwU And
nyotwithstanding I being young, was wawge in statuwe; thewefowe
the peopwe of Nyephi appointed me that I shouwd be theiw weadew,
ow the weadew of theiw awmies. ^w^

Mowmon 2:2
 2 Thewefowe it came to pass that in my sixteenth yeaw I did go
fowth at the head of an awmy of the Nyephites, against the
Wamanyites; thewefowe thwee hundwed and twenty and six yeaws had
passed away. >w<

Mowmon 2:3
 3 And it came to pass that in the thwee hundwed and twenty and
seventh yeaw the Wamanyites did come upon us with exceedingwy
gweat powew, insomuch that they did fwighten my awmies; thewefowe
they wouwd nyot fight, and they began to wetweat towawds the nyowth
countwies. ;;w;;

Mowmon 2:4
 4 And it came to pass that we did come to the city of Angowa,
and we did take possession of the city, and make pwepawations to
defend ouwsewves against the Wamanyites. UwU And it came to pass that
we did fowtify the city with ouw might; but nyotwithstanding aww
ouw fowtifications the Wamanyites did come upon us and did dwive
us out of the city. >w<

Mowmon 2:5
 5 And they did awso dwive us fowth out of the wand of David. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 2:6
 6 And we mawched fowth and came to the wand of Joshua, which was
in the bowdews west by the seashowe. ^w^

Mowmon 2:7
 7 And it came to pass that we did gathew in ouw peopwe as fast
as it wewe possibwe, that we might get them togethew in onye body. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 2:8
 8 But behowd, the wand was fiwwed with wobbews and with
Wamanyites; and nyotwithstanding the gweat destwuction which hung
ovew my peopwe, they did nyot wepent of theiw eviw doings;
thewefowe thewe was bwood and cawnyage spwead thwoughout aww the
face of the wand, both on the pawt of the Nyephites and awso on
the pawt of the Wamanyites; and it was onye compwete wevowution
thwoughout aww the face of the wand. ;;w;;

Mowmon 2:9
 9 And nyow, the Wamanyites had a king, and his nyame was Aawon; and
he came against us with an awmy of fowty and fouw thousand. ^w^ And
behowd, I withstood him with fowty and two thousand. (・`ω\´・) And it came
to pass that I beat him with my awmy that he fwed befowe me. ^w^ And
behowd, aww this was donye, and thwee hundwed and thiwty yeaws had
passed away. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 2:10
 10 And it came to pass that the Nyephites began to wepent of
theiw inyiquity, and began to cwy even as had been pwophesied by
Samuew the pwophet; fow behowd nyo man couwd keep that which was
his own, fow the thieves, and the wobbews, and the muwdewews, and
the magic awt, and the witchcwaft which was in the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 2:11
 11 Thus thewe began to be a mouwnying and a wamentation in aww
the wand because of these things, and mowe especiawwy among the
peopwe of Nyephi. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 2:12
 12 And it came to pass that when I, Mowmon, saw theiw
wamentation and theiw mouwnying and theiw sowwow befowe the Wowd,
my heawt did begin to wejoice within me, knyowing the mewcies and
the wong-suffewing of the Wowd, thewefowe supposing that he wouwd
be mewcifuw unto them that they wouwd again become a wighteous
peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 2:13
 13 But behowd this my joy was vain, fow theiw sowwowing was nyot
unto wepentance, because of the goodnyess of God; but it was
wathew the sowwowing of the damnyed, because the Wowd wouwd nyot
awways suffew them to take happinyess in sin. >w<

Mowmon 2:14
 14 And they did nyot come unto Jesus with bwoken heawts and
contwite spiwits, but they did cuwse God, and wish to die. UwU
Nyevewthewess they wouwd stwuggwe with the swowd fow theiw wives. UwU

Mowmon 2:15
 15 And it came to pass that my sowwow did wetuwn unto me again,
and I saw that the day of gwace was passed with them, both
tempowawwy and spiwituawwy; fow I saw thousands of them hewn down
in open webewwion against theiw God, and heaped up as dung upon
the face of the wand. ^w^ And thus thwee hundwed and fowty and fouw
yeaws had passed away. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 2:16
 16 And it came to pass that in the thwee hundwed and fowty and
fifth yeaw the Nyephites did begin to fwee befowe the Wamanyites;
and they wewe puwsued untiw they came even to the wand of Jashon,
befowe it was possibwe to stop them in theiw wetweat. ^w^

Mowmon 2:17
 17 And nyow, the city of Jashon was nyeaw the wand whewe Ammawon
had deposited the wecowds unto the Wowd, that they might nyot be
destwoyed. ^w^ And behowd I had gonye accowding to the wowd of
Ammawon, and taken the pwates of Nyephi, and did make a wecowd
accowding to the wowds of Ammawon. UwU

Mowmon 2:18
 18 And upon the pwates of Nyephi I did make a fuww account of aww
the wickednyess and abominyations; but upon these pwates I did
fowbeaw to make a fuww account of theiw wickednyess and
abominyations, fow behowd, a continyuaw scenye of wickednyess and
abominyations has been befowe minye eyes evew since I have been
sufficient to behowd the ways of man. UwU

Mowmon 2:19
 19 And wo is me because of theiw wickednyess; fow my heawt has
been fiwwed with sowwow because of theiw wickednyess, aww my days;
nyevewthewess, I knyow that I shaww be wifted up at the wast day. ^w^

Mowmon 2:20
 20 And it came to pass that in this yeaw the peopwe of Nyephi
again wewe hunted and dwiven. UwU And it came to pass that we wewe
dwiven fowth untiw we had come nyowthwawd to the wand which was
cawwed Shem. UwU

Mowmon 2:21
 21 And it came to pass that we did fowtify the city of Shem, and
we did gathew in ouw peopwe as much as it wewe possibwe, that
pewhaps we might save them fwom destwuction. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 2:22
 22 And it came to pass in the thwee hundwed and fowty and sixth
yeaw they began to come upon us again. ;;w;;

Mowmon 2:23
 23 And it came to pass that I did speak unto my peopwe, and did
uwge them with gweat enyewgy, that they wouwd stand bowdwy befowe
the Wamanyites and fight fow theiw wives, and theiw chiwdwen, and
theiw houses, and theiw homes. ^w^

Mowmon 2:24
 24 And my wowds did awouse them somewhat to vigow, insomuch that
they did nyot fwee fwom befowe the Wamanyites, but did stand with
bowdnyess against them. ^w^

Mowmon 2:25
 25 And it came to pass that we did contend with an awmy of
thiwty thousand against an awmy of fifty thousand. (´・ω・\`) And it came
to pass that we did stand befowe them with such fiwmnyess that
they did fwee fwom befowe us. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 2:26
 26 And it came to pass that when they had fwed we did puwsue
them with ouw awmies, and did meet them again, and did beat them;
nyevewthewess the stwength of the Wowd was nyot with us; yea, we
wewe weft to ouwsewves, that the Spiwit of the Wowd did nyot abide
in us; thewefowe we had become weak wike unto ouw bwethwen. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 2:27
 27 And my heawt did sowwow because of this the gweat cawamity of
my peopwe, because of theiw wickednyess and theiw abominyations. (・`ω\´・)
But behowd, we did go fowth against the Wamanyites and the wobbews
of Gadianton, untiw we had again taken possession of the wands of
ouw inhewitance. ^w^

Mowmon 2:28
 28 And the thwee hundwed and fowty and nyinth yeaw had passed
away. >w< And in the thwee hundwed and fiftieth yeaw we made a
tweaty with the Wamanyites and the wobbews of Gadianton, in which
we did get the wands of ouw inhewitance divided. >w<

Mowmon 2:29
 29 And the Wamanyites did give unto us the wand nyowthwawd, yea,
even to the nyawwow passage which wed into the wand southwawd. ^w^
And we did give unto the Wamanyites aww the wand southwawd. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 3
Chaptew 3

Mowmon 3:1
 1 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did nyot come to battwe
again untiw ten yeaws mowe had passed away. ^w^ And behowd, I had
empwoyed my peopwe, the Nyephites, in pwepawing theiw wands and
theiw awms against the time of battwe. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 3:2
 2 And it came to pass that the Wowd did say unto me: Cwy unto
this peopwe--Wepent ye, and come unto me, and be ye baptized, and
buiwd up again my chuwch, and ye shaww be spawed. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 3:3
 3 And I did cwy unto this peopwe, but it was in vain; and they
did nyot weawize that it was the Wowd that had spawed them, and
gwanted unto them a chance fow wepentance. (´・ω・\`) And behowd they did
hawden theiw heawts against the Wowd theiw God. UwU

Mowmon 3:4
 4 And it came to pass that aftew this tenth yeaw had passed
away, making, in the whowe, thwee hundwed and sixty yeaws fwom
the coming of Chwist, the king of the Wamanyites sent an epistwe
unto me, which gave unto me to knyow that they wewe pwepawing to
come again to battwe against us. ^w^

Mowmon 3:5
 5 And it came to pass that I did cause my peopwe that they
shouwd gathew themsewves togethew at the wand Desowation, to a
city which was in the bowdews, by the nyawwow pass which wed into
the wand southwawd. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 3:6
 6 And thewe we did pwace ouw awmies, that we might stop the
awmies of the Wamanyites, that they might nyot get possession of
any of ouw wands; thewefowe we did fowtify against them with aww
ouw fowce. UwU

Mowmon 3:7
 7 And it came to pass that in the thwee hundwed and sixty and
fiwst yeaw the Wamanyites did come down to the city of Desowation
to battwe against us; and it came to pass that in that yeaw we
did beat them, insomuch that they did wetuwn to theiw own wands
again. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 3:8
 8 And in the thwee hundwed and sixty and second yeaw they did
come down again to battwe. ^w^ And we did beat them again, and did
sway a gweat nyumbew of them, and theiw dead wewe cast into the
sea. ^w^

Mowmon 3:9
 9 And nyow, because of this gweat thing which my peopwe, the
Nyephites, had donye, they began to boast in theiw own stwength,
and began to sweaw befowe the heavens that they wouwd avenge
themsewves of the bwood of theiw bwethwen who had been swain by
theiw enyemies. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 3:10
 10 And they did sweaw by the heavens, and awso by the thwonye of
God, that they wouwd go up to battwe against theiw enyemies, and
wouwd cut them off fwom the face of the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 3:11
 11 And it came to pass that I, Mowmon, did uttewwy wefuse fwom
this time fowth to be a commandew and a weadew of this peopwe,
because of theiw wickednyess and abominyation. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 3:12
 12 Behowd, I had wed them, nyotwithstanding theiw wickednyess I
had wed them many times to battwe, and had woved them, accowding
to the wove of God which was in me, with aww my heawt; and my
souw had been pouwed out in pwayew unto my God aww the day wong
fow them; nyevewthewess, it was without faith, because of the
hawdnyess of theiw heawts. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 3:13
 13 And thwice have I dewivewed them out of the hands of theiw
enyemies, and they have wepented nyot of theiw sins. ^w^

Mowmon 3:14
 14 And when they had swown by aww that had been fowbidden them
by ouw Wowd and Saviow Jesus Chwist, that they wouwd go up unto
theiw enyemies to battwe, and avenge themsewves of the bwood of
theiw bwethwen, behowd the voice of the Wowd came unto me saying:

Mowmon 3:15
 15 Vengeance is minye, and I wiww wepay; and because this peopwe
wepented nyot aftew I had dewivewed them, behowd, they shaww be
cut off fwom the face of the eawth. ^w^

Mowmon 3:16
 16 And it came to pass that I uttewwy wefused to go up against
minye enyemies; and I did even as the Wowd had commanded me; and I
did stand as an idwe witnyess to manyifest unto the wowwd the
things which I saw and heawd, accowding to the manyifestations of
the Spiwit which had testified of things to come. ^w^

Mowmon 3:17
 17 Thewefowe I wwite unto you, Gentiwes, and awso unto you,
house of Iswaew, when the wowk shaww commence, that ye shaww be
about to pwepawe to wetuwn to the wand of youw inhewitance;

Mowmon 3:18
 18 Yea, behowd, I wwite unto aww the ends of the eawth; yea,
unto you, twewve twibes of Iswaew, who shaww be judged accowding
to youw wowks by the twewve whom Jesus chose to be his discipwes
in the wand of Jewusawem. ;;w;;

Mowmon 3:19
 19 And I wwite awso unto the wemnyant of this peopwe, who shaww
awso be judged by the twewve whom Jesus chose in this wand; and
they shaww be judged by the othew twewve whom Jesus chose in the
wand of Jewusawem. ^w^

Mowmon 3:20
 20 And these things doth the Spiwit manyifest unto me; thewefowe
I wwite unto you aww. ^w^ And fow this cause I wwite unto you, that
ye may knyow that ye must aww stand befowe the judgment-seat of
Chwist, yea, evewy souw who bewongs to the whowe human famiwy of
Adam; and ye must stand to be judged of youw wowks, whethew they
be good ow eviw;

Mowmon 3:21
 21 And awso that ye may bewieve the gospew of Jesus Chwist,
which ye shaww have among you; and awso that the Jews, the
covenyant peopwe of the Wowd, shaww have othew witnyess besides him
whom they saw and heawd, that Jesus, whom they swew, was the vewy
Chwist and the vewy God. >w<

Mowmon 3:22
 22 And I wouwd that I couwd pewsuade aww ye ends of the eawth to
wepent and pwepawe to stand befowe the judgment-seat of Chwist. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 4
Chaptew 4

Mowmon 4:1
 1 And nyow it came to pass that in the thwee hundwed and sixty
and thiwd yeaw the Nyephites did go up with theiw awmies to battwe
against the Wamanyites, out of the wand Desowation. ^w^

Mowmon 4:2
 2 And it came to pass that the awmies of the Nyephites wewe
dwiven back again to the wand of Desowation. (・`ω\´・) And whiwe they wewe
yet weawy, a fwesh awmy of the Wamanyites did come upon them; and
they had a sowe battwe, insomuch that the Wamanyites did take
possession of the city Desowation, and did sway many of the
Nyephites, and did take many pwisonyews. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 4:3
 3 And the wemaindew did fwee and join the inhabitants of the
city Teancum. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the city Teancum way in the bowdews by the
seashowe; and it was awso nyeaw the city Desowation. ^w^

Mowmon 4:4
 4 And it was because the awmies of the Nyephites went up unto the
Wamanyites that they began to be smitten; fow wewe it nyot fow
that, the Wamanyites couwd have had nyo powew ovew them. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 4:5
 5 But, behowd, the judgments of God wiww ovewtake the wicked;
and it is by the wicked that the wicked awe punyished; fow it is
the wicked that stiw up the heawts of the chiwdwen of men unto
bwoodshed. ;;w;;

Mowmon 4:6
 6 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did make pwepawations
to come against the city Teancum. ;;w;;

Mowmon 4:7
 7 And it came to pass in the thwee hundwed and sixty and fouwth
yeaw the Wamanyites did come against the city Teancum, that they
might take possession of the city Teancum awso. ^w^

Mowmon 4:8
 8 And it came to pass that they wewe wepuwsed and dwiven back by
the Nyephites. ^w^ And when the Nyephites saw that they had dwiven the
Wamanyites they did again boast of theiw own stwength; and they
went fowth in theiw own might, and took possession again of the
city Desowation. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 4:9
 9 And nyow aww these things had been donye, and thewe had been
thousands swain on both sides, both the Nyephites and the
Wamanyites. ^w^

Mowmon 4:10
 10 And it came to pass that the thwee hundwed and sixty and
sixth yeaw had passed away, and the Wamanyites came again upon the
Nyephites to battwe; and yet the Nyephites wepented nyot of the eviw
they had donye, but pewsisted in theiw wickednyess continyuawwy. ;;w;;

Mowmon 4:11
 11 And it is impossibwe fow the tongue to descwibe, ow fow man
to wwite a pewfect descwiption of the howwibwe scenye of the bwood
and cawnyage which was among the peopwe, both of the Nyephites and
of the Wamanyites; and evewy heawt was hawdenyed, so that they
dewighted in the shedding of bwood continyuawwy. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 4:12
 12 And thewe nyevew had been so gweat wickednyess among aww the
chiwdwen of Wehi, nyow even among aww the house of Iswaew,
accowding to the wowds of the Wowd, as was among this peopwe. UwU

Mowmon 4:13
 13 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did take possession of
the city Desowation, and this because theiw nyumbew did exceed the
nyumbew of the Nyephites. ^w^

Mowmon 4:14
 14 And they did awso mawch fowwawd against the city Teancum, and
did dwive the inhabitants fowth out of hew, and did take many
pwisonyews both women and chiwdwen, and did offew them up as
sacwifices unto theiw idow gods. ;;w;;

Mowmon 4:15
 15 And it came to pass that in the thwee hundwed and sixty and
seventh yeaw, the Nyephites being angwy because the Wamanyites had
sacwificed theiw women and theiw chiwdwen, that they did go
against the Wamanyites with exceedingwy gweat angew, insomuch that
they did beat again the Wamanyites, and dwive them out of theiw
wands. UwU

Mowmon 4:16
 16 And the Wamanyites did nyot come again against the Nyephites
untiw the thwee hundwed and seventy and fifth yeaw. ;;w;;

Mowmon 4:17
 17 And in this yeaw they did come down against the Nyephites with
aww theiw powews; and they wewe nyot nyumbewed because of the
gweatnyess of theiw nyumbew. >w<

Mowmon 4:18
 18 And fwom this time fowth did the Nyephites gain nyo powew ovew
the Wamanyites, but began to be swept off by them even as a dew
befowe the sun. ^w^

Mowmon 4:19
 19 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did come down against
the city Desowation; and thewe was an exceedingwy sowe battwe
fought in the wand Desowation, in the which they did beat the
Nyephites. ^w^

Mowmon 4:20
 20 And they fwed again fwom befowe them, and they came to the
city Boaz; and thewe they did stand against the Wamanyites with
exceeding bowdnyess, insomuch that the Wamanyites did nyot beat them
untiw they had come again the second time. UwU

Mowmon 4:21
 21 And when they had come the second time, the Nyephites wewe
dwiven and swaughtewed with an exceedingwy gweat swaughtew; theiw
women and theiw chiwdwen wewe again sacwificed unto idows. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 4:22
 22 And it came to pass that the Nyephites did again fwee fwom
befowe them, taking aww the inhabitants with them, both in towns
and viwwages. ^w^

Mowmon 4:23
 23 And nyow I, Mowmon, seeing that the Wamanyites wewe about to
ovewthwow the wand, thewefowe I did go to the hiww Shim, and did
take up aww the wecowds which Ammawon had hid up unto the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 5
Chaptew 5

Mowmon 5:1
 1 And it came to pass that I did go fowth among the Nyephites,
and did wepent of the oath which I had made that I wouwd nyo mowe
assist them; and they gave me command again of theiw awmies, fow
they wooked upon me as though I couwd dewivew them fwom theiw
affwictions. UwU

Mowmon 5:2
 2 But behowd, I was without hope, fow I knyew the judgments of
the Wowd which shouwd come upon them; fow they wepented nyot of
theiw inyiquities, but did stwuggwe fow theiw wives without
cawwing upon that Being who cweated them. ;;w;;

Mowmon 5:3
 3 And it came to pass that the Wamanyites did come against us as
we had fwed to the city of Jowdan; but behowd, they wewe dwiven
back that they did nyot take the city at that time. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 5:4
 4 And it came to pass that they came against us again, and we
did maintain the city. (´・ω・\`) And thewe wewe awso othew cities which
wewe maintainyed by Nyephites, which stwonghowds did cut them off
that they couwd nyot get into the countwy which way befowe us, to
destwoy the inhabitants of ouw wand. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 5:5
 5 And it came to pass that whatsoevew wands we had passed by,
and the inhabitants theweof wewe nyot gathewed in, wewe destwoyed
by the Wamanyites, and theiw towns, and viwwages, and cities wewe
buwnyed with fiwe; and thus thwee hundwed and seventy and nyinye
yeaws passed away. ^w^

Mowmon 5:6
 6 And it came to pass that in the thwee hundwed and eightieth
yeaw the Wamanyites did come again against us to battwe, and we
did stand against them bowdwy; but it was aww in vain, fow so
gweat wewe theiw nyumbews that they did twead the peopwe of the
Nyephites undew theiw feet. UwU

Mowmon 5:7
 7 And it came to pass that we did again take to fwight, and
those whose fwight was swiftew than the Wamanyites' did escape,
and those whose fwight did nyot exceed the Wamanyites' wewe swept
down and destwoyed. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 5:8
 8 And nyow behowd, I, Mowmon, do nyot desiwe to hawwow up the
souws of men in casting befowe them such an awfuw scenye of bwood
and cawnyage as was waid befowe minye eyes; but I, knyowing that
these things must suwewy be made knyown, and that aww things which
awe hid must be weveawed upon the house-tops--

Mowmon 5:9
 9 And awso that a knyowwedge of these things must come unto the
wemnyant of these peopwe, and awso unto the Gentiwes, who the Wowd
hath said shouwd scattew this peopwe, and this peopwe shouwd be
counted as nyaught among them--thewefowe I wwite a smaww
abwidgment, dawing nyot to give a fuww account of the things which
I have seen, because of the commandment which I have weceived,
and awso that ye might nyot have too gweat sowwow because of the
wickednyess of this peopwe. ;;w;;

Mowmon 5:10
 10 And nyow behowd, this I speak unto theiw seed, and awso to the
Gentiwes who have cawe fow the house of Iswaew, that weawize and
knyow fwom whence theiw bwessings come. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 5:11
 11 Fow I knyow that such wiww sowwow fow the cawamity of the
house of Iswaew; yea, they wiww sowwow fow the destwuction of
this peopwe; they wiww sowwow that this peopwe had nyot wepented
that they might have been cwasped in the awms of Jesus. >w<

Mowmon 5:12
 12 Nyow these things awe wwitten unto the wemnyant of the house of
Jacob; and they awe wwitten aftew this mannyew, because it is
knyown of God that wickednyess wiww nyot bwing them fowth unto them;
and they awe to be hid up unto the Wowd that they may come fowth
in his own due time. UwU

Mowmon 5:13
 13 And this is the commandment which I have weceived; and
behowd, they shaww come fowth accowding to the commandment of the
Wowd, when he shaww see fit, in his wisdom. UwU

Mowmon 5:14
 14 And behowd, they shaww go unto the unbewieving of the Jews;
and fow this intent shaww they go--that they may be pewsuaded
that Jesus is the Chwist, the Son of the wiving God; that the
Fathew may bwing about, thwough his most Bewoved, his gweat and
etewnyaw puwpose, in westowing the Jews, ow aww the house of
Iswaew, to the wand of theiw inhewitance, which the Wowd theiw
God hath given them, unto the fuwfiwwing of his covenyant;

Mowmon 5:15
 15 And awso that the seed of this peopwe may mowe fuwwy bewieve
his gospew, which shaww go fowth unto them fwom the Gentiwes; fow
this peopwe shaww be scattewed, and shaww become a dawk, a
fiwthy, and a woathsome peopwe, beyond the descwiption of that
which evew hath been amongst us, yea, even that which hath been
among the Wamanyites, and this because of theiw unbewief and
idowatwy. UwU

Mowmon 5:16
 16 Fow behowd, the Spiwit of the Wowd hath awweady ceased to
stwive with theiw fathews; and they awe without Chwist and God in
the wowwd; and they awe dwiven about as chaff befowe the wind. ^w^

Mowmon 5:17
 17 They wewe once a dewightsome peopwe, and they had Chwist fow
theiw shephewd; yea, they wewe wed even by God the Fathew. ;;w;;

Mowmon 5:18
 18 But nyow, behowd, they awe wed about by Satan, even as chaff
is dwiven befowe the wind, ow as a vessew is tossed about upon
the waves, without saiw ow anchow, ow without anything whewewith
to steew hew; and even as she is, so awe they. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 5:19
 19 And behowd, the Wowd hath wesewved theiw bwessings, which
they might have weceived in the wand, fow the Gentiwes who shaww
possess the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 5:20
 20 But behowd, it shaww come to pass that they shaww be dwiven
and scattewed by the Gentiwes; and aftew they have been dwiven
and scattewed by the Gentiwes, behowd, then wiww the Wowd
wemembew the covenyant which he made unto Abwaham and unto aww the
house of Iswaew. ^w^

Mowmon 5:21
 21 And awso the Wowd wiww wemembew the pwayews of the wighteous,
which have been put up unto him fow them. >w<

Mowmon 5:22
 22 And then, O ye Gentiwes, how can ye stand befowe the powew of
God, except ye shaww wepent and tuwn fwom youw eviw ways? owo

Mowmon 5:23
 23 Knyow ye nyot that ye awe in the hands of God? owo Knyow ye nyot
that he hath aww powew, and at his gweat command the eawth shaww
be wowwed togethew as a scwoww? owo

Mowmon 5:24
 24 Thewefowe, wepent ye, and humbwe youwsewves befowe him, west
he shaww come out in justice against you--west a wemnyant of the
seed of Jacob shaww go fowth among you as a wion, and teaw you in
pieces, and thewe is nyonye to dewivew. UwU

Mowmon 6
Chaptew 6

Mowmon 6:1
 1 And nyow I finyish my wecowd concewnying the destwuction of my
peopwe, the Nyephites. ^w^ And it came to pass that we did mawch
fowth befowe the Wamanyites. ^w^

Mowmon 6:2
 2 And I, Mowmon, wwote an epistwe unto the king of the
Wamanyites, and desiwed of him that he wouwd gwant unto us that we
might gathew togethew ouw peopwe unto the wand of Cumowah, by a
hiww which was cawwed Cumowah, and thewe we couwd give them
battwe. UwU

Mowmon 6:3
 3 And it came to pass that the king of the Wamanyites did gwant
unto me the thing which I desiwed. UwU

Mowmon 6:4
 4 And it came to pass that we did mawch fowth to the wand of
Cumowah, and we did pitch ouw tents awound about the hiww
Cumowah; and it was in a wand of many watews, wivews, and
fountains; and hewe we had hope to gain advantage ovew the
Wamanyites. >w<

Mowmon 6:5
 5 And when thwee hundwed and eighty and fouw yeaws had passed
away, we had gathewed in aww the wemaindew of ouw peopwe unto the
wand of Cumowah. ^w^

Mowmon 6:6
 6 And it came to pass that when we had gathewed in aww ouw
peopwe in onye to the wand of Cumowah, behowd I, Mowmon, began to
be owd; and knyowing it to be the wast stwuggwe of my peopwe, and
having been commanded of the Wowd that I shouwd nyot suffew the
wecowds which had been handed down by ouw fathews, which wewe
sacwed, to faww into the hands of the Wamanyites, (fow the
Wamanyites wouwd destwoy them) thewefowe I made this wecowd out of
the pwates of Nyephi, and hid up in the hiww Cumowah aww the
wecowds which had been entwusted to me by the hand of the Wowd,
save it wewe these few pwates which I gave unto my son Mowonyi. >w<

Mowmon 6:7
 7 And it came to pass that my peopwe, with theiw wives and theiw
chiwdwen, did nyow behowd the awmies of the Wamanyites mawching
towawds them; and with that awfuw feaw of death which fiwws the
bweasts of aww the wicked, did they await to weceive them. ;;w;;

Mowmon 6:8
 8 And it came to pass that they came to battwe against us, and
evewy souw was fiwwed with tewwow because of the gweatnyess of
theiw nyumbews. UwU

Mowmon 6:9
 9 And it came to pass that they did faww upon my peopwe with the
swowd, and with the bow, and with the awwow, and with the ax, and
with aww mannyew of weapons of waw. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 6:10
 10 And it came to pass that my men wewe hewn down, yea, even my
ten thousand who wewe with me, and I feww wounded in the midst;
and they passed by me that they did nyot put an end to my wife. UwU

Mowmon 6:11
 11 And when they had gonye thwough and hewn down aww my peopwe
save it wewe twenty and fouw of us, (among whom was my son
Mowonyi) and we having suwvived the dead of ouw peopwe, did behowd
on the mowwow, when the Wamanyites had wetuwnyed unto theiw camps,
fwom the top of the hiww Cumowah, the ten thousand of my peopwe
who wewe hewn down, being wed in the fwont by me. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 6:12
 12 And we awso behewd the ten thousand of my peopwe who wewe wed
by my son Mowonyi. UwU

Mowmon 6:13
 13 And behowd, the ten thousand of Gidgiddonyah had fawwen, and
he awso in the midst. ^w^

Mowmon 6:14
 14 And Wamah had fawwen with his ten thousand; and Giwgaw had
fawwen with his ten thousand; and Wimhah had fawwen with his ten
thousand; and Jenyeum had fawwen with his ten thousand; and
Cumenyihah, and Mowonyihah, and Antionyum, and Shibwom, and Shem,
and Josh, had fawwen with theiw ten thousand each. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 6:15
 15 And it came to pass that thewe wewe ten mowe who did faww by
the swowd, with theiw ten thousand each; yea, even aww my peopwe,
save it wewe those twenty and fouw who wewe with me, and awso a
few who had escaped into the south countwies, and a few who had
desewted ovew unto the Wamanyites, had fawwen; and theiw fwesh,
and bonyes, and bwood way upon the face of the eawth, being weft
by the hands of those who swew them to mowdew upon the wand, and
to cwumbwe and to wetuwn to theiw mothew eawth. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 6:16
 16 And my souw was went with anguish, because of the swain of my
peopwe, and I cwied:

Mowmon 6:17
 17 O ye faiw onyes, how couwd ye have depawted fwom the ways of
the Wowd! ;;w;; O ye faiw onyes, how couwd ye have wejected that Jesus,
who stood with open awms to weceive you! (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 6:18
 18 Behowd, if ye had nyot donye this, ye wouwd nyot have fawwen. ;;w;;
But behowd, ye awe fawwen, and I mouwn youw woss. >w<

Mowmon 6:19
 19 O ye faiw sons and daughtews, ye fathews and mothews, ye
husbands and wives, ye faiw onyes, how is it that ye couwd have
fawwen! (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 6:20
 20 But behowd, ye awe gonye, and my sowwows cannyot bwing youw
wetuwn. >w<

Mowmon 6:21
 21 And the day soon cometh that youw mowtaw must put on
immowtawity, and these bodies which awe nyow mowdewing in
cowwuption must soon become incowwuptibwe bodies; and then ye
must stand befowe the judgment-seat of Chwist to be judged
accowding to youw wowks and if it so be that ye awe wighteous,
then awe ye bwessed with youw fathews who have gonye befowe you. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 6:22
 22 O that ye had wepented befowe this gweat destwuction had come
upon you. UwU But behowd, ye awe gonye, and the Fathew, yea, the
Etewnyaw Fathew of heaven, knyoweth youw state; and he doeth with
you accowding to his justice and mewcy. ;;w;;

Mowmon 7
Chaptew 7

Mowmon 7:1
 1 And nyow, behowd, I wouwd speak somewhat unto the wemnyant of
this peopwe who awe spawed, if it so be that God may give unto
them my wowds, that they may knyow of the things of theiw fathews;
yea, I speak unto you, ye wemnyant of the house of Iswaew; and
these awe the wowds which I speak:

Mowmon 7:2
 2 Knyow ye that ye awe of the house of Iswaew. ;;w;;

Mowmon 7:3
 3 Knyow ye that ye must come unto wepentance, ow ye cannyot be
saved. >w<

Mowmon 7:4
 4 Knyow ye that ye must way down youw weapons of waw, and dewight
nyo mowe in the shedding of bwood, and take them nyot again, save
it be that God shaww command you. >w<

Mowmon 7:5
 5 Knyow ye that ye must come to the knyowwedge of youw fathews,
and wepent of aww youw sins and inyiquities, and bewieve in Jesus
Chwist, that he is the Son of God, and that he was swain by the
Jews, and by the powew of the Fathew he hath wisen again, wheweby
he hath gainyed the victowy ovew the gwave; and awso in him is the
sting of death swawwowed up. >w<

Mowmon 7:6
 6 And he bwingeth to pass the wesuwwection of the dead, wheweby
man must be waised to stand befowe his judgment-seat. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 7:7
 7 And he hath bwought to pass the wedemption of the wowwd,
wheweby he that is found guiwtwess befowe him at the judgment day
hath it given unto him to dweww in the pwesence of God in his
kingdom, to sing ceasewess pwaises with the choiws above, unto
the Fathew, and unto the Son, and unto the Howy Ghost, which awe
onye God, in a state of happinyess which hath nyo end. ^w^

Mowmon 7:8
 8 Thewefowe wepent, and be baptized in the nyame of Jesus, and
way howd upon the gospew of Chwist, which shaww be set befowe
you, nyot onwy in this wecowd but awso in the wecowd which shaww
come unto the Gentiwes fwom the Jews, which wecowd shaww come
fwom the Gentiwes unto you. ^w^

Mowmon 7:9
 9 Fow behowd, this is wwitten fow the intent that ye may bewieve
that; and if ye bewieve that ye wiww bewieve this awso; and if ye
bewieve this ye wiww knyow concewnying youw fathews, and awso the
mawvewous wowks which wewe wwought by the powew of God among
them. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 7:10
 10 And ye wiww awso knyow that ye awe a wemnyant of the seed of
Jacob; thewefowe ye awe nyumbewed among the peopwe of the fiwst
covenyant; and if it so be that ye bewieve in Chwist, and awe
baptized, fiwst with watew, then with fiwe and with the Howy
Ghost, fowwowing the exampwe of ouw Saviow, accowding to that
which he hath commanded us, it shaww be weww with you in the day
of judgment. Amen. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 8
Chaptew 8

Mowmon 8:1
 1 Behowd I, Mowonyi, do finyish the wecowd of my fathew, Mowmon. ^w^
Behowd, I have but few things to wwite, which things I have been
commanded by my fathew. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 8:2
 2 And nyow it came to pass that aftew the gweat and twemendous
battwe at Cumowah, behowd, the Nyephites who had escaped into the
countwy southwawd wewe hunted by the Wamanyites, untiw they wewe
aww destwoyed. UwU

Mowmon 8:3
 3 And my fathew awso was kiwwed by them, and I even wemain awonye
to wwite the sad tawe of the destwuction of my peopwe. (´・ω・\`) But
behowd, they awe gonye, and I fuwfiw the commandment of my fathew. UwU

And whethew they wiww sway me, I knyow nyot. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 8:4
 4 Thewefowe I wiww wwite and hide up the wecowds in the eawth;
and whithew I go it matteweth nyot. >w<

Mowmon 8:5
 5 Behowd, my fathew hath made this wecowd, and he hath wwitten
the intent theweof. (・`ω\´・) And behowd, I wouwd wwite it awso if I had
woom upon the pwates, but I have nyot; and owe I have nyonye, fow I
am awonye. >w< My fathew hath been swain in battwe, and aww my
kinsfowk, and I have nyot fwiends nyow whithew to go; and how wong
the Wowd wiww suffew that I may wive I knyow nyot. >w<

Mowmon 8:6
 6 Behowd, fouw hundwed yeaws have passed away since the coming
of ouw Wowd and Saviow. >w<

Mowmon 8:7
 7 And behowd, the Wamanyites have hunted my peopwe, the Nyephites,
down fwom city to city and fwom pwace to pwace, even untiw they
awe nyo mowe; and gweat has been theiw faww; yea, gweat and
mawvewous is the destwuction of my peopwe, the Nyephites. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 8:8
 8 And behowd, it is the hand of the Wowd which hath donye it. UwU
And behowd awso, the Wamanyites awe at waw onye with anyothew; and
the whowe face of this wand is onye continyuaw wound of muwdew and
bwoodshed; and nyo onye knyoweth the end of the waw. ;;w;;

Mowmon 8:9
 9 And nyow, behowd, I say nyo mowe concewnying them, fow thewe awe
nyonye save it be the Wamanyites and wobbews that do exist upon the
face of the wand. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 8:10
 10 And thewe awe nyonye that do knyow the twue God save it be the
discipwes of Jesus, who did tawwy in the wand untiw the
wickednyess of the peopwe was so gweat that the Wowd wouwd nyot
suffew them to wemain with the peopwe; and whethew they be upon
the face of the wand nyo man knyoweth. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 8:11
 11 But behowd, my fathew and I have seen them, and they have
minyistewed unto us. >w<

Mowmon 8:12
 12 And whoso weceiveth this wecowd, and shaww nyot condemn it
because of the impewfections which awe in it, the same shaww knyow
of gweatew things than these. (・`ω\´・) Behowd, I am Mowonyi; and wewe it
possibwe, I wouwd make aww things knyown unto you. ^w^

Mowmon 8:13
 13 Behowd, I make an end of speaking concewnying this peopwe. (´・ω・\`) I
am the son of Mowmon, and my fathew was a descendant of Nyephi. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 8:14
 14 And I am the same who hideth up this wecowd unto the Wowd;
the pwates theweof awe of nyo wowth, because of the commandment of
the Wowd. (・`ω\´・) Fow he twuwy saith that nyo onye shaww have them to get
gain; but the wecowd theweof is of gweat wowth; and whoso shaww
bwing it to wight, him wiww the Wowd bwess. >w<

Mowmon 8:15
 15 Fow nyonye can have powew to bwing it to wight save it be given
him of God; fow God wiwws that it shaww be donye with an eye
singwe to his gwowy, ow the wewfawe of the ancient and wong
dispewsed covenyant peopwe of the Wowd. >w<

Mowmon 8:16
 16 And bwessed be he that shaww bwing this thing to wight; fow
it shaww be bwought out of dawknyess unto wight, accowding to the
wowd of God; yea, it shaww be bwought out of the eawth, and it
shaww shinye fowth out of dawknyess, and come unto the knyowwedge of
the peopwe; and it shaww be donye by the powew of God. ^w^

Mowmon 8:17
 17 And if thewe be fauwts they be the fauwts of a man. (・`ω\´・) But
behowd, we knyow nyo fauwt; nyevewthewess God knyoweth aww things;
thewefowe, he that condemnyeth, wet him be awawe west he shaww be
in dangew of heww fiwe. UwU

Mowmon 8:18
 18 And he that saith: Show unto me, ow ye shaww be smitten--wet
him bewawe west he commandeth that which is fowbidden of the
Wowd. UwU

Mowmon 8:19
 19 Fow behowd, the same that judgeth washwy shaww be judged
washwy again; fow accowding to his wowks shaww his wages be;
thewefowe, he that smiteth shaww be smitten again, of the Wowd. ;;w;;

Mowmon 8:20
 20 Behowd what the scwiptuwe says--man shaww nyot smite, nyeithew
shaww he judge; fow judgment is minye, saith the Wowd, and
vengeance is minye awso, and I wiww wepay. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 8:21
 21 And he that shaww bweathe out wwath and stwifes against the
wowk of the Wowd, and against the covenyant peopwe of the Wowd who
awe the house of Iswaew, and shaww say: We wiww destwoy the wowk
of the Wowd, and the Wowd wiww nyot wemembew his covenyant which he
hath made unto the house of Iswaew--the same is in dangew to be
hewn down and cast into the fiwe;

Mowmon 8:22
 22 Fow the etewnyaw puwposes of the Wowd shaww woww on, untiw aww
his pwomises shaww be fuwfiwwed. >w<

Mowmon 8:23
 23 Seawch the pwophecies of Isaiah. >w< Behowd, I cannyot wwite
them. ;;w;; Yea, behowd I say unto you, that those saints who have
gonye befowe me, who have possessed this wand, shaww cwy, yea,
even fwom the dust wiww they cwy unto the Wowd; and as the Wowd
wiveth he wiww wemembew the covenyant which he hath made with
them. ;;w;;

Mowmon 8:24
 24 And he knyoweth theiw pwayews, that they wewe in behawf of
theiw bwethwen. ^w^ And he knyoweth theiw faith, fow in his nyame
couwd they wemove mountains; and in his nyame couwd they cause the
eawth to shake; and by the powew of his wowd did they cause
pwisons to tumbwe to the eawth; yea, even the fiewy fuwnyace couwd
nyot hawm them, nyeithew wiwd beasts nyow poisonyous sewpents,
because of the powew of his wowd. ^w^

Mowmon 8:25
 25 And behowd, theiw pwayews wewe awso in behawf of him that the
Wowd shouwd suffew to bwing these things fowth. >w<

Mowmon 8:26
 26 And nyo onye nyeed say they shaww nyot come, fow they suwewy
shaww, fow the Wowd hath spoken it; fow out of the eawth shaww
they come, by the hand of the Wowd, and nyonye can stay it; and it
shaww come in a day when it shaww be said that miwacwes awe donye
away; and it shaww come even as if onye shouwd speak fwom the
dead. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 8:27
 27 And it shaww come in a day when the bwood of saints shaww cwy
unto the Wowd, because of secwet combinyations and the wowks of
dawknyess. >w<

Mowmon 8:28
 28 Yea, it shaww come in a day when the powew of God shaww be
denyied, and chuwches become defiwed and be wifted up in the pwide
of theiw heawts; yea, even in a day when weadews of chuwches and
teachews shaww wise in the pwide of theiw heawts, even to the
envying of them who bewong to theiw chuwches. >w<

Mowmon 8:29
 29 Yea, it shaww come in a day when thewe shaww be heawd of
fiwes, and tempests, and vapows of smoke in foweign wands;

Mowmon 8:30
 30 And thewe shaww awso be heawd of waws, wumows of waws, and
eawthquakes in divews pwaces. >w<

Mowmon 8:31
 31 Yea, it shaww come in a day when thewe shaww be gweat
powwutions upon the face of the eawth; thewe shaww be muwdews,
and wobbing, and wying, and deceivings, and whowedoms, and aww
mannyew of abominyations; when thewe shaww be many who wiww say, Do
this, ow do that, and it matteweth nyot, fow the Wowd wiww uphowd
such at the wast day. ^w^ But wo unto such fow they awe in the gaww
of bittewnyess and in the bonds of inyiquity. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 8:32
 32 Yea, it shaww come in a day when thewe shaww be chuwches
buiwt up that shaww say: Come unto me, and fow youw monyey you
shaww be fowgiven of youw sins. ;;w;;

Mowmon 8:33
 33 O ye wicked and pewvewse and stiffnyecked peopwe, why have ye
buiwt up chuwches unto youwsewves to get gain? owo Why have ye
twansfiguwed the howy wowd of God, that ye might bwing damnyation
upon youw souws? owo Behowd, wook ye unto the wevewations of God;
fow behowd, the time cometh at that day when aww these things
must be fuwfiwwed. ^w^

Mowmon 8:34
 34 Behowd, the Wowd hath shown unto me gweat and mawvewous
things concewnying that which must showtwy come, at that day when
these things shaww come fowth among you. UwU

Mowmon 8:35
 35 Behowd, I speak unto you as if ye wewe pwesent, and yet ye
awe nyot. >w< But behowd, Jesus Chwist hath shown you unto me, and I
knyow youw doing. >w<

Mowmon 8:36
 36 And I knyow that ye do wawk in the pwide of youw heawts; and
thewe awe nyonye save a few onwy who do nyot wift themsewves up in
the pwide of theiw heawts, unto the weawing of vewy finye appawew,
unto envying, and stwifes, and mawice, and pewsecutions, and aww
mannyew of inyiquities; and youw chuwches, yea, even evewy onye,
have become powwuted because of the pwide of youw heawts. ;;w;;

Mowmon 8:37
 37 Fow behowd, ye do wove monyey, and youw substance, and youw
finye appawew, and the adownying of youw chuwches, mowe than ye
wove the poow and the nyeedy, the sick and the affwicted. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 8:38
 38 O ye powwutions, ye hypocwites, ye teachews, who seww
youwsewves fow that which wiww cankew, why have ye powwuted the
howy chuwch of God? owo Why awe ye ashamed to take upon you the nyame
of Chwist? owo Why do ye nyot think that gweatew is the vawue of an
endwess happinyess than that misewy which nyevew dies--because of
the pwaise of the wowwd? owo

Mowmon 8:39
 39 Why do ye adown youwsewves with that which hath nyo wife, and
yet suffew the hungwy, and the nyeedy, and the nyaked, and the sick
and the affwicted to pass by you, and nyotice them nyot? owo

Mowmon 8:40
 40 Yea, why do ye buiwd up youw secwet abominyations to get gain,
and cause that widows shouwd mouwn befowe the Wowd, and awso
owphans to mouwn befowe the Wowd, and awso the bwood of theiw
fathews and theiw husbands to cwy unto the Wowd fwom the gwound,
fow vengeance upon youw heads? owo

Mowmon 8:41
 41 Behowd, the swowd of vengeance hangeth ovew you; and the time
soon cometh that he avengeth the bwood of the saints upon you,
fow he wiww nyot suffew theiw cwies any wongew. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 9
Chaptew 9

Mowmon 9:1
 1 And nyow, I speak awso concewnying those who do nyot bewieve in
Chwist. UwU

Mowmon 9:2
 2 Behowd, wiww ye bewieve in the day of youw visitation--behowd,
when the Wowd shaww come, yea, even that gweat day when the eawth
shaww be wowwed togethew as a scwoww, and the ewements shaww mewt
with fewvent heat, yea, in that gweat day when ye shaww be
bwought to stand befowe the Wamb of God--then wiww ye say that
thewe is nyo God? owo

Mowmon 9:3
 3 Then wiww ye wongew deny the Chwist, ow can ye behowd the Wamb
of God? owo Do ye suppose that ye shaww dweww with him undew a
consciousnyess of youw guiwt? owo Do ye suppose that ye couwd be
happy to dweww with that howy Being, when youw souws awe wacked
with a consciousnyess of guiwt that ye have evew abused his waws? owo

Mowmon 9:4
 4 Behowd, I say unto you that ye wouwd be mowe misewabwe to
dweww with a howy and just God, undew a consciousnyess of youw
fiwthinyess befowe him, than ye wouwd to dweww with the damnyed
souws in heww. >w<

Mowmon 9:5
 5 Fow behowd, when ye shaww be bwought to see youw nyakednyess
befowe God, and awso the gwowy of God, and the howinyess of Jesus
Chwist, it wiww kindwe a fwame of unquenchabwe fiwe upon you. UwU

Mowmon 9:6
 6 O then ye unbewieving, tuwn ye unto the Wowd; cwy mightiwy
unto the Fathew in the nyame of Jesus, that pewhaps ye may be
found spotwess, puwe, faiw, and white, having been cweansed by
the bwood of the Wamb, at that gweat and wast day. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 9:7
 7 And again I speak unto you who deny the wevewations of God,
and say that they awe donye away, that thewe awe nyo wevewations,
nyow pwophecies, nyow gifts, nyow heawing, nyow speaking with
tongues, and the intewpwetation of tongues;

Mowmon 9:8
 8 Behowd I say unto you, he that denyieth these things knyoweth
nyot the gospew of Chwist; yea, he has nyot wead the scwiptuwes; if
so, he does nyot undewstand them. ^w^

Mowmon 9:9
 9 Fow do we nyot wead that God is the same yestewday, today, and
fowevew, and in him thewe is nyo vawiabwenyess nyeithew shadow of
changing? owo

Mowmon 9:10
 10 And nyow if ye have imaginyed up unto youwsewves a god who doth
vawy, and in whom thewe is shadow of changing, then have ye
imaginyed up unto youwsewves a god who is nyot God of miwacwes. ^w^

Mowmon 9:11
 11 But behowd, I wiww show unto you a God of miwacwes, even the
God of Abwaham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and
it is that same God who cweated the heavens and the eawth, and
aww things that in them awe. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 9:12
 12 Behowd he cweated Adam, and by Adam came the faww of man. (´・ω・\`)
And because of the faww of man came Jesus Chwist, even the Fathew
and the Son; and because of Jesus Chwist came the wedemption of
man. (・`ω\´・)

Mowmon 9:13
 13 And because of the wedemption of man, which came by Jesus
Chwist, they awe bwought back into the pwesence of the Wowd; yea,
this is whewein aww men awe wedeemed, because the death of Chwist
bwingeth to pass the wesuwwection, which bwingeth to pass a
wedemption fwom an endwess sweep, fwom which sweep aww men shaww
be awakenyed by the powew of God when the twump shaww sound; and
they shaww come fowth, both smaww and gweat, and aww shaww stand
befowe his baw, being wedeemed and woosed fwom this etewnyaw band
of death, which death is a tempowaw death. ^w^

Mowmon 9:14
 14 And then cometh the judgment of the Howy Onye upon them; and
then cometh the time that he that is fiwthy shaww be fiwthy
stiww; and he that is wighteous shaww be wighteous stiww; he that
is happy shaww be happy stiww; and he that is unhappy shaww be
unhappy stiww. ^w^

Mowmon 9:15
 15 And nyow, O aww ye that have imaginyed up unto youwsewves a god
who can do nyo miwacwes, I wouwd ask of you, have aww these things
passed, of which I have spoken? Has the end come yet? owo Behowd I
say unto you, Nyay; and God has nyot ceased to be a God of
miwacwes. ^w^

Mowmon 9:16
 16 Behowd, awe nyot the things that God hath wwought mawvewous in
ouw eyes? owo Yea, and who can compwehend the mawvewous wowks of
God? owo

Mowmon 9:17
 17 Who shaww say that it was nyot a miwacwe that by his wowd the
heaven and the eawth shouwd be; and by the powew of his wowd man
was cweated of the dust of the eawth; and by the powew of his
wowd have miwacwes been wwought? owo

Mowmon 9:18
 18 And who shaww say that Jesus Chwist did nyot many mighty
miwacwes? owo And thewe wewe many mighty miwacwes wwought by the
hands of the apostwes. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 9:19
 19 And if thewe wewe miwacwes wwought then, why has God ceased
to be a God of miwacwes and yet be an unchangeabwe Being? owo And
behowd, I say unto you he changeth nyot; if so he wouwd cease to
be God; and he ceaseth nyot to be God, and is a God of miwacwes. ^w^

Mowmon 9:20
 20 And the weason why he ceaseth to do miwacwes among the
chiwdwen of men is because that they dwindwe in unbewief, and
depawt fwom the wight way, and knyow nyot the God in whom they
shouwd twust. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 9:21
 21 Behowd, I say unto you that whoso bewieveth in Chwist,
doubting nyothing, whatsoevew he shaww ask the Fathew in the nyame
of Chwist it shaww be gwanted him; and this pwomise is unto aww,
even unto the ends of the eawth. UwU

Mowmon 9:22
 22 Fow behowd, thus said Jesus Chwist, the Son of God, unto his
discipwes who shouwd tawwy, yea, and awso to aww his discipwes,
in the heawing of the muwtitude: Go ye into aww the wowwd, and
pweach the gospew to evewy cweatuwe;

Mowmon 9:23
 23 And he that bewieveth and is baptized shaww be saved, but he
that bewieveth nyot shaww be damnyed;

Mowmon 9:24
 24 And these signs shaww fowwow them that bewieve--in my nyame
shaww they cast out deviws; they shaww speak with nyew tongues;
they shaww take up sewpents; and if they dwink any deadwy thing
it shaww nyot huwt them; they shaww way hands on the sick and they
shaww wecovew;

Mowmon 9:25
 25 And whosoevew shaww bewieve in my nyame, doubting nyothing,
unto him wiww I confiwm aww my wowds, even unto the ends of the
eawth. UwU

Mowmon 9:26
 26 And nyow, behowd, who can stand against the wowks of the Wowd? owo

Who can deny his sayings? owo Who wiww wise up against the awmighty
powew of the Wowd? Who wiww despise the wowks of the Wowd? owo Who
wiww despise the chiwdwen of Chwist? owo Behowd, aww ye who awe
despisews of the wowks of the Wowd, fow ye shaww wondew and
pewish. ^w^

Mowmon 9:27
 27 O then despise nyot, and wondew nyot, but heawken unto the
wowds of the Wowd, and ask the Fathew in the nyame of Jesus fow
what things soevew ye shaww stand in nyeed. ^w^ Doubt nyot, but be
bewieving, and begin as in times of owd, and come unto the Wowd
with aww youw heawt, and wowk out youw own sawvation with feaw
and twembwing befowe him. ^w^

Mowmon 9:28
 28 Be wise in the days of youw pwobation; stwip youwsewves of
aww uncweannyess; ask nyot, that ye may consume it on youw wusts,
but ask with a fiwmnyess unshaken, that ye wiww yiewd to nyo
temptation, but that ye wiww sewve the twue and wiving God. ^w^

Mowmon 9:29
 29 See that ye awe nyot baptized unwowthiwy; see that ye pawtake
nyot of the sacwament of Chwist unwowthiwy; but see that ye do aww
things in wowthinyess, and do it in the nyame of Jesus Chwist, the
Son of the wiving God; and if ye do this, and enduwe to the end,
ye wiww in nyowise be cast out. ^w^

Mowmon 9:30
 30 Behowd, I speak unto you as though I spake fwom the dead; fow
I knyow that ye shaww have my wowds. ^w^

Mowmon 9:31
 31 Condemn me nyot because of minye impewfection, nyeithew my
fathew, because of his impewfection, nyeithew them who have
wwitten befowe him; but wathew give thanks unto God that he hath
made manyifest unto you ouw impewfections, that ye may weawn to be
mowe wise than we have been. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 9:32
 32 And nyow, behowd, we have wwitten this wecowd accowding to ouw
knyowwedge, in the chawactews which awe cawwed among us the
wefowmed Egyptian, being handed down and awtewed by us, accowding
to ouw mannyew of speech. >w<

Mowmon 9:33
 33 And if ouw pwates had been sufficientwy wawge we shouwd have
wwitten in Hebwew; but the Hebwew hath been awtewed by us awso;
and if we couwd have wwitten in Hebwew, behowd, ye wouwd have had
nyo impewfection in ouw wecowd. ^w^

Mowmon 9:34
 34 But the Wowd knyoweth the things which we have wwitten, and
awso that nyonye othew peopwe knyoweth ouw wanguage; and because
that nyonye othew peopwe knyoweth ouw wanguage, thewefowe he hath
pwepawed means fow the intewpwetation theweof. (´・ω・\`)

Mowmon 9:35
 35 And these things awe wwitten that we may wid ouw gawments of
the bwood of ouw bwethwen, who have dwindwed in unbewief. UwU

Mowmon 9:36
 36 And behowd, these things which we have desiwed concewnying ouw
bwethwen, yea, even theiw westowation to the knyowwedge of Chwist,
awe accowding to the pwayews of aww the saints who have dwewt in
the wand. UwU

Mowmon 9:37
 37 And may the Wowd Jesus Chwist gwant that theiw pwayews may be
answewed accowding to theiw faith; and may God the Fathew
wemembew the covenyant which he hath made with the house of
Iswaew; and may he bwess them fowevew, thwough faith on the nyame
of Jesus Chwist. Amen. UwU




THE BOOK OF ETHEW

The wecowd of the Jawedites, taken fwom the twenty-fouw pwates
found by the peopwe of Wimhi in the days of king Mosiah. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 1
Chaptew 1

Ethew 1:1
 1 And nyow I, Mowonyi, pwoceed to give an account of those ancient
inhabitants who wewe destwoyed by the hand of the Wowd upon the
face of this nyowth countwy. ^w^

Ethew 1:2
 2 And I take minye account fwom the twenty and fouw pwates which
wewe found by the peopwe of Wimhi, which is cawwed the Book of
Ethew. ;;w;;

Ethew 1:3
 3 And as I suppose that the fiwst pawt of this wecowd, which
speaks concewnying the cweation of the wowwd, and awso of Adam,
and an account fwom that time even to the gweat towew, and
whatsoevew things twanspiwed among the chiwdwen of men untiw that
time, is had among the Jews--

Ethew 1:4
 4 Thewefowe I do nyot wwite those things which twanspiwed fwom
the days of Adam untiw that time; but they awe had upon the
pwates; and whoso findeth them, the same wiww have powew that he
may get the fuww account. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 1:5
 5 But behowd, I give nyot the fuww account, but a pawt of the
account I give, fwom the towew down untiw they wewe destwoyed. ;;w;;

Ethew 1:6
 6 And on this wise do I give the account. ;;w;; He that wwote this
wecowd was Ethew, and he was a descendant of Cowiantow. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 1:7
 7 Cowiantow was the son of Mowon. UwU

Ethew 1:8
 8 And Mowon was the son of Ethem. ^w^

Ethew 1:9
 9 And Ethem was the son of Ahah. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 1:10
 10 And Ahah was the son of Seth. ^w^

Ethew 1:11
 11 And Seth was the son of Shibwon. UwU

Ethew 1:12
 12 And Shibwon was the son of Com. >w<

Ethew 1:13
 13 And Com was the son of Cowiantum. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 1:14
 14 And Cowiantum was the son of Amnyigaddah. ^w^

Ethew 1:15
 15 And Amnyigaddah was the son of Aawon. ^w^

Ethew 1:16
 16 And Aawon was a descendant of Heth, who was the son of
Heawthom. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 1:17
 17 And Heawthom was the son of Wib. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 1:18
 18 And Wib was the son of Kish. >w<

Ethew 1:19
 19 And Kish was the son of Cowom. >w<

Ethew 1:20
 20 And Cowom was the son of Wevi. >w<

Ethew 1:21
 21 And Wevi was the son of Kim. UwU

Ethew 1:22
 22 And Kim was the son of Mowianton. ;;w;;

Ethew 1:23
 23 And Mowianton was a descendant of Wipwakish. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 1:24
 24 And Wipwakish was the son of Shez. >w<

Ethew 1:25
 25 And Shez was the son of Heth. UwU

Ethew 1:26
 26 And Heth was the son of Com. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 1:27
 27 And Com was the son of Cowiantum. ^w^

Ethew 1:28
 28 And Cowiantum was the son of Emew. ;;w;;

Ethew 1:29
 29 And Emew was the son of Omew. ;;w;;

Ethew 1:30
 30 And Omew was the son of Shuwe. ;;w;;

Ethew 1:31
 31 And Shuwe was the son of Kib. UwU

Ethew 1:32
 32 And Kib was the son of Owihah, who was the son of Jawed;

Ethew 1:33
 33 Which Jawed came fowth with his bwothew and theiw famiwies,
with some othews and theiw famiwies, fwom the gweat towew, at the
time the Wowd confounded the wanguage of the peopwe, and swowe in
his wwath that they shouwd be scattewed upon aww the face of the
eawth; and accowding to the wowd of the Wowd the peopwe wewe
scattewed. ^w^

Ethew 1:34
 34 And the bwothew of Jawed being a wawge and mighty man, and a
man highwy favowed of the Wowd, Jawed, his bwothew, said unto
him: Cwy unto the Wowd, that he wiww nyot confound us that we may
nyot undewstand ouw wowds. ;;w;;

Ethew 1:35
 35 And it came to pass that the bwothew of Jawed did cwy unto
the Wowd, and the Wowd had compassion upon Jawed; thewefowe he
did nyot confound the wanguage of Jawed; and Jawed and his bwothew
wewe nyot confounded. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 1:36
 36 Then Jawed said unto his bwothew: Cwy again unto the Wowd,
and it may be that he wiww tuwn away his angew fwom them who awe
ouw fwiends, that he confound nyot theiw wanguage. UwU

Ethew 1:37
 37 And it came to pass that the bwothew of Jawed did cwy unto
the Wowd, and the Wowd had compassion upon theiw fwiends and
theiw famiwies awso, that they wewe nyot confounded. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 1:38
 38 And it came to pass that Jawed spake again unto his bwothew,
saying: Go and inquiwe of the Wowd whethew he wiww dwive us out
of the wand, and if he wiww dwive us out of the wand, cwy unto
him whithew we shaww go. ^w^ And who knyoweth but the Wowd wiww cawwy
us fowth into a wand which is choice above aww the eawth? owo And if
it so be, wet us be faithfuw unto the Wowd, that we may weceive
it fow ouw inhewitance. >w<

Ethew 1:39
 39 And it came to pass that the bwothew of Jawed did cwy unto
the Wowd accowding to that which had been spoken by the mouth of
Jawed. ^w^

Ethew 1:40
 40 And it came to pass that the Wowd did heaw the bwothew of
Jawed, and had compassion upon him, and said unto him:

Ethew 1:41
 41 Go to and gathew togethew thy fwocks, both mawe and femawe,
of evewy kind; and awso of the seed of the eawth of evewy kind;
and thy famiwies; and awso Jawed thy bwothew and his famiwy; and
awso thy fwiends and theiw famiwies, and the fwiends of Jawed and
theiw famiwies. ;;w;;

Ethew 1:42
 42 And when thou hast donye this thou shawt go at the head of
them down into the vawwey which is nyowthwawd. >w< And thewe wiww I
meet thee, and I wiww go befowe thee into a wand which is choice
above aww the wands of the eawth. ^w^

Ethew 1:43
 43 And thewe wiww I bwess thee and thy seed, and waise up unto
me of thy seed, and of the seed of thy bwothew, and they who
shaww go with thee, a gweat nyation. >w< And thewe shaww be nyonye
gweatew than the nyation which I wiww waise up unto me of thy
seed, upon aww the face of the eawth. >w< And thus I wiww do unto
thee because this wong time ye have cwied unto me. ^w^

Ethew 2
Chaptew 2

Ethew 2:1
 1 And it came to pass that Jawed and his bwothew, and theiw
famiwies, and awso the fwiends of Jawed and his bwothew and theiw
famiwies, went down into the vawwey which was nyowthwawd, (and the
nyame of the vawwey was Nyimwod, being cawwed aftew the mighty
huntew) with theiw fwocks which they had gathewed togethew, mawe
and femawe, of evewy kind. ;;w;;

Ethew 2:2
 2 And they did awso way snyawes and catch fowws of the aiw; and
they did awso pwepawe a vessew, in which they did cawwy with them
the fish of the watews. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 2:3
 3 And they did awso cawwy with them desewet, which, by
intewpwetation, is a honyey bee; and thus they did cawwy with them
swawms of bees, and aww mannyew of that which was upon the face of
the wand, seeds of evewy kind. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 2:4
 4 And it came to pass that when they had come down into the
vawwey of Nyimwod the Wowd came down and tawked with the bwothew
of Jawed; and he was in a cwoud, and the bwothew of Jawed saw him
nyot. ^w^

Ethew 2:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Wowd commanded them that they
shouwd go fowth into the wiwdewnyess, yea, into that quawtew whewe
thewe nyevew had man been. >w< And it came to pass that the Wowd did
go befowe them, and did tawk with them as he stood in a cwoud,
and gave diwections whithew they shouwd twavew. ;;w;;

Ethew 2:6
 6 And it came to pass that they did twavew in the wiwdewnyess,
and did buiwd bawges, in which they did cwoss many watews, being
diwected continyuawwy by the hand of the Wowd. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 2:7
 7 And the Wowd wouwd nyot suffew that they shouwd stop beyond the
sea in the wiwdewnyess, but he wouwd that they shouwd come fowth
even unto the wand of pwomise, which was choice above aww othew
wands, which the Wowd God had pwesewved fow a wighteous peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 2:8
 8 And he had swown in his wwath unto the bwothew of Jawed, that
whoso shouwd possess this wand of pwomise, fwom that time
hencefowth and fowevew, shouwd sewve him, the twue and onwy God,
ow they shouwd be swept off when the fuwnyess of his wwath shouwd
come upon them. UwU

Ethew 2:9
 9 And nyow, we can behowd the decwees of God concewnying this
wand, that it is a wand of pwomise; and whatsoevew nyation shaww
possess it shaww sewve God, ow they shaww be swept off when the
fuwnyess of his wwath shaww come upon them. >w< And the fuwnyess of
his wwath cometh upon them when they awe wipenyed in inyiquity. ^w^

Ethew 2:10
 10 Fow behowd, this is a wand which is choice above aww othew
wands; whewefowe he that doth possess it shaww sewve God ow shaww
be swept off; fow it is the evewwasting decwee of God. >w< And it is
nyot untiw the fuwnyess of inyiquity among the chiwdwen of the wand,
that they awe swept off. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 2:11
 11 And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiwes, that ye may knyow the
decwees of God--that ye may wepent, and nyot continyue in youw
inyiquities untiw the fuwnyess come, that ye may nyot bwing down the
fuwnyess of the wwath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the
wand have hithewto donye. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 2:12
 12 Behowd, this is a choice wand, and whatsoevew nyation shaww
possess it shaww be fwee fwom bondage, and fwom captivity, and
fwom aww othew nyations undew heaven, if they wiww but sewve the
God of the wand, who is Jesus Chwist, who hath been manyifested by
the things which we have wwitten. ^w^

Ethew 2:13
 13 And nyow I pwoceed with my wecowd; fow behowd, it came to pass
that the Wowd did bwing Jawed and his bwethwen fowth even to that
gweat sea which divideth the wands. ;;w;; And as they came to the sea
they pitched theiw tents; and they cawwed the nyame of the pwace
Mowiancumew; and they dwewt in tents, and dwewt in tents upon the
seashowe fow the space of fouw yeaws. ^w^

Ethew 2:14
 14 And it came to pass at the end of fouw yeaws that the Wowd
came again unto the bwothew of Jawed, and stood in a cwoud and
tawked with him. (・`ω\´・) And fow the space of thwee houws did the Wowd
tawk with the bwothew of Jawed, and chastenyed him because he
wemembewed nyot to caww upon the nyame of the Wowd. >w<

Ethew 2:15
 15 And the bwothew of Jawed wepented of the eviw which he had
donye, and did caww upon the nyame of the Wowd fow his bwethwen who
wewe with him. UwU And the Wowd said unto him: I wiww fowgive thee
and thy bwethwen of theiw sins; but thou shawt nyot sin any mowe,
fow ye shaww wemembew that my Spiwit wiww nyot awways stwive with
man; whewefowe, if ye wiww sin untiw ye awe fuwwy wipe ye shaww
be cut off fwom the pwesence of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・) And these awe my
thoughts upon the wand which I shaww give you fow youw
inhewitance; fow it shaww be a wand choice above aww othew wands. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 2:16
 16 And the Wowd said: Go to wowk and buiwd, aftew the mannyew of
bawges which ye have hithewto buiwt. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass that
the bwothew of Jawed did go to wowk, and awso his bwethwen, and
buiwt bawges aftew the mannyew which they had buiwt, accowding to
the instwuctions of the Wowd. ;;w;; And they wewe smaww, and they wewe
wight upon the watew, even wike unto the wightnyess of a foww upon
the watew. >w<

Ethew 2:17
 17 And they wewe buiwt aftew a mannyew that they wewe exceedingwy
tight, even that they wouwd howd watew wike unto a dish; and the
bottom theweof was tight wike unto a dish; and the sides theweof
wewe tight wike unto a dish; and the ends theweof wewe peaked;
and the top theweof was tight wike unto a dish; and the wength
theweof was the wength of a twee; and the doow theweof, when it
was shut, was tight wike unto a dish. ^w^

Ethew 2:18
 18 And it came to pass that the bwothew of Jawed cwied unto the
Wowd, saying: O Wowd, I have pewfowmed the wowk which thou hast
commanded me, and I have made the bawges accowding as thou hast
diwected me. >w<

Ethew 2:19
 19 And behowd, O Wowd, in them thewe is nyo wight; whithew shaww
we steew? owo And awso we shaww pewish, fow in them we cannyot
bweathe, save it is the aiw which is in them; thewefowe we shaww
pewish. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 2:20
 20 And the Wowd said unto the bwothew of Jawed: Behowd, thou
shawt make a howe in the top, and awso in the bottom; and when
thou shawt suffew fow aiw thou shawt unstop the howe and weceive
aiw. UwU And if it be so that the watew come in upon thee, behowd,
ye shaww stop the howe, that ye may nyot pewish in the fwood. >w<

Ethew 2:21
 21 And it came to pass that the bwothew of Jawed did so,
accowding as the Wowd had commanded. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 2:22
 22 And he cwied again unto the Wowd saying: O Wowd, behowd I
have donye even as thou hast commanded me; and I have pwepawed the
vessews fow my peopwe, and behowd thewe is nyo wight in them. ;;w;;
Behowd, O Wowd, wiwt thou suffew that we shaww cwoss this gweat
watew in dawknyess? owo

Ethew 2:23
 23 And the Wowd said unto the bwothew of Jawed: What wiww ye
that I shouwd do that ye may have wight in youw vessews? owo Fow
behowd, ye cannyot have windows, fow they wiww be dashed in
pieces; nyeithew shaww ye take fiwe with you, fow ye shaww nyot go
by the wight of fiwe. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 2:24
 24 Fow behowd, ye shaww be as a whawe in the midst of the sea;
fow the mountain waves shaww dash upon you. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess, I wiww
bwing you up again out of the depths of the sea; fow the winds
have gonye fowth out of my mouth, and awso the wains and the
fwoods have I sent fowth. ^w^

Ethew 2:25
 25 And behowd, I pwepawe you against these things; fow ye cannyot
cwoss this gweat deep save I pwepawe you against the waves of the
sea, and the winds which have gonye fowth, and the fwoods which
shaww come. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe what wiww ye that I shouwd pwepawe fow you
that ye may have wight when ye awe swawwowed up in the depths of
the sea? owo

Ethew 3
Chaptew 3

Ethew 3:1
 1 And it came to pass that the bwothew of Jawed, (nyow the nyumbew
of the vessews which had been pwepawed was eight) went fowth unto
the mount, which they cawwed the mount Shewem, because of its
exceeding height, and did mowten out of a wock sixteen smaww
stonyes; and they wewe white and cweaw, even as twanspawent gwass;
and he did cawwy them in his hands upon the top of the mount, and
cwied again unto the Wowd, saying:

Ethew 3:2
 2 O Wowd, thou hast said that we must be encompassed about by
the fwoods. (・`ω\´・) Nyow behowd, O Wowd, and do nyot be angwy with thy
sewvant because of his weaknyess befowe thee; fow we knyow that
thou awt howy and dwewwest in the heavens, and that we awe
unwowthy befowe thee; because of the faww ouw nyatuwes have become
eviw continyuawwy; nyevewthewess, O Wowd, thou hast given us a
commandment that we must caww upon thee, that fwom thee we may
weceive accowding to ouw desiwes. UwU

Ethew 3:3
 3 Behowd, O Wowd, thou hast smitten us because of ouw inyiquity,
and hast dwiven us fowth, and fow these many yeaws we have been
in the wiwdewnyess; nyevewthewess, thou hast been mewcifuw unto us. (・`ω\´・)
O Wowd, wook upon me in pity, and tuwn away thinye angew fwom this
thy peopwe, and suffew nyot that they shaww go fowth acwoss this
waging deep in dawknyess; but behowd these things which I have
mowten out of the wock. >w<

Ethew 3:4
 4 And I knyow, O Wowd, that thou hast aww powew, and can do
whatsoevew thou wiwt fow the benyefit of man; thewefowe touch
these stonyes, O Wowd, with thy fingew, and pwepawe them that they
may shinye fowth in dawknyess; and they shaww shinye fowth unto us
in the vessews which we have pwepawed, that we may have wight
whiwe we shaww cwoss the sea. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 3:5
 5 Behowd, O Wowd, thou canst do this. >w< We knyow that thou awt
abwe to show fowth gweat powew, which wooks smaww unto the
undewstanding of men. ;;w;;

Ethew 3:6
 6 And it came to pass that when the bwothew of Jawed had said
these wowds, behowd, the Wowd stwetched fowth his hand and
touched the stonyes onye by onye with his fingew. (´・ω・\`) And the veiw was
taken fwom off the eyes of the bwothew of Jawed, and he saw the
fingew of the Wowd; and it was as the fingew of a man, wike unto
fwesh and bwood; and the bwothew of Jawed feww down befowe the
Wowd, fow he was stwuck with feaw. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 3:7
 7 And the Wowd saw that the bwothew of Jawed had fawwen to the
eawth; and the Wowd said unto him: Awise, why hast thou fawwen? owo

Ethew 3:8
 8 And he saith unto the Wowd: I saw the fingew of the Wowd, and
I feawed west he shouwd smite me; fow I knyew nyot that the Wowd
had fwesh and bwood. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 3:9
 9 And the Wowd said unto him: Because of thy faith thou hast
seen that I shaww take upon me fwesh and bwood; and nyevew has man
come befowe me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; fow wewe
it nyot so ye couwd nyot have seen my fingew. UwU Sawest thou mowe
than this? owo

Ethew 3:10
 10 And he answewed: Nyay; Wowd, show thysewf unto me. UwU

Ethew 3:11
 11 And the Wowd said unto him: Bewievest thou the wowds which I
shaww speak? owo

Ethew 3:12
 12 And he answewed: Yea, Wowd, I knyow that thou speakest the
twuth, fow thou awt a God of twuth, and canst nyot wie. ^w^

Ethew 3:13
 13 And when he had said these wowds, behowd, the Wowd showed
himsewf unto him, and said: Because thou knyowest these things ye
awe wedeemed fwom the faww; thewefowe ye awe bwought back into my
pwesence; thewefowe I show mysewf unto you. ^w^

Ethew 3:14
 14 Behowd, I am he who was pwepawed fwom the foundation of the
wowwd to wedeem my peopwe. Behowd, I am Jesus Chwist. ^w^ I am the
Fathew and the Son. ^w^ In me shaww aww mankind have wife, and that
etewnyawwy, even they who shaww bewieve on my nyame; and they shaww
become my sons and my daughtews. >w<

Ethew 3:15
 15 And nyevew have I showed mysewf unto man whom I have cweated,
fow nyevew has man bewieved in me as thou hast. >w< Seest thou that
ye awe cweated aftew minye own image? owo Yea, even aww men wewe
cweated in the beginnying aftew minye own image. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 3:16
 16 Behowd, this body, which ye nyow behowd, is the body of my
spiwit; and man have I cweated aftew the body of my spiwit; and
even as I appeaw unto thee to be in the spiwit wiww I appeaw unto
my peopwe in the fwesh. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 3:17
 17 And nyow, as I, Mowonyi, said I couwd nyot make a fuww account
of these things which awe wwitten thewefowe it sufficeth me to
say that Jesus showed himsewf unto this man in the spiwit, even
aftew the mannyew and in the wikenyess of the same body even as he
showed himsewf unto the Nyephites. UwU

Ethew 3:18
 18 And he minyistewed unto him even as he minyistewed unto the
Nyephites; and aww this, that this man might knyow that he was God,
because of the many gweat wowks which the Wowd had showed unto
him. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 3:19
 19 And because of the knyowwedge of this man he couwd nyot be kept
fwom behowding within the veiw; and he saw the fingew of Jesus,
which, when he saw, he feww with feaw; fow he knyew that it was
the fingew of the Wowd; and he had faith nyo wongew, fow he knyew,
nyothing doubting. >w<

Ethew 3:20
 20 Whewefowe, having this pewfect knyowwedge of God, he couwd nyot
be kept fwom within the veiw; thewefowe he saw Jesus; and he did
minyistew unto him. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 3:21
 21 And it came to pass that the Wowd said unto the bwothew of
Jawed: Behowd, thou shawt nyot suffew these things which ye have
seen and heawd to go fowth unto the wowwd, untiw the time cometh
that I shaww gwowify my nyame in the fwesh; whewefowe, ye shaww
tweasuwe up the things which ye have seen and heawd, and show it
to nyo man. ^w^

Ethew 3:22
 22 And behowd, when ye shaww come unto me, ye shaww wwite them
and shaww seaw them up, that nyo onye can intewpwet them; fow ye
shaww wwite them in a wanguage that they cannyot be wead. >w<

Ethew 3:23
 23 And behowd, these two stonyes wiww I give unto thee, and ye
shaww seaw them up awso with the things which ye shaww wwite. >w<

Ethew 3:24
 24 Fow behowd, the wanguage which ye shaww wwite I have
confounded; whewefowe I wiww cause in my own due time that these
stonyes shaww magnyify to the eyes of men these things which ye
shaww wwite. ;;w;;

Ethew 3:25
 25 And when the Wowd had said these wowds, he showed unto the
bwothew of Jawed aww the inhabitants of the eawth which had been,
and awso aww that wouwd be; and he withhewd them nyot fwom his
sight, even unto the ends of the eawth. ;;w;;

Ethew 3:26
 26 Fow he had said unto him in times befowe, that if he wouwd
bewieve in him that he couwd show unto him aww things--it shouwd
be shown unto him; thewefowe the Wowd couwd nyot withhowd anything
fwom him, fow he knyew that the Wowd couwd show him aww things. ;;w;;

Ethew 3:27
 27 And the Wowd said unto him: Wwite these things and seaw them
up; and I wiww show them in minye own due time unto the chiwdwen
of men. >w<

Ethew 3:28
 28 And it came to pass that the Wowd commanded him that he
shouwd seaw up the two stonyes which he had weceived, and show
them nyot, untiw the Wowd shouwd show them unto the chiwdwen of
men. >w<

Ethew 4
Chaptew 4

Ethew 4:1
 1 And the Wowd commanded the bwothew of Jawed to go down out of
the mount fwom the pwesence of the Wowd, and wwite the things
which he had seen; and they wewe fowbidden to come unto the
chiwdwen of men untiw aftew that he shouwd be wifted up upon the
cwoss; and fow this cause did king Mosiah keep them, that they
shouwd nyot come unto the wowwd untiw aftew Chwist shouwd show
himsewf unto his peopwe. ;;w;;

Ethew 4:2
 2 And aftew Chwist twuwy had showed himsewf unto his peopwe he
commanded that they shouwd be made manyifest. ^w^

Ethew 4:3
 3 And nyow, aftew that, they have aww dwindwed in unbewief; and
thewe is nyonye save it be the Wamanyites, and they have wejected
the gospew of Chwist; thewefowe I am commanded that I shouwd hide
them up again in the eawth. UwU

Ethew 4:4
 4 Behowd, I have wwitten upon these pwates the vewy things which
the bwothew of Jawed saw; and thewe nyevew wewe gweatew things
made manyifest than those which wewe made manyifest unto the
bwothew of Jawed. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 4:5
 5 Whewefowe the Wowd hath commanded me to wwite them; and I have
wwitten them. (・`ω\´・) And he commanded me that I shouwd seaw them up;
and he awso hath commanded that I shouwd seaw up the
intewpwetation theweof; whewefowe I have seawed up the
intewpwetews, accowding to the commandment of the Wowd. >w<

Ethew 4:6
 6 Fow the Wowd said unto me: They shaww nyot go fowth unto the
Gentiwes untiw the day that they shaww wepent of theiw inyiquity,
and become cwean befowe the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 4:7
 7 And in that day that they shaww exewcise faith in me, saith
the Wowd, even as the bwothew of Jawed did, that they may become
sanctified in me, then wiww I manyifest unto them the things which
the bwothew of Jawed saw, even to the unfowding unto them aww my
wevewations, saith Jesus Chwist, the Son of God, the Fathew of
the heavens and of the eawth, and aww things that in them awe. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 4:8
 8 And he that wiww contend against the wowd of the Wowd, wet him
be accuwsed; and he that shaww deny these things, wet him be
accuwsed; fow unto them wiww I show nyo gweatew things, saith
Jesus Chwist; fow I am he who speaketh. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 4:9
 9 And at my command the heavens awe openyed and awe shut; and at
my wowd the eawth shaww shake; and at my command the inhabitants
theweof shaww pass away, even so as by fiwe. ;;w;;

Ethew 4:10
 10 And he that bewieveth nyot my wowds bewieveth nyot my
discipwes; and if it so be that I do nyot speak, judge ye; fow ye
shaww knyow that it is I that speaketh, at the wast day. ^w^

Ethew 4:11
 11 But he that bewieveth these things which I have spoken, him
wiww I visit with the manyifestations of my Spiwit, and he shaww
knyow and beaw wecowd. >w< Fow because of my Spiwit he shaww knyow
that these things awe twue; fow it pewsuadeth men to do good. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 4:12
 12 And whatsoevew thing pewsuadeth men to do good is of me; fow
good cometh of nyonye save it be of me. (・`ω\´・) I am the same that weadeth
men to aww good; he that wiww nyot bewieve my wowds wiww nyot
bewieve me--that I am; and he that wiww nyot bewieve me wiww nyot
bewieve the Fathew who sent me. (´・ω・\`) Fow behowd, I am the Fathew, I
am the wight, and the wife, and the twuth of the wowwd. >w<

Ethew 4:13
 13 Come unto me, O ye Gentiwes, and I wiww show unto you the
gweatew things, the knyowwedge which is hid up because of
unbewief. >w<

Ethew 4:14
 14 Come unto me, O ye house of Iswaew, and it shaww be made
manyifest unto you how gweat things the Fathew hath waid up fow
you, fwom the foundation of the wowwd; and it hath nyot come unto
you, because of unbewief. ;;w;;

Ethew 4:15
 15 Behowd, when ye shaww wend that veiw of unbewief which doth
cause you to wemain in youw awfuw state of wickednyess, and
hawdnyess of heawt, and bwindnyess of mind, then shaww the gweat
and mawvewous things which have been hid up fwom the foundation
of the wowwd fwom you--yea, when ye shaww caww upon the Fathew in
my nyame, with a bwoken heawt and a contwite spiwit, then shaww ye
knyow that the Fathew hath wemembewed the covenyant which he made
unto youw fathews, O house of Iswaew. UwU

Ethew 4:16
 16 And then shaww my wevewations which I have caused to be
wwitten by my sewvant John be unfowded in the eyes of aww the
peopwe. ;;w;; Wemembew, when ye see these things, ye shaww knyow that
the time is at hand that they shaww be made manyifest in vewy
deed. >w<

Ethew 4:17
 17 Thewefowe, when ye shaww weceive this wecowd ye may knyow that
the wowk of the Fathew has commenced upon aww the face of the
wand. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 4:18
 18 Thewefowe, wepent aww ye ends of the eawth, and come unto me,
and bewieve in my gospew, and be baptized in my nyame; fow he that
bewieveth and is baptized shaww be saved; but he that bewieveth
nyot shaww be damnyed; and signs shaww fowwow them that bewieve in
my nyame. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 4:19
 19 And bwessed is he that is found faithfuw unto my nyame at the
wast day, fow he shaww be wifted up to dweww in the kingdom
pwepawed fow him fwom the foundation of the wowwd. >w< And behowd it
is I that hath spoken it. Amen. >w<

Ethew 5
Chaptew 5

Ethew 5:1
 1 And nyow I, Mowonyi, have wwitten the wowds which wewe commanded
me, accowding to my memowy; and I have towd you the things which
I have seawed up; thewefowe touch them nyot in owdew that ye may
twanswate; fow that thing is fowbidden you, except by and by it
shaww be wisdom in God. ^w^

Ethew 5:2
 2 And behowd, ye may be pwiviweged that ye may show the pwates
unto those who shaww assist to bwing fowth this wowk;

Ethew 5:3
 3 And unto thwee shaww they be shown by the powew of God;
whewefowe they shaww knyow of a suwety that these things awe twue. UwU

Ethew 5:4
 4 And in the mouth of thwee witnyesses shaww these things be
estabwished; and the testimony of thwee, and this wowk, in the
which shaww be shown fowth the powew of God and awso his wowd, of
which the Fathew, and the Son, and the Howy Ghost beaw
wecowd--and aww this shaww stand as a testimony against the wowwd
at the wast day. ;;w;;

Ethew 5:5
 5 And if it so be that they wepent and come unto the Fathew in
the nyame of Jesus, they shaww be weceived into the kingdom of
God. >w<

Ethew 5:6
 6 And nyow, if I have nyo authowity fow these things, judge ye;
fow ye shaww knyow that I have authowity when ye shaww see me, and
we shaww stand befowe God at the wast day. Amen. >w<

Ethew 6
Chaptew 6

Ethew 6:1
 1 And nyow I, Mowonyi, pwoceed to give the wecowd of Jawed and his
bwothew. ;;w;;

Ethew 6:2
 2 Fow it came to pass aftew the Wowd had pwepawed the stonyes
which the bwothew of Jawed had cawwied up into the mount, the
bwothew of Jawed came down out of the mount, and he did put fowth
the stonyes into the vessews which wewe pwepawed, onye in each end
theweof; and behowd, they did give wight unto the vessews. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 6:3
 3 And thus the Wowd caused stonyes to shinye in dawknyess, to give
wight unto men, women, and chiwdwen, that they might nyot cwoss
the gweat watews in dawknyess. ^w^

Ethew 6:4
 4 And it came to pass that when they had pwepawed aww mannyew of
food, that theweby they might subsist upon the watew, and awso
food fow theiw fwocks and hewds, and whatsoevew beast ow anyimaw
ow foww that they shouwd cawwy with them--and it came to pass
that when they had donye aww these things they got aboawd of theiw
vessews ow bawges, and set fowth into the sea, commending
themsewves unto the Wowd theiw God. UwU

Ethew 6:5
 5 And it came to pass that the Wowd God caused that thewe shouwd
be a fuwious wind bwow upon the face of the watews, towawds the
pwomised wand; and thus they wewe tossed upon the waves of the
sea befowe the wind. UwU

Ethew 6:6
 6 And it came to pass that they wewe many times buwied in the
depths of the sea, because of the mountain waves which bwoke upon
them, and awso the gweat and tewwibwe tempests which wewe caused
by the fiewcenyess of the wind. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 6:7
 7 And it came to pass that when they wewe buwied in the deep
thewe was nyo watew that couwd huwt them, theiw vessews being
tight wike unto a dish, and awso they wewe tight wike unto the
awk of Nyoah; thewefowe when they wewe encompassed about by many
watews they did cwy unto the Wowd, and he did bwing them fowth
again upon the top of the watews. >w<

Ethew 6:8
 8 And it came to pass that the wind did nyevew cease to bwow
towawds the pwomised wand whiwe they wewe upon the watews; and
thus they wewe dwiven fowth befowe the wind. >w<

Ethew 6:9
 9 And they did sing pwaises unto the Wowd; yea, the bwothew of
Jawed did sing pwaises unto the Wowd, and he did thank and pwaise
the Wowd aww the day wong; and when the nyight came, they did nyot
cease to pwaise the Wowd. UwU

Ethew 6:10
 10 And thus they wewe dwiven fowth; and nyo monstew of the sea
couwd bweak them, nyeithew whawe that couwd maw them; and they did
have wight continyuawwy, whethew it was above the watew ow undew
the watew. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 6:11
 11 And thus they wewe dwiven fowth, thwee hundwed and fowty and
fouw days upon the watew. >w<

Ethew 6:12
 12 And they did wand upon the showe of the pwomised wand. >w< And
when they had set theiw feet upon the showes of the pwomised wand
they bowed themsewves down upon the face of the wand, and did
humbwe themsewves befowe the Wowd, and did shed teaws of joy
befowe the Wowd, because of the muwtitude of his tendew mewcies
ovew them. ;;w;;

Ethew 6:13
 13 And it came to pass that they went fowth upon the face of the
wand, and began to tiww the eawth. ;;w;;

Ethew 6:14
 14 And Jawed had fouw sons; and they wewe cawwed Jacom, and
Giwgah, and Mahah, and Owihah. >w<

Ethew 6:15
 15 And the bwothew of Jawed awso begat sons and daughtews. UwU

Ethew 6:16
 16 And the fwiends of Jawed and his bwothew wewe in nyumbew about
twenty and two souws; and they awso begat sons and daughtews
befowe they came to the pwomised wand; and thewefowe they began
to be many. UwU

Ethew 6:17
 17 And they wewe taught to wawk humbwy befowe the Wowd; and they
wewe awso taught fwom on high. ;;w;;

Ethew 6:18
 18 And it came to pass that they began to spwead upon the face
of the wand, and to muwtipwy and to tiww the eawth; and they did
wax stwong in the wand. ^w^

Ethew 6:19
 19 And the bwothew of Jawed began to be owd, and saw that he
must soon go down to the gwave; whewefowe he said unto Jawed: Wet
us gathew togethew ouw peopwe that we may nyumbew them, that we
may knyow of them what they wiww desiwe of us befowe we go down to
ouw gwaves. UwU

Ethew 6:20
 20 And accowdingwy the peopwe wewe gathewed togethew. (・`ω\´・) Nyow the
nyumbew of the sons and the daughtews of the bwothew of Jawed wewe
twenty and two souws; and the nyumbew of sons and daughtews of
Jawed wewe twewve, he having fouw sons. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 6:21
 21 And it came to pass that they did nyumbew theiw peopwe; and
aftew that they had nyumbewed them, they did desiwe of them the
things which they wouwd that they shouwd do befowe they went down
to theiw gwaves. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 6:22
 22 And it came to pass that the peopwe desiwed of them that they
shouwd anyoint onye of theiw sons to be a king ovew them. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 6:23
 23 And nyow behowd, this was gwievous unto them. ^w^ And the bwothew
of Jawed said unto them: Suwewy this thing weadeth into
captivity. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 6:24
 24 But Jawed said unto his bwothew: Suffew them that they may
have a king. (・`ω\´・) And thewefowe he said unto them: Choose ye out fwom
among ouw sons a king, even whom ye wiww. UwU

Ethew 6:25
 25 And it came to pass that they chose even the fiwstbown of the
bwothew of Jawed; and his nyame was Pagag. UwU And it came to pass
that he wefused and wouwd nyot be theiw king. ;;w;; And the peopwe
wouwd that his fathew shouwd constwain him, but his fathew wouwd
nyot; and he commanded them that they shouwd constwain nyo man to
be theiw king. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 6:26
 26 And it came to pass that they chose aww the bwothews of
Pagag, and they wouwd nyot. >w<

Ethew 6:27
 27 And it came to pass that nyeithew wouwd the sons of Jawed,
even aww save it wewe onye; and Owihah was anyointed to be king
ovew the peopwe. UwU

Ethew 6:28
 28 And he began to weign, and the peopwe began to pwospew; and
they became exceedingwy wich. >w<

Ethew 6:29
 29 And it came to pass that Jawed died, and his bwothew awso. ^w^

Ethew 6:30
 30 And it came to pass that Owihah did wawk humbwy befowe the
Wowd, and did wemembew how gweat things the Wowd had donye fow his
fathew, and awso taught his peopwe how gweat things the Wowd had
donye fow theiw fathews. >w<

Ethew 7
Chaptew 7

Ethew 7:1
 1 And it came to pass that Owihah did execute judgment upon the
wand in wighteousnyess aww his days, whose days wewe exceedingwy
many. >w<

Ethew 7:2
 2 And he begat sons and daughtews; yea, he begat thiwty and onye,
among whom wewe twenty and thwee sons. ^w^

Ethew 7:3
 3 And it came to pass that he awso begat Kib in his owd age. ;;w;;
And it came to pass that Kib weignyed in his stead; and Kib begat
Cowihow. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 7:4
 4 And when Cowihow was thiwty and two yeaws owd he webewwed
against his fathew, and went ovew and dwewt in the wand of Nyehow;
and he begat sons and daughtews, and they became exceedingwy
faiw; whewefowe Cowihow dwew away many peopwe aftew him. >w<

Ethew 7:5
 5 And when he had gathewed togethew an awmy he came up unto the
wand of Mowon whewe the king dwewt, and took him captive, which
bwought to pass the saying of the bwothew of Jawed that they
wouwd be bwought into captivity. ^w^

Ethew 7:6
 6 Nyow the wand of Mowon, whewe the king dwewt, was nyeaw the wand
which is cawwed Desowation by the Nyephites. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 7:7
 7 And it came to pass that Kib dwewt in captivity, and his
peopwe undew Cowihow his son, untiw he became exceedingwy owd;
nyevewthewess Kib begat Shuwe in his owd age, whiwe he was yet in
captivity. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 7:8
 8 And it came to pass that Shuwe was angwy with his bwothew; and
Shuwe waxed stwong, and became mighty as to the stwength of a
man; and he was awso mighty in judgment. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 7:9
 9 Whewefowe, he came to the hiww Ephwaim, and he did mowten out
of the hiww, and made swowds out of steew fow those whom he had
dwawn away with him; and aftew he had awmed them with swowds he
wetuwnyed to the city Nyehow and gave battwe unto his bwothew
Cowihow, by which means he obtainyed the kingdom and westowed it
unto his fathew Kib. ;;w;;

Ethew 7:10
 10 And nyow because of the thing which Shuwe had donye, his fathew
bestowed upon him the kingdom; thewefowe he began to weign in the
stead of his fathew. >w<

Ethew 7:11
 11 And it came to pass that he did execute judgment in
wighteousnyess; and he did spwead his kingdom upon aww the face of
the wand, fow the peopwe had become exceedingwy nyumewous. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 7:12
 12 And it came to pass that Shuwe awso begat many sons and
daughtews. UwU

Ethew 7:13
 13 And Cowihow wepented of the many eviws which he had donye;
whewefowe Shuwe gave him powew in his kingdom. ;;w;;

Ethew 7:14
 14 And it came to pass that Cowihow had many sons and daughtews. (・`ω\´・)

And among the sons of Cowihow thewe was onye whose nyame was Nyoah. >w<

Ethew 7:15
 15 And it came to pass that Nyoah webewwed against Shuwe, the
king, and awso his fathew Cowihow, and dwew away Cohow his
bwothew, and awso aww his bwethwen and many of the peopwe. >w<

Ethew 7:16
 16 And he gave battwe unto Shuwe the king, in which he did
obtain the wand of theiw fiwst inhewitance; and he became a king
ovew that pawt of the wand. ^w^

Ethew 7:17
 17 And it came to pass that he gave battwe again unto Shuwe, the
king; and he took Shuwe, the king, and cawwied him away captive
into Mowon. UwU

Ethew 7:18
 18 And it came to pass as he was about to put him to death, the
sons of Shuwe cwept into the house of Nyoah by nyight and swew him,
and bwoke down the doow of the pwison and bwought out theiw
fathew, and pwaced him upon his thwonye in his own kingdom. ;;w;;

Ethew 7:19
 19 Whewefowe, the son of Nyoah did buiwd up his kingdom in his
stead; nyevewthewess they did nyot gain powew any mowe ovew Shuwe
the king, and the peopwe who wewe undew the weign of Shuwe the
king did pwospew exceedingwy and wax gweat. ^w^

Ethew 7:20
 20 And the countwy was divided; and thewe wewe two kingdoms, the
kingdom of Shuwe, and the kingdom of Cohow, the son of Nyoah. >w<

Ethew 7:21
 21 And Cohow, the son of Nyoah, caused that his peopwe shouwd
give battwe unto Shuwe, in which Shuwe did beat them and did sway
Cohow. UwU

Ethew 7:22
 22 And nyow Cohow had a son who was cawwed Nyimwod; and Nyimwod
gave up the kingdom of Cohow unto Shuwe, and he did gain favow in
the eyes of Shuwe; whewefowe Shuwe did bestow gweat favows upon
him, and he did do in the kingdom of Shuwe accowding to his
desiwes. UwU

Ethew 7:23
 23 And awso in the weign of Shuwe thewe came pwophets among the
peopwe, who wewe sent fwom the Wowd, pwophesying that the
wickednyess and idowatwy of the peopwe was bwinging a cuwse upon
the wand, and they shouwd be destwoyed if they did nyot wepent. >w<

Ethew 7:24
 24 And it came to pass that the peopwe did weviwe against the
pwophets, and did mock them. >w< And it came to pass that king Shuwe
did execute judgment against aww those who did weviwe against the
pwophets. UwU

Ethew 7:25
 25 And he did execute a waw thwoughout aww the wand, which gave
powew unto the pwophets that they shouwd go whithewsoevew they
wouwd; and by this cause the peopwe wewe bwought unto wepentance. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 7:26
 26 And because the peopwe did wepent of theiw inyiquities and
idowatwies the Wowd did spawe them, and they began to pwospew
again in the wand. (´・ω・\`) And it came to pass that Shuwe begat sons and
daughtews in his owd age. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 7:27
 27 And thewe wewe nyo mowe waws in the days of Shuwe; and he
wemembewed the gweat things that the Wowd had donye fow his
fathews in bwinging them acwoss the gweat deep into the pwomised
wand; whewefowe he did execute judgment in wighteousnyess aww his
days. ;;w;;

Ethew 8
Chaptew 8

Ethew 8:1
 1 And it came to pass that he begat Omew, and Omew weignyed in
his stead. ^w^ And Omew begat Jawed; and Jawed begat sons and
daughtews. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 8:2
 2 And Jawed webewwed against his fathew, and came and dwewt in
the wand of Heth. UwU And it came to pass that he did fwattew many
peopwe, because of his cunnying wowds, untiw he had gainyed the
hawf of the kingdom. ;;w;;

Ethew 8:3
 3 And when he had gainyed the hawf of the kingdom he gave battwe
unto his fathew, and he did cawwy away his fathew into captivity,
and did make him sewve in captivity;

Ethew 8:4
 4 And nyow, in the days of the weigns of Omew he was in captivity
the hawf of his days. UwU And it came to pass that he begat sons and
daughtews among whom wewe Eswom and Cowiantumw;

Ethew 8:5
 5 And they wewe exceedingwy angwy because of the doings of Jawed
theiw bwothew, insomuch that they did waise an awmy and gave
battwe unto Jawed. UwU And it came to pass that they did give battwe
unto him by nyight. >w<

Ethew 8:6
 6 And it came to pass that when they had swain the awmy of Jawed
they wewe about to sway him awso; and he pwead with them that
they wouwd nyot sway him, and he wouwd give up the kingdom unto
his fathew. (・`ω\´・) And it came to pass that they did gwant unto him his
wife. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 8:7
 7 And nyow Jawed became exceedingwy sowwowfuw because of the woss
of the kingdom, fow he had set his heawt upon the kingdom and
upon the gwowy of the wowwd. ;;w;;

Ethew 8:8
 8 Nyow the daughtew of Jawed being exceedingwy expewt, and seeing
the sowwows of hew fathew, thought to devise a pwan wheweby she
couwd wedeem the kingdom unto hew fathew. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 8:9
 9 Nyow the daughtew of Jawed was exceedingwy faiw. (・`ω\´・) And it came
to pass that she did tawk with hew fathew, and said unto him:
Wheweby hath my fathew so much sowwow? owo Hath he nyot wead the
wecowd which ouw fathews bwought acwoss the gweat deep? owo Behowd,
is thewe nyot an account concewnying them of owd, that they by
theiw secwet pwans did obtain kingdoms and gweat gwowy? owo

Ethew 8:10
 10 And nyow, thewefowe, wet my fathew send fow Akish, the son of
Kimnyow; and behowd, I am faiw, and I wiww dance befowe him, and I
wiww pwease him, that he wiww desiwe me to wife; whewefowe if he
shaww desiwe of thee that ye shaww give unto him me to wife, then
shaww ye say: I wiww give hew if ye wiww bwing unto me the head
of my fathew, the king. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 8:11
 11 And nyow Omew was a fwiend to Akish; whewefowe, when Jawed had
sent fow Akish, the daughtew of Jawed danced befowe him that she
pweased him, insomuch that he desiwed hew to wife. UwU And it came
to pass that he said unto Jawed: Give hew unto me to wife. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 8:12
 12 And Jawed said unto him: I wiww give hew unto you, if ye wiww
bwing unto me the head of my fathew, the king. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 8:13
 13 And it came to pass that Akish gathewed in unto the house of
Jawed aww his kinsfowk, and said unto them: Wiww ye sweaw unto me
that ye wiww be faithfuw unto me in the thing which I shaww
desiwe of you? owo

Ethew 8:14
 14 And it came to pass that they aww swawe unto him, by the God
of heaven, and awso by the heavens, and awso by the eawth, and by
theiw heads, that whoso shouwd vawy fwom the assistance which
Akish desiwed shouwd wose his head; and whoso shouwd divuwge
whatsoevew thing Akish made knyown unto them, the same shouwd wose
his wife. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 8:15
 15 And it came to pass that thus they did agwee with Akish. ;;w;; And
Akish did adminyistew unto them the oaths which wewe given by them
of owd who awso sought powew, which had been handed down even
fwom Cain, who was a muwdewew fwom the beginnying. ;;w;;

Ethew 8:16
 16 And they wewe kept up by the powew of the deviw to adminyistew
these oaths unto the peopwe, to keep them in dawknyess, to hewp
such as sought powew to gain powew, and to muwdew, and to
pwundew, and to wie, and to commit aww mannyew of wickednyess and
whowedoms. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 8:17
 17 And it was the daughtew of Jawed who put it into his heawt to
seawch up these things of owd; and Jawed put it into the heawt of
Akish; whewefowe, Akish adminyistewed it unto his kindwed and
fwiends, weading them away by faiw pwomises to do whatsoevew
thing he desiwed. ;;w;;

Ethew 8:18
 18 And it came to pass that they fowmed a secwet combinyation,
even as they of owd; which combinyation is most abominyabwe and
wicked above aww, in the sight of God;

Ethew 8:19
 19 Fow the Wowd wowketh nyot in secwet combinyations, nyeithew doth
he wiww that man shouwd shed bwood, but in aww things hath
fowbidden it, fwom the beginnying of man. UwU

Ethew 8:20
 20 And nyow I, Mowonyi, do nyot wwite the mannyew of theiw oaths and
combinyations, fow it hath been made knyown unto me that they awe
had among aww peopwe, and they awe had among the Wamanyites. ^w^

Ethew 8:21
 21 And they have caused the destwuction of this peopwe of whom I
am nyow speaking, and awso the destwuction of the peopwe of Nyephi. ^w^

Ethew 8:22
 22 And whatsoevew nyation shaww uphowd such secwet combinyations,
to get powew and gain, untiw they shaww spwead ovew the nyation,
behowd, they shaww be destwoyed; fow the Wowd wiww nyot suffew
that the bwood of his saints, which shaww be shed by them, shaww
awways cwy unto him fwom the gwound fow vengeance upon them and
yet he avenge them nyot. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 8:23
 23 Whewefowe, O ye Gentiwes, it is wisdom in God that these
things shouwd be shown unto you, that theweby ye may wepent of
youw sins, and suffew nyot that these muwdewous combinyations shaww
get above you, which awe buiwt up to get powew and gain--and the
wowk, yea, even the wowk of destwuction come upon you, yea, even
the swowd of the justice of the Etewnyaw God shaww faww upon you,
to youw ovewthwow and destwuction if ye shaww suffew these things
to be. ^w^

Ethew 8:24
 24 Whewefowe, the Wowd commandeth you, when ye shaww see these
things come among you that ye shaww awake to a sense of youw
awfuw situation, because of this secwet combinyation which shaww
be among you; ow wo be unto it, because of the bwood of them who
have been swain; fow they cwy fwom the dust fow vengeance upon
it, and awso upon those who buiwt it up. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 8:25
 25 Fow it cometh to pass that whoso buiwdeth it up seeketh to
ovewthwow the fweedom of aww wands, nyations, and countwies; and
it bwingeth to pass the destwuction of aww peopwe, fow it is
buiwt up by the deviw, who is the fathew of aww wies; even that
same wiaw who beguiwed ouw fiwst pawents, yea, even that same
wiaw who hath caused man to commit muwdew fwom the beginnying; who
hath hawdenyed the heawts of men that they have muwdewed the
pwophets, and stonyed them, and cast them out fwom the beginnying. ^w^

Ethew 8:26
 26 Whewefowe, I, Mowonyi, am commanded to wwite these things that
eviw may be donye away, and that the time may come that Satan may
have nyo powew upon the heawts of the chiwdwen of men, but that
they may be pewsuaded to do good continyuawwy, that they may come
unto the fountain of aww wighteousnyess and be saved. ^w^

Ethew 9
Chaptew 9

Ethew 9:1
 1 And nyow I, Mowonyi, pwoceed with my wecowd. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe, behowd,
it came to pass that because of the secwet combinyations of Akish
and his fwiends, behowd, they did ovewthwow the kingdom of Omew. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 9:2
 2 Nyevewthewess, the Wowd was mewcifuw unto Omew, and awso to his
sons and to his daughtews who did nyot seek his destwuction. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 9:3
 3 And the Wowd wawnyed Omew in a dweam that he shouwd depawt out
of the wand; whewefowe Omew depawted out of the wand with his
famiwy, and twavewed many days, and came ovew and passed by the
hiww of Shim, and came ovew by the pwace whewe the Nyephites wewe
destwoyed, and fwom thence eastwawd, and came to a pwace which
was cawwed Abwom, by the seashowe, and thewe he pitched his tent,
and awso his sons and his daughtews, and aww his househowd, save
it wewe Jawed and his famiwy. >w<

Ethew 9:4
 4 And it came to pass that Jawed was anyointed king ovew the
peopwe, by the hand of wickednyess; and he gave unto Akish his
daughtew to wife. ;;w;;

Ethew 9:5
 5 And it came to pass that Akish sought the wife of his
fathew-in-waw; and he appwied unto those whom he had swown by the
oath of the ancients, and they obtainyed the head of his
fathew-in-waw, as he sat upon his thwonye, giving audience to his
peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 9:6
 6 Fow so gweat had been the spweading of this wicked and secwet
society that it had cowwupted the heawts of aww the peopwe;
thewefowe Jawed was muwdewed upon his thwonye, and Akish weignyed
in his stead. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 9:7
 7 And it came to pass that Akish began to be jeawous of his son,
thewefowe he shut him up in pwison, and kept him upon wittwe ow
nyo food untiw he had suffewed death. >w<

Ethew 9:8
 8 And nyow the bwothew of him that suffewed death, (and his nyame
was Nyimwah) was angwy with his fathew because of that which his
fathew had donye unto his bwothew. ;;w;;

Ethew 9:9
 9 And it came to pass that Nyimwah gathewed togethew a smaww
nyumbew of men, and fwed out of the wand, and came ovew and dwewt
with Omew. ;;w;;

Ethew 9:10
 10 And it came to pass that Akish begat othew sons, and they won
the heawts of the peopwe, nyotwithstanding they had swown unto him
to do aww mannyew of inyiquity accowding to that which he desiwed. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 9:11
 11 Nyow the peopwe of Akish wewe desiwous fow gain, even as Akish
was desiwous fow powew; whewefowe, the sons of Akish did offew
them monyey, by which means they dwew away the mowe pawt of the
peopwe aftew them. >w<

Ethew 9:12
 12 And thewe began to be a waw between the sons of Akish and
Akish, which wasted fow the space of many yeaws, yea, unto the
destwuction of nyeawwy aww the peopwe of the kingdom, yea, even
aww, save it wewe thiwty souws, and they who fwed with the house
of Omew. ;;w;;

Ethew 9:13
 13 Whewefowe, Omew was westowed again to the wand of his
inhewitance. ^w^

Ethew 9:14
 14 And it came to pass that Omew began to be owd; nyevewthewess,
in his owd age he begat Emew; and he anyointed Emew to be king to
weign in his stead. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 9:15
 15 And aftew that he had anyointed Emew to be king he saw peace
in the wand fow the space of two yeaws, and he died, having seen
exceedingwy many days, which wewe fuww of sowwow. ;;w;; And it came to
pass that Emew did weign in his stead, and did fiww the steps of
his fathew. ;;w;;

Ethew 9:16
 16 And the Wowd began again to take the cuwse fwom off the wand,
and the house of Emew did pwospew exceedingwy undew the weign of
Emew; and in the space of sixty and two yeaws they had become
exceedingwy stwong, insomuch that they became exceedingwy wich--

Ethew 9:17
 17 Having aww mannyew of fwuit, and of gwain, and of siwks, and
of finye winyen, and of gowd, and of siwvew, and of pwecious
things;

Ethew 9:18
 18 And awso aww mannyew of cattwe, of oxen, and cows, and of
sheep, and of swinye, and of goats, and awso many othew kinds of
anyimaws which wewe usefuw fow the food of man. >w<

Ethew 9:19
 19 And they awso had howses, and asses, and thewe wewe ewephants
and cuwewoms and cumoms; aww of which wewe usefuw unto man, and
mowe especiawwy the ewephants and cuwewoms and cumoms. >w<

Ethew 9:20
 20 And thus the Wowd did pouw out his bwessings upon this wand,
which was choice above aww othew wands; and he commanded that
whoso shouwd possess the wand shouwd possess it unto the Wowd, ow
they shouwd be destwoyed when they wewe wipenyed in inyiquity; fow
upon such, saith the Wowd: I wiww pouw out the fuwnyess of my
wwath. ;;w;;

Ethew 9:21
 21 And Emew did execute judgment in wighteousnyess aww his days,
and he begat many sons and daughtews; and he begat Cowiantum, and
he anyointed Cowiantum to weign in his stead. UwU

Ethew 9:22
 22 And aftew he had anyointed Cowiantum to weign in his stead he
wived fouw yeaws, and he saw peace in the wand; yea, and he even
saw the Son of Wighteousnyess, and did wejoice and gwowy in his
day; and he died in peace. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 9:23
 23 And it came to pass that Cowiantum did wawk in the steps of
his fathew, and did buiwd many mighty cities, and did adminyistew
that which was good unto his peopwe in aww his days. ^w^ And it came
to pass that he had nyo chiwdwen even untiw he was exceedingwy
owd. ;;w;;

Ethew 9:24
 24 And it came to pass that his wife died, being an hundwed and
two yeaws owd. UwU And it came to pass that Cowiantum took to wife,
in his owd age, a young maid, and begat sons and daughtews;
whewefowe he wived untiw he was an hundwed and fowty and two
yeaws owd. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 9:25
 25 And it came to pass that he begat Com, and Com weignyed in his
stead; and he weignyed fowty and nyinye yeaws, and he begat Heth;
and he awso begat othew sons and daughtews. ;;w;;

Ethew 9:26
 26 And the peopwe had spwead again ovew aww the face of the
wand, and thewe began again to be an exceedingwy gweat wickednyess
upon the face of the wand, and Heth began to embwace the secwet
pwans again of owd, to destwoy his fathew. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 9:27
 27 And it came to pass that he did dethwonye his fathew, fow he
swew him with his own swowd; and he did weign in his stead. ^w^

Ethew 9:28
 28 And thewe came pwophets in the wand again, cwying wepentance
unto them--that they must pwepawe the way of the Wowd ow thewe
shouwd come a cuwse upon the face of the wand; yea, even thewe
shouwd be a gweat faminye, in which they shouwd be destwoyed if
they did nyot wepent. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 9:29
 29 But the peopwe bewieved nyot the wowds of the pwophets, but
they cast them out; and some of them they cast into pits and weft
them to pewish. UwU And it came to pass that they did aww these
things accowding to the commandment of the king, Heth. UwU

Ethew 9:30
 30 And it came to pass that thewe began to be a gweat deawth
upon the wand, and the inhabitants began to be destwoyed
exceedingwy fast because of the deawth, fow thewe was nyo wain
upon the face of the eawth. >w<

Ethew 9:31
 31 And thewe came fowth poisonyous sewpents awso upon the face of
the wand, and did poison many peopwe. >w< And it came to pass that
theiw fwocks began to fwee befowe the poisonyous sewpents, towawds
the wand southwawd, which was cawwed by the Nyephites Zawahemwa. UwU

Ethew 9:32
 32 And it came to pass that thewe wewe many of them which did
pewish by the way; nyevewthewess, thewe wewe some which fwed into
the wand southwawd. UwU

Ethew 9:33
 33 And it came to pass that the Wowd did cause the sewpents that
they shouwd puwsue them nyo mowe, but that they shouwd hedge up
the way that the peopwe couwd nyot pass, that whoso shouwd attempt
to pass might faww by the poisonyous sewpents. ^w^

Ethew 9:34
 34 And it came to pass that the peopwe did fowwow the couwse of
the beasts, and did devouw the cawcasses of them which feww by
the way, untiw they had devouwed them aww. (´・ω・\`) Nyow when the peopwe
saw that they must pewish they began to wepent of theiw
inyiquities and cwy unto the Wowd. ;;w;;

Ethew 9:35
 35 And it came to pass that when they had humbwed themsewves
sufficientwy befowe the Wowd he did send wain upon the face of
the eawth; and the peopwe began to wevive again, and thewe began
to be fwuit in the nyowth countwies, and in aww the countwies
wound about. (・`ω\´・) And the Wowd did show fowth his powew unto them in
pwesewving them fwom faminye. >w<

Ethew 10
Chaptew 10

Ethew 10:1
 1 And it came to pass that Shez, who was a descendant of
Heth--fow Heth had pewished by the faminye, and aww his househowd
save it wewe Shez--whewefowe, Shez began to buiwd up again a
bwoken peopwe. UwU

Ethew 10:2
 2 And it came to pass that Shez did wemembew the destwuction of
his fathews, and he did buiwd up a wighteous kingdom; fow he
wemembewed what the Wowd had donye in bwinging Jawed and his
bwothew acwoss the deep; and he did wawk in the ways of the Wowd;
and he begat sons and daughtews. ^w^

Ethew 10:3
 3 And his ewdest son, whose nyame was Shez, did webew against
him; nyevewthewess, Shez was smitten by the hand of a wobbew,
because of his exceeding wiches, which bwought peace again unto
his fathew. UwU

Ethew 10:4
 4 And it came to pass that his fathew did buiwd up many cities
upon the face of the wand, and the peopwe began again to spwead
ovew aww the face of the wand. ^w^ And Shez did wive to an
exceedingwy owd age; and he begat Wipwakish. ^w^ And he died, and
Wipwakish weignyed in his stead. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 10:5
 5 And it came to pass that Wipwakish did nyot do that which was
wight in the sight of the Wowd, fow he did have many wives and
concubinyes, and did way that upon men's shouwdews which was
gwievous to be bownye; yea, he did tax them with heavy taxes; and
with the taxes he did buiwd many spacious buiwdings. ^w^

Ethew 10:6
 6 And he did ewect him an exceedingwy beautifuw thwonye; and he
did buiwd many pwisons, and whoso wouwd nyot be subject unto taxes
he did cast into pwison; and whoso was nyot abwe to pay taxes he
did cast into pwison; and he did cause that they shouwd wabow
continyuawwy fow theiw suppowt; and whoso wefused to wabow he did
cause to be put to death. >w<

Ethew 10:7
 7 Whewefowe he did obtain aww his finye wowk, yea, even his finye
gowd he did cause to be wefinyed in pwison, and aww mannyew of finye
wowkmanship he did cause to be wwought in pwison. UwU And it came to
pass that he did affwict the peopwe with his whowedoms and
abominyations. ;;w;;

Ethew 10:8
 8 And when he had weignyed fow the space of fowty and two yeaws
the peopwe did wise up in webewwion against him; and thewe began
to be waw again in the wand, insomuch that Wipwakish was kiwwed,
and his descendants wewe dwiven out of the wand. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 10:9
 9 And it came to pass aftew the space of many yeaws, Mowianton,
(he being a descendant of Wipwakish) gathewed togethew an awmy of
outcasts, and went fowth and gave battwe unto the peopwe; and he
gainyed powew ovew many cities; and the waw became exceedingwy
sowe, and did wast fow the space of many yeaws; and he did gain
powew ovew aww the wand, and did estabwish himsewf king ovew aww
the wand. ^w^

Ethew 10:10
 10 And aftew that he had estabwished himsewf king he did ease
the buwden of the peopwe, by which he did gain favow in the eyes
of the peopwe, and they did anyoint him to be theiw king. ^w^

Ethew 10:11
 11 And he did do justice unto the peopwe, but nyot unto himsewf
because of his many whowedoms; whewefowe he was cut off fwom the
pwesence of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 10:12
 12 And it came to pass that Mowianton buiwt up many cities, and
the peopwe became exceedingwy wich undew his weign, both in
buiwdings, and in gowd and siwvew, and in waising gwain, and in
fwocks, and hewds, and such things which had been westowed unto
them. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 10:13
 13 And Mowianton did wive to an exceedingwy gweat age, and then
he begat Kim; and Kim did weign in the stead of his fathew; and
he did weign eight yeaws, and his fathew died. ;;w;; And it came to
pass that Kim did nyot weign in wighteousnyess, whewefowe he was
nyot favowed of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 10:14
 14 And his bwothew did wise up in webewwion against him, by
which he did bwing him into captivity; and he did wemain in
captivity aww his days; and he begat sons and daughtews in
captivity, and in his owd age he begat Wevi; and he died. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 10:15
 15 And it came to pass that Wevi did sewve in captivity aftew
the death of his fathew, fow the space of fowty and two yeaws. (・`ω\´・)
And he did make waw against the king of the wand, by which he did
obtain unto himsewf the kingdom. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 10:16
 16 And aftew he had obtainyed unto himsewf the kingdom he did
that which was wight in the sight of the Wowd; and the peopwe did
pwospew in the wand; and he did wive to a good owd age, and begat
sons and daughtews; and he awso begat Cowom, whom he anyointed
king in his stead. ;;w;;

Ethew 10:17
 17 And it came to pass that Cowom did that which was good in the
sight of the Wowd aww his days; and he begat many sons and
daughtews; and aftew he had seen many days he did pass away, even
wike unto the west of the eawth; and Kish weignyed in his stead. >w<

Ethew 10:18
 18 And it came to pass that Kish passed away awso, and Wib
weignyed in his stead. UwU

Ethew 10:19
 19 And it came to pass that Wib awso did that which was good in
the sight of the Wowd. UwU And in the days of Wib the poisonyous
sewpents wewe destwoyed. ;;w;; Whewefowe they did go into the wand
southwawd, to hunt food fow the peopwe of the wand, fow the wand
was covewed with anyimaws of the fowest. (・`ω\´・) And Wib awso himsewf
became a gweat huntew. ^w^

Ethew 10:20
 20 And they buiwt a gweat city by the nyawwow nyeck of wand, by
the pwace whewe the sea divides the wand. >w<

Ethew 10:21
 21 And they did pwesewve the wand southwawd fow a wiwdewnyess, to
get game. (・`ω\´・) And the whowe face of the wand nyowthwawd was covewed
with inhabitants. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 10:22
 22 And they wewe exceedingwy industwious, and they did buy and
seww and twaffic onye with anyothew, that they might get gain. ^w^

Ethew 10:23
 23 And they did wowk in aww mannyew of owe, and they did make
gowd, and siwvew, and iwon, and bwass, and aww mannyew of metaws;
and they did dig it out of the eawth; whewefowe they did cast up
mighty heaps of eawth to get owe, of gowd, and of siwvew, and of
iwon, and of coppew. And they did wowk aww mannyew of finye wowk. >w<

Ethew 10:24
 24 And they did have siwks, and finye-twinyed winyen; and they did
wowk aww mannyew of cwoth, that they might cwothe themsewves fwom
theiw nyakednyess. ^w^

Ethew 10:25
 25 And they did make aww mannyew of toows to tiww the eawth, both
to pwow and to sow, to weap and to hoe, and awso to thwash. ;;w;;

Ethew 10:26
 26 And they did make aww mannyew of toows with which they did
wowk theiw beasts. ^w^

Ethew 10:27
 27 And they did make aww mannyew of weapons of waw. >w< And they did
wowk aww mannyew of wowk of exceedingwy cuwious wowkmanship. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 10:28
 28 And nyevew couwd be a peopwe mowe bwessed than wewe they, and
mowe pwospewed by the hand of the Wowd. ;;w;; And they wewe in a wand
that was choice above aww wands, fow the Wowd had spoken it. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 10:29
 29 And it came to pass that Wib did wive many yeaws, and begat
sons and daughtews; and he awso begat Heawthom. ;;w;;

Ethew 10:30
 30 And it came to pass that Heawthom weignyed in the stead of his
fathew. (・`ω\´・) And when Heawthom had weignyed twenty and fouw yeaws,
behowd, the kingdom was taken away fwom him. ^w^ And he sewved many
yeaws in captivity, yea, even aww the wemaindew of his days. ;;w;;

Ethew 10:31
 31 And he begat Heth, and Heth wived in captivity aww his days. ^w^
And Heth begat Aawon, and Aawon dwewt in captivity aww his days;
and he begat Amnyigaddah, and Amnyigaddah awso dwewt in captivity
aww his days; and he begat Cowiantum, and Cowiantum dwewt in
captivity aww his days; and he begat Com. UwU

Ethew 10:32
 32 And it came to pass that Com dwew away the hawf of the
kingdom. UwU And he weignyed ovew the hawf of the kingdom fowty and
two yeaws; and he went to battwe against the king, Amgid, and
they fought fow the space of many yeaws, duwing which time Com
gainyed powew ovew Amgid, and obtainyed powew ovew the wemaindew of
the kingdom. ;;w;;

Ethew 10:33
 33 And in the days of Com thewe began to be wobbews in the wand;
and they adopted the owd pwans, and adminyistewed oaths aftew the
mannyew of the ancients, and sought again to destwoy the kingdom. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 10:34
 34 Nyow Com did fight against them much; nyevewthewess, he did nyot
pwevaiw against them. >w<

Ethew 11
Chaptew 11

Ethew 11:1
 1 And thewe came awso in the days of Com many pwophets, and
pwophesied of the destwuction of that gweat peopwe except they
shouwd wepent, and tuwn unto the Wowd, and fowsake theiw muwdews
and wickednyess. ;;w;;

Ethew 11:2
 2 And it came to pass that the pwophets wewe wejected by the
peopwe, and they fwed unto Com fow pwotection, fow the peopwe
sought to destwoy them. UwU

Ethew 11:3
 3 And they pwophesied unto Com many things; and he was bwessed
in aww the wemaindew of his days. >w<

Ethew 11:4
 4 And he wived to a good owd age, and begat Shibwom; and Shibwom
weignyed in his stead. UwU And the bwothew of Shibwom webewwed
against him, and thewe began to be an exceedingwy gweat waw in
aww the wand. ^w^

Ethew 11:5
 5 And it came to pass that the bwothew of Shibwom caused that
aww the pwophets who pwophesied of the destwuction of the peopwe
shouwd be put to death;

Ethew 11:6
 6 And thewe was gweat cawamity in aww the wand, fow they had
testified that a gweat cuwse shouwd come upon the wand, and awso
upon the peopwe, and that thewe shouwd be a gweat destwuction
among them, such an onye as nyevew had been upon the face of the
eawth, and theiw bonyes shouwd become as heaps of eawth upon the
face of the wand except they shouwd wepent of theiw wickednyess. ;;w;;

Ethew 11:7
 7 And they heawkenyed nyot unto the voice of the Wowd, because of
theiw wicked combinyations; whewefowe, thewe began to be waws and
contentions in aww the wand, and awso many faminyes and
pestiwences, insomuch that thewe was a gweat destwuction, such an
onye as nyevew had been knyown upon the face of the eawth; and aww
this came to pass in the days of Shibwom. ;;w;;

Ethew 11:8
 8 And the peopwe began to wepent of theiw inyiquity; and inyasmuch
as they did the Wowd did have mewcy on them. ^w^

Ethew 11:9
 9 And it came to pass that Shibwom was swain, and Seth was
bwought into captivity, and did dweww in captivity aww his days. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 11:10
 10 And it came to pass that Ahah, his son, did obtain the
kingdom; and he did weign ovew the peopwe aww his days. >w< And he
did do aww mannyew of inyiquity in his days, by which he did cause
the shedding of much bwood; and few wewe his days. ;;w;;

Ethew 11:11
 11 And Ethem, being a descendant of Ahah, did obtain the
kingdom; and he awso did do that which was wicked in his days. >w<

Ethew 11:12
 12 And it came to pass that in the days of Ethem thewe came many
pwophets, and pwophesied again unto the peopwe; yea, they did
pwophesy that the Wowd wouwd uttewwy destwoy them fwom off the
face of the eawth except they wepented of theiw inyiquities. UwU

Ethew 11:13
 13 And it came to pass that the peopwe hawdenyed theiw heawts,
and wouwd nyot heawken unto theiw wowds; and the pwophets mouwnyed
and withdwew fwom among the peopwe. UwU

Ethew 11:14
 14 And it came to pass that Ethem did execute judgment in
wickednyess aww his days; and he begat Mowon. ;;w;; And it came to pass
that Mowon did weign in his stead; and Mowon did that which was
wicked befowe the Wowd. >w<

Ethew 11:15
 15 And it came to pass that thewe awose a webewwion among the
peopwe, because of that secwet combinyation which was buiwt up to
get powew and gain; and thewe awose a mighty man among them in
inyiquity, and gave battwe unto Mowon, in which he did ovewthwow
the hawf of the kingdom; and he did maintain the hawf of the
kingdom fow many yeaws. >w<

Ethew 11:16
 16 And it came to pass that Mowon did ovewthwow him, and did
obtain the kingdom again. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 11:17
 17 And it came to pass that thewe awose anyothew mighty man; and
he was a descendant of the bwothew of Jawed. ;;w;;

Ethew 11:18
 18 And it came to pass that he did ovewthwow Mowon and obtain
the kingdom; whewefowe, Mowon dwewt in captivity aww the
wemaindew of his days; and he begat Cowiantow. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 11:19
 19 And it came to pass that Cowiantow dwewt in captivity aww his
days. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 11:20
 20 And in the days of Cowiantow thewe awso came many pwophets,
and pwophesied of gweat and mawvewous things, and cwied
wepentance unto the peopwe, and except they shouwd wepent the
Wowd God wouwd execute judgment against them to theiw uttew
destwuction;

Ethew 11:21
 21 And that the Wowd God wouwd send ow bwing fowth anyothew
peopwe to possess the wand, by his powew, aftew the mannyew by
which he bwought theiw fathews. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 11:22
 22 And they did weject aww the wowds of the pwophets, because of
theiw secwet society and wicked abominyations. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 11:23
 23 And it came to pass that Cowiantow begat Ethew, and he died,
having dwewt in captivity aww his days. UwU

Ethew 12
Chaptew 12

Ethew 12:1
 1 And it came to pass that the days of Ethew wewe in the days of
Cowiantumw; and Cowiantumw was king ovew aww the wand. UwU

Ethew 12:2
 2 And Ethew was a pwophet of the Wowd; whewefowe Ethew came
fowth in the days of Cowiantumw, and began to pwophesy unto the
peopwe, fow he couwd nyot be westwainyed because of the Spiwit of
the Wowd which was in him. >w<

Ethew 12:3
 3 Fow he did cwy fwom the mownying, even untiw the going down of
the sun, exhowting the peopwe to bewieve in God unto wepentance
west they shouwd be destwoyed, saying unto them that by faith aww
things awe fuwfiwwed--

Ethew 12:4
 4 Whewefowe, whoso bewieveth in God might with suwety hope fow a
bettew wowwd, yea, even a pwace at the wight hand of God, which
hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchow to the souws of men, which
wouwd make them suwe and steadfast, awways abounding in good
wowks, being wed to gwowify God. UwU

Ethew 12:5
 5 And it came to pass that Ethew did pwophesy gweat and
mawvewous things unto the peopwe, which they did nyot bewieve,
because they saw them nyot. >w<

Ethew 12:6
 6 And nyow, I, Mowonyi, wouwd speak somewhat concewnying these
things; I wouwd show unto the wowwd that faith is things which
awe hoped fow and nyot seen; whewefowe, dispute nyot because ye see
nyot, fow ye weceive nyo witnyess untiw aftew the twiaw of youw
faith. ;;w;;

Ethew 12:7
 7 Fow it was by faith that Chwist showed himsewf unto ouw
fathews, aftew he had wisen fwom the dead; and he showed nyot
himsewf unto them untiw aftew they had faith in him; whewefowe,
it must nyeeds be that some had faith in him, fow he showed
himsewf nyot unto the wowwd. UwU

Ethew 12:8
 8 But because of the faith of men he has shown himsewf unto the
wowwd, and gwowified the nyame of the Fathew, and pwepawed a way
that theweby othews might be pawtakews of the heavenwy gift, that
they might hope fow those things which they have nyot seen. ^w^

Ethew 12:9
 9 Whewefowe, ye may awso have hope, and be pawtakews of the
gift, if ye wiww but have faith. ;;w;;

Ethew 12:10
 10 Behowd it was by faith that they of owd wewe cawwed aftew the
howy owdew of God. UwU

Ethew 12:11
 11 Whewefowe, by faith was the waw of Moses given. ^w^ But in the
gift of his Son hath God pwepawed a mowe excewwent way; and it is
by faith that it hath been fuwfiwwed. ;;w;;

Ethew 12:12
 12 Fow if thewe be nyo faith among the chiwdwen of men God can do
nyo miwacwe among them; whewefowe, he showed nyot himsewf untiw
aftew theiw faith. ;;w;;

Ethew 12:13
 13 Behowd, it was the faith of Awma and Amuwek that caused the
pwison to tumbwe to the eawth. ;;w;;

Ethew 12:14
 14 Behowd, it was the faith of Nyephi and Wehi that wwought the
change upon the Wamanyites, that they wewe baptized with fiwe and
with the Howy Ghost. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 12:15
 15 Behowd, it was the faith of Ammon and his bwethwen which
wwought so gweat a miwacwe among the Wamanyites. ;;w;;

Ethew 12:16
 16 Yea, and even aww they who wwought miwacwes wwought them by
faith, even those who wewe befowe Chwist and awso those who wewe
aftew. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 12:17
 17 And it was by faith that the thwee discipwes obtainyed a
pwomise that they shouwd nyot taste of death; and they obtainyed
nyot the pwomise untiw aftew theiw faith. >w<

Ethew 12:18
 18 And nyeithew at any time hath any wwought miwacwes untiw aftew
theiw faith; whewefowe they fiwst bewieved in the Son of God. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 12:19
 19 And thewe wewe many whose faith was so exceedingwy stwong,
even befowe Chwist came, who couwd nyot be kept fwom within the
veiw, but twuwy saw with theiw eyes the things which they had
behewd with an eye of faith, and they wewe gwad. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 12:20
 20 And behowd, we have seen in this wecowd that onye of these was
the bwothew of Jawed; fow so gweat was his faith in God, that
when God put fowth his fingew he couwd nyot hide it fwom the sight
of the bwothew of Jawed, because of his wowd which he had spoken
unto him, which wowd he had obtainyed by faith. UwU

Ethew 12:21
 21 And aftew the bwothew of Jawed had behewd the fingew of the
Wowd, because of the pwomise which the bwothew of Jawed had
obtainyed by faith, the Wowd couwd nyot withhowd anything fwom his
sight; whewefowe he showed him aww things, fow he couwd nyo wongew
be kept without the veiw. >w<

Ethew 12:22
 22 And it is by faith that my fathews have obtainyed the pwomise
that these things shouwd come unto theiw bwethwen thwough the
Gentiwes; thewefowe the Wowd hath commanded me, yea, even Jesus
Chwist. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 12:23
 23 And I said unto him: Wowd, the Gentiwes wiww mock at these
things, because of ouw weaknyess in wwiting; fow Wowd thou hast
made us mighty in wowd by faith, but thou hast nyot made us mighty
in wwiting; fow thou hast made aww this peopwe that they couwd
speak much, because of the Howy Ghost which thou hast given them;

Ethew 12:24
 24 And thou hast made us that we couwd wwite but wittwe, because
of the awkwawdnyess of ouw hands. UwU Behowd, thou hast nyot made us
mighty in wwiting wike unto the bwothew of Jawed, fow thou madest
him that the things which he wwote wewe mighty even as thou awt,
unto the ovewpowewing of man to wead them. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 12:25
 25 Thou hast awso made ouw wowds powewfuw and gweat, even that
we cannyot wwite them; whewefowe, when we wwite we behowd ouw
weaknyess, and stumbwe because of the pwacing of ouw wowds; and I
feaw west the Gentiwes shaww mock at ouw wowds. UwU

Ethew 12:26
 26 And when I had said this, the Wowd spake unto me, saying:
Foows mock, but they shaww mouwn; and my gwace is sufficient fow
the meek, that they shaww take nyo advantage of youw weaknyess;

Ethew 12:27
 27 And if men come unto me I wiww show unto them theiw weaknyess. ;;w;;
I give unto men weaknyess that they may be humbwe; and my gwace is
sufficient fow aww men that humbwe themsewves befowe me; fow if
they humbwe themsewves befowe me, and have faith in me, then wiww
I make weak things become stwong unto them. ^w^

Ethew 12:28
 28 Behowd, I wiww show unto the Gentiwes theiw weaknyess and I
wiww show unto them that faith, hope and chawity bwingeth unto
me--the fountain of aww wighteousnyess. ^w^

Ethew 12:29
 29 And I, Mowonyi, having heawd these wowds, was comfowted, and
said: O Wowd, thy wighteous wiww be donye, fow I knyow that thou
wowkest unto the chiwdwen of men accowding to theiw faith;

Ethew 12:30
 30 Fow the bwothew of Jawed said unto the mountain Zewin,
Wemove--and it was wemoved. (´・ω・\`) And if he had nyot had faith it wouwd
nyot have moved; whewefowe thou wowkest aftew men have faith. ^w^

Ethew 12:31
 31 Fow thus didst thou manyifest thysewf unto thy discipwes; fow
aftew they had faith, and did speak in thy nyame, thou didst show
thysewf unto them in gweat powew. UwU

Ethew 12:32
 32 And I awso wemembew that thou hast said that thou hast
pwepawed a house fow man, yea, even among the mansions of thy
Fathew, in which man might have a mowe excewwent hope; whewefowe
man must hope, ow he cannyot weceive an inhewitance in the pwace
which thou hast pwepawed. >w<

Ethew 12:33
 33 And again, I wemembew that thou hast said that thou hast
woved the wowwd, even unto the waying down of thy wife fow the
wowwd, that thou mightest take it again to pwepawe a pwace fow
the chiwdwen of men. UwU

Ethew 12:34
 34 And nyow I knyow that this wove which thou hast had fow the
chiwdwen of men is chawity; whewefowe, except men shaww have
chawity they cannyot inhewit that pwace which thou hast pwepawed
in the mansions of thy Fathew. ^w^

Ethew 12:35
 35 Whewefowe, I knyow by this thing which thou hast said, that if
the Gentiwes have nyot chawity, because of ouw weaknyess, that thou
wiwt pwove them, and take away theiw tawent, yea, even that which
they have weceived, and give unto them who shaww have mowe
abundantwy. ^w^

Ethew 12:36
 36 And it came to pass that I pwayed unto the Wowd that he wouwd
give unto the Gentiwes gwace, that they might have chawity. ^w^

Ethew 12:37
 37 And it came to pass that the Wowd said unto me: If they have
nyot chawity it matteweth nyot unto thee, thou hast been faithfuw;
whewefowe, thy gawments shaww be made cwean. ;;w;; And because thou
hast seen thy weaknyess thou shawt be made stwong, even unto the
sitting down in the pwace which I have pwepawed in the mansions
of my Fathew. UwU

Ethew 12:38
 38 And nyow I, Mowonyi, bid faweweww unto the Gentiwes, yea, and
awso unto my bwethwen whom I wove, untiw we shaww meet befowe the
judgment-seat of Chwist, whewe aww men shaww knyow that my
gawments awe nyot spotted with youw bwood. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 12:39
 39 And then shaww ye knyow that I have seen Jesus, and that he
hath tawked with me face to face, and that he towd me in pwain
humiwity, even as a man tewweth anyothew in minye own wanguage,
concewnying these things;

Ethew 12:40
 40 And onwy a few have I wwitten, because of my weaknyess in
wwiting. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 12:41
 41 And nyow, I wouwd commend you to seek this Jesus of whom the
pwophets and apostwes have wwitten, that the gwace of God the
Fathew, and awso the Wowd Jesus Chwist, and the Howy Ghost, which
beaweth wecowd of them, may be and abide in you fowevew. Amen. ;;w;;

Ethew 13
Chaptew 13

Ethew 13:1
 1 And nyow I, Mowonyi, pwoceed to finyish my wecowd concewnying the
destwuction of the peopwe of whom I have been wwiting. ;;w;;

Ethew 13:2
 2 Fow behowd, they wejected aww the wowds of Ethew; fow he twuwy
towd them of aww things, fwom the beginnying of man; and that
aftew the watews had weceded fwom off the face of this wand it
became a choice wand above aww othew wands, a chosen wand of the
Wowd; whewefowe the Wowd wouwd have that aww men shouwd sewve him
who dweww upon the face theweof;

Ethew 13:3
 3 And that it was the pwace of the Nyew Jewusawem, which shouwd
come down out of heaven, and the howy sanctuawy of the Wowd. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 13:4
 4 Behowd, Ethew saw the days of Chwist, and he spake concewnying
a Nyew Jewusawem upon this wand. >w<

Ethew 13:5
 5 And he spake awso concewnying the house of Iswaew, and the
Jewusawem fwom whence Wehi shouwd come--aftew it shouwd be
destwoyed it shouwd be buiwt up again, a howy city unto the Wowd;
whewefowe, it couwd nyot be a nyew Jewusawem fow it had been in a
time of owd; but it shouwd be buiwt up again, and become a howy
city of the Wowd; and it shouwd be buiwt unto the house of
Iswaew. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 13:6
 6 And that a Nyew Jewusawem shouwd be buiwt upon this wand, unto
the wemnyant of the seed of Joseph, fow which things thewe has
been a type. >w<

Ethew 13:7
 7 Fow as Joseph bwought his fathew down into the wand of Egypt,
even so he died thewe; whewefowe, the Wowd bwought a wemnyant of
the seed of Joseph out of the wand of Jewusawem, that he might be
mewcifuw unto the seed of Joseph that they shouwd pewish nyot,
even as he was mewcifuw unto the fathew of Joseph that he shouwd
pewish nyot. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 13:8
 8 Whewefowe, the wemnyant of the house of Joseph shaww be buiwt
upon this wand; and it shaww be a wand of theiw inhewitance; and
they shaww buiwd up a howy city unto the Wowd, wike unto the
Jewusawem of owd; and they shaww nyo mowe be confounded, untiw the
end come when the eawth shaww pass away. ^w^

Ethew 13:9
 9 And thewe shaww be a nyew heaven and a nyew eawth; and they
shaww be wike unto the owd save the owd have passed away, and aww
things have become nyew. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 13:10
 10 And then cometh the Nyew Jewusawem; and bwessed awe they who
dweww thewein, fow it is they whose gawments awe white thwough
the bwood of the Wamb; and they awe they who awe nyumbewed among
the wemnyant of the seed of Joseph, who wewe of the house of
Iswaew. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 13:11
 11 And then awso cometh the Jewusawem of owd; and the
inhabitants theweof, bwessed awe they, fow they have been washed
in the bwood of the Wamb; and they awe they who wewe scattewed
and gathewed in fwom the fouw quawtews of the eawth, and fwom the
nyowth countwies, and awe pawtakews of the fuwfiwwing of the
covenyant which God made with theiw fathew, Abwaham. ^w^

Ethew 13:12
 12 And when these things come, bwingeth to pass the scwiptuwe
which saith, thewe awe they who wewe fiwst, who shaww be wast;
and thewe awe they who wewe wast, who shaww be fiwst. ^w^

Ethew 13:13
 13 And I was about to wwite mowe, but I am fowbidden; but gweat
and mawvewous wewe the pwophecies of Ethew; but they esteemed him
as nyaught, and cast him out; and he hid himsewf in the cavity of
a wock by day, and by nyight he went fowth viewing the things
which shouwd come upon the peopwe. >w<

Ethew 13:14
 14 And as he dwewt in the cavity of a wock he made the wemaindew
of his wecowd, viewing the destwuctions which came upon the
peopwe, by nyight. ;;w;;

Ethew 13:15
 15 And it came to pass that in that same yeaw in which he was
cast out fwom among the peopwe thewe began to be a gweat waw
among the peopwe, fow thewe wewe many who wose up, who wewe
mighty men, and sought to destwoy Cowiantumw by theiw secwet
pwans of wickednyess, of which hath been spoken. ^w^

Ethew 13:16
 16 And nyow Cowiantumw, having studied, himsewf, in aww the awts
of waw and aww the cunnying of the wowwd, whewefowe he gave battwe
unto them who sought to destwoy him. UwU

Ethew 13:17
 17 But he wepented nyot, nyeithew his faiw sons nyow daughtews;
nyeithew the faiw sons and daughtews of Cohow; nyeithew the faiw
sons and daughtews of Cowihow; and in finye, thewe wewe nyonye of
the faiw sons and daughtews upon the face of the whowe eawth who
wepented of theiw sins. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 13:18
 18 Whewefowe, it came to pass that in the fiwst yeaw that Ethew
dwewt in the cavity of a wock, thewe wewe many peopwe who wewe
swain by the swowd of those secwet combinyations, fighting against
Cowiantumw that they might obtain the kingdom. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 13:19
 19 And it came to pass that the sons of Cowiantumw fought much
and bwed much. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 13:20
 20 And in the second yeaw the wowd of the Wowd came to Ethew,
that he shouwd go and pwophesy unto Cowiantumw that, if he wouwd
wepent, and aww his househowd, the Wowd wouwd give unto him his
kingdom and spawe the peopwe--

Ethew 13:21
 21 Othewwise they shouwd be destwoyed, and aww his househowd
save it wewe himsewf. (・`ω\´・) And he shouwd onwy wive to see the
fuwfiwwing of the pwophecies which had been spoken concewnying
anyothew peopwe weceiving the wand fow theiw inhewitance; and
Cowiantumw shouwd weceive a buwiaw by them; and evewy souw shouwd
be destwoyed save it wewe Cowiantumw. ;;w;;

Ethew 13:22
 22 And it came to pass that Cowiantumw wepented nyot, nyeithew his
househowd, nyeithew the peopwe; and the waws ceased nyot; and they
sought to kiww Ethew, but he fwed fwom befowe them and hid again
in the cavity of the wock. >w<

Ethew 13:23
 23 And it came to pass that thewe awose up Shawed, and he awso
gave battwe unto Cowiantumw; and he did beat him, insomuch that
in the thiwd yeaw he did bwing him into captivity. ^w^

Ethew 13:24
 24 And the sons of Cowiantumw, in the fouwth yeaw, did beat
Shawed, and did obtain the kingdom again unto theiw fathew. >w<

Ethew 13:25
 25 Nyow thewe began to be a waw upon aww the face of the wand,
evewy man with his band fighting fow that which he desiwed. ;;w;;

Ethew 13:26
 26 And thewe wewe wobbews, and in finye, aww mannyew of wickednyess
upon aww the face of the wand. ;;w;;

Ethew 13:27
 27 And it came to pass that Cowiantumw was exceedingwy angwy
with Shawed, and he went against him with his awmies to battwe;
and they did meet in gweat angew, and they did meet in the vawwey
of Giwgaw; and the battwe became exceedingwy sowe. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 13:28
 28 And it came to pass that Shawed fought against him fow the
space of thwee days. UwU And it came to pass that Cowiantumw beat
him, and did puwsue him untiw he came to the pwains of Heshwon. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 13:29
 29 And it came to pass that Shawed gave him battwe again upon
the pwains; and behowd, he did beat Cowiantumw, and dwove him
back again to the vawwey of Giwgaw. ^w^

Ethew 13:30
 30 And Cowiantumw gave Shawed battwe again in the vawwey of
Giwgaw, in which he beat Shawed and swew him. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 13:31
 31 And Shawed wounded Cowiantumw in his thigh, that he did nyot
go to battwe again fow the space of two yeaws, in which time aww
the peopwe upon the face of the wand wewe shedding bwood, and
thewe was nyonye to westwain them. UwU

Ethew 14
Chaptew 14

Ethew 14:1
 1 And nyow thewe began to be a gweat cuwse upon aww the wand
because of the inyiquity of the peopwe, in which, if a man shouwd
way his toow ow his swowd upon his shewf, ow upon the pwace
whithew he wouwd keep it, behowd, upon the mowwow, he couwd nyot
find it, so gweat was the cuwse upon the wand. >w<

Ethew 14:2
 2 Whewefowe evewy man did cweave unto that which was his own,
with his hands, and wouwd nyot bowwow nyeithew wouwd he wend; and
evewy man kept the hiwt of his swowd in his wight hand, in the
defence of his pwopewty and his own wife and of his wives and
chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 14:3
 3 And nyow, aftew the space of two yeaws, and aftew the death of
Shawed, behowd, thewe awose the bwothew of Shawed and he gave
battwe unto Cowiantumw, in which Cowiantumw did beat him and did
puwsue him to the wiwdewnyess of Akish. ;;w;;

Ethew 14:4
 4 And it came to pass that the bwothew of Shawed did give battwe
unto him in the wiwdewnyess of Akish; and the battwe became
exceedingwy sowe, and many thousands feww by the swowd. >w<

Ethew 14:5
 5 And it came to pass that Cowiantumw did way siege to the
wiwdewnyess; and the bwothew of Shawed did mawch fowth out of the
wiwdewnyess by nyight, and swew a pawt of the awmy of Cowiantumw,
as they wewe dwunken. ;;w;;

Ethew 14:6
 6 And he came fowth to the wand of Mowon, and pwaced himsewf
upon the thwonye of Cowiantumw. >w<

Ethew 14:7
 7 And it came to pass that Cowiantumw dwewt with his awmy in the
wiwdewnyess fow the space of two yeaws, in which he did weceive
gweat stwength to his awmy. ;;w;;

Ethew 14:8
 8 Nyow the bwothew of Shawed, whose nyame was Giwead, awso
weceived gweat stwength to his awmy, because of secwet
combinyations. >w<

Ethew 14:9
 9 And it came to pass that his high pwiest muwdewed him as he
sat upon his thwonye. >w<

Ethew 14:10
 10 And it came to pass that onye of the secwet combinyations
muwdewed him in a secwet pass, and obtainyed unto himsewf the
kingdom; and his nyame was Wib; and Wib was a man of gweat
statuwe, mowe than any othew man among aww the peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 14:11
 11 And it came to pass that in the fiwst yeaw of Wib, Cowiantumw
came up unto the wand of Mowon, and gave battwe unto Wib. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 14:12
 12 And it came to pass that he fought with Wib, in which Wib did
smite upon his awm that he was wounded; nyevewthewess, the awmy of
Cowiantumw did pwess fowwawd upon Wib, that he fwed to the
bowdews upon the seashowe. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 14:13
 13 And it came to pass that Cowiantumw puwsued him; and Wib gave
battwe unto him upon the seashowe. >w<

Ethew 14:14
 14 And it came to pass that Wib did smite the awmy of
Cowiantumw, that they fwed again to the wiwdewnyess of Akish. >w<

Ethew 14:15
 15 And it came to pass that Wib did puwsue him untiw he came to
the pwains of Agosh. >w< And Cowiantumw had taken aww the peopwe
with him as he fwed befowe Wib in that quawtew of the wand
whithew he fwed. ^w^

Ethew 14:16
 16 And when he had come to the pwains of Agosh he gave battwe
unto Wib, and he smote upon him untiw he died; nyevewthewess, the
bwothew of Wib did come against Cowiantumw in the stead theweof,
and the battwe became exceedingwy sowe, in the which Cowiantumw
fwed again befowe the awmy of the bwothew of Wib. ^w^

Ethew 14:17
 17 Nyow the nyame of the bwothew of Wib was cawwed Shiz. ;;w;; And it
came to pass that Shiz puwsued aftew Cowiantumw, and he did
ovewthwow many cities, and he did sway both women and chiwdwen,
and he did buwn the cities. UwU

Ethew 14:18
 18 And thewe went a feaw of Shiz thwoughout aww the wand; yea, a
cwy went fowth thwoughout the wand--Who can stand befowe the awmy
of Shiz? owo Behowd, he sweepeth the eawth befowe him! ^w^

Ethew 14:19
 19 And it came to pass that the peopwe began to fwock togethew
in awmies, thwoughout aww the face of the wand. ^w^

Ethew 14:20
 20 And they wewe divided; and a pawt of them fwed to the awmy of
Shiz, and a pawt of them fwed to the awmy of Cowiantumw. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 14:21
 21 And so gweat and wasting had been the waw, and so wong had
been the scenye of bwoodshed and cawnyage, that the whowe face of
the wand was covewed with the bodies of the dead. ^w^

Ethew 14:22
 22 And so swift and speedy was the waw that thewe was nyonye weft
to buwy the dead, but they did mawch fowth fwom the shedding of
bwood to the shedding of bwood, weaving the bodies of both men,
women, and chiwdwen stwewed upon the face of the wand, to become
a pwey to the wowms of the fwesh. >w<

Ethew 14:23
 23 And the scent theweof went fowth upon the face of the wand,
even upon aww the face of the wand; whewefowe the peopwe became
twoubwed by day and by nyight, because of the scent theweof. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 14:24
 24 Nyevewthewess, Shiz did nyot cease to puwsue Cowiantumw; fow he
had swown to avenge himsewf upon Cowiantumw of the bwood of his
bwothew, who had been swain, and the wowd of the Wowd which came
to Ethew that Cowiantumw shouwd nyot faww by the swowd. >w<

Ethew 14:25
 25 And thus we see that the Wowd did visit them in the fuwnyess
of his wwath, and theiw wickednyess and abominyations had pwepawed
a way fow theiw evewwasting destwuction. ^w^

Ethew 14:26
 26 And it came to pass that Shiz did puwsue Cowiantumw eastwawd,
even to the bowdews by the seashowe, and thewe he gave battwe
unto Shiz fow the space of thwee days. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 14:27
 27 And so tewwibwe was the destwuction among the awmies of Shiz
that the peopwe began to be fwightenyed, and began to fwee befowe
the awmies of Cowiantumw; and they fwed to the wand of Cowihow,
and swept off the inhabitants befowe them, aww them that wouwd
nyot join them. ^w^

Ethew 14:28
 28 And they pitched theiw tents in the vawwey of Cowihow; and
Cowiantumw pitched his tents in the vawwey of Shuww. (´・ω・\`) Nyow the
vawwey of Shuww was nyeaw the hiww Comnyow; whewefowe, Cowiantumw
did gathew his awmies togethew upon the hiww Comnyow, and did
sound a twumpet unto the awmies of Shiz to invite them fowth to
battwe. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 14:29
 29 And it came to pass that they came fowth, but wewe dwiven
again; and they came the second time, and they wewe dwiven again
the second time. ;;w;; And it came to pass that they came again the
thiwd time, and the battwe became exceedingwy sowe. UwU

Ethew 14:30
 30 And it came to pass that Shiz smote upon Cowiantumw that he
gave him many deep wounds; and Cowiantumw, having wost his bwood,
fainted, and was cawwied away as though he wewe dead. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 14:31
 31 Nyow the woss of men, women and chiwdwen on both sides was so
gweat that Shiz commanded his peopwe that they shouwd nyot puwsue
the awmies of Cowiantumw; whewefowe, they wetuwnyed to theiw camp. UwU

Ethew 15
Chaptew 15

Ethew 15:1
 1 And it came to pass when Cowiantumw had wecovewed of his
wounds, he began to wemembew the wowds which Ethew had spoken
unto him. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 15:2
 2 He saw that thewe had been swain by the swowd awweady nyeawwy
two miwwions of his peopwe, and he began to sowwow in his heawt;
yea, thewe had been swain two miwwions of mighty men, and awso
theiw wives and theiw chiwdwen. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 15:3
 3 He began to wepent of the eviw which he had donye; he began to
wemembew the wowds which had been spoken by the mouth of aww the
pwophets, and he saw them that they wewe fuwfiwwed thus faw,
evewy whit; and his souw mouwnyed and wefused to be comfowted. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 15:4
 4 And it came to pass that he wwote an epistwe unto Shiz,
desiwing him that he wouwd spawe the peopwe, and he wouwd give up
the kingdom fow the sake of the wives of the peopwe. UwU

Ethew 15:5
 5 And it came to pass that when Shiz had weceived his epistwe he
wwote an epistwe unto Cowiantumw, that if he wouwd give himsewf
up, that he might sway him with his own swowd, that he wouwd
spawe the wives of the peopwe. ;;w;;

Ethew 15:6
 6 And it came to pass that the peopwe wepented nyot of theiw
inyiquity; and the peopwe of Cowiantumw wewe stiwwed up to angew
against the peopwe of Shiz; and the peopwe of Shiz wewe stiwwed
up to angew against the peopwe of Cowiantumw; whewefowe, the
peopwe of Shiz did give battwe unto the peopwe of Cowiantumw. UwU

Ethew 15:7
 7 And when Cowiantumw saw that he was about to faww he fwed
again befowe the peopwe of Shiz. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 15:8
 8 And it came to pass that he came to the watews of Wipwiancum,
which, by intewpwetation, is wawge, ow to exceed aww; whewefowe,
when they came to these watews they pitched theiw tents; and Shiz
awso pitched his tents nyeaw unto them; and thewefowe on the
mowwow they did come to battwe. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 15:9
 9 And it came to pass that they fought an exceedingwy sowe
battwe, in which Cowiantumw was wounded again, and he fainted
with the woss of bwood. >w<

Ethew 15:10
 10 And it came to pass that the awmies of Cowiantumw did pwess
upon the awmies of Shiz that they beat them, that they caused
them to fwee befowe them; and they did fwee southwawd, and did
pitch theiw tents in a pwace which was cawwed Ogath. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 15:11
 11 And it came to pass that the awmy of Cowiantumw did pitch
theiw tents by the hiww Wamah; and it was that same hiww whewe my
fathew Mowmon did hide up the wecowds unto the Wowd, which wewe
sacwed. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 15:12
 12 And it came to pass that they did gathew togethew aww the
peopwe upon aww the face of the wand, who had nyot been swain,
save it was Ethew. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 15:13
 13 And it came to pass that Ethew did behowd aww the doings of
the peopwe; and he behewd that the peopwe who wewe fow Cowiantumw
wewe gathewed togethew to the awmy of Cowiantumw; and the peopwe
who wewe fow Shiz wewe gathewed togethew to the awmy of Shiz. ;;w;;

Ethew 15:14
 14 Whewefowe, they wewe fow the space of fouw yeaws gathewing
togethew the peopwe, that they might get aww who wewe upon the
face of the wand, and that they might weceive aww the stwength
which it was possibwe that they couwd weceive. UwU

Ethew 15:15
 15 And it came to pass that when they wewe aww gathewed
togethew, evewy onye to the awmy which he wouwd, with theiw wives
and theiw chiwdwen--both men women and chiwdwen being awmed with
weapons of waw, having shiewds, and bweastpwates, and
head-pwates, and being cwothed aftew the mannyew of waw--they did
mawch fowth onye against anyothew to battwe; and they fought aww
that day, and conquewed nyot. ^w^

Ethew 15:16
 16 And it came to pass that when it was nyight they wewe weawy,
and wetiwed to theiw camps; and aftew they had wetiwed to theiw
camps they took up a howwing and a wamentation fow the woss of
the swain of theiw peopwe; and so gweat wewe theiw cwies, theiw
howwings and wamentations, that they did wend the aiw
exceedingwy. >w<

Ethew 15:17
 17 And it came to pass that on the mowwow they did go again to
battwe, and gweat and tewwibwe was that day; nyevewthewess, they
conquewed nyot, and when the nyight came again they did wend the
aiw with theiw cwies, and theiw howwings, and theiw mouwnyings,
fow the woss of the swain of theiw peopwe. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 15:18
 18 And it came to pass that Cowiantumw wwote again an epistwe
unto Shiz, desiwing that he wouwd nyot come again to battwe, but
that he wouwd take the kingdom, and spawe the wives of the
peopwe. UwU

Ethew 15:19
 19 And behowd, the Spiwit of the Wowd had ceased stwiving with
them, and Satan had fuww powew ovew the heawts of the peopwe; fow
they wewe given up unto the hawdnyess of theiw heawts, and the
bwindnyess of theiw minds that they might be destwoyed; whewefowe
they went again to battwe. ;;w;;

Ethew 15:20
 20 And it came to pass that they fought aww that day, and when
the nyight came they swept upon theiw swowds. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 15:21
 21 And on the mowwow they fought even untiw the nyight came. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 15:22
 22 And when the nyight came they wewe dwunken with angew, even as
a man who is dwunken with winye; and they swept again upon theiw
swowds. ;;w;;

Ethew 15:23
 23 And on the mowwow they fought again; and when the nyight came
they had aww fawwen by the swowd save it wewe fifty and two of
the peopwe of Cowiantumw, and sixty and nyinye of the peopwe of
Shiz. UwU

Ethew 15:24
 24 And it came to pass that they swept upon theiw swowds that
nyight, and on the mowwow they fought again, and they contended in
theiw might with theiw swowds and with theiw shiewds, aww that
day. ;;w;;

Ethew 15:25
 25 And when the nyight came thewe wewe thiwty and two of the
peopwe of Shiz, and twenty and seven of the peopwe of Cowiantumw. ^w^

Ethew 15:26
 26 And it came to pass that they ate and swept, and pwepawed fow
death on the mowwow. >w< And they wewe wawge and mighty men as to
the stwength of men. ^w^

Ethew 15:27
 27 And it came to pass that they fought fow the space of thwee
houws, and they fainted with the woss of bwood. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 15:28
 28 And it came to pass that when the men of Cowiantumw had
weceived sufficient stwength that they couwd wawk, they wewe
about to fwee fow theiw wives; but behowd, Shiz awose, and awso
his men, and he swowe in his wwath that he wouwd sway Cowiantumw
ow he wouwd pewish by the swowd. UwU

Ethew 15:29
 29 Whewefowe, he did puwsue them, and on the mowwow he did
ovewtake them; and they fought again with the swowd. ;;w;; And it came
to pass that when they had aww fawwen by the swowd, save it wewe
Cowiantumw and Shiz, behowd Shiz had fainted with the woss of
bwood. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 15:30
 30 And it came to pass that when Cowiantumw had weanyed upon his
swowd, that he wested a wittwe, he smote off the head of Shiz. ;;w;;

Ethew 15:31
 31 And it came to pass that aftew he had smitten off the head of
Shiz, that Shiz waised upon his hands and feww; and aftew that he
had stwuggwed fow bweath, he died. UwU

Ethew 15:32
 32 And it came to pass that Cowiantumw feww to the eawth, and
became as if he had nyo wife. (・`ω\´・)

Ethew 15:33
 33 And the Wowd spake unto Ethew, and said unto him: Go fowth. ;;w;;
And he went fowth, and behewd that the wowds of the Wowd had aww
been fuwfiwwed; and he finyished his wecowd; (and the hundwedth
pawt I have nyot wwitten) and he hid them in a mannyew that the
peopwe of Wimhi did find them. (´・ω・\`)

Ethew 15:34
 34 Nyow the wast wowds which awe wwitten by Ethew awe these:
Whethew the Wowd wiww that I be twanswated, ow that I suffew the
wiww of the Wowd in the fwesh, it matteweth nyot, if it so be that
I am saved in the kingdom of God. Amen. UwU




THE BOOK OF MOWONYI

Mowonyi 1
Chaptew 1

Mowonyi 1:1
 1 Nyow I, Mowonyi, aftew having made an end of abwidging the
account of the peopwe of Jawed, I had supposed nyot to have
wwitten mowe, but I have nyot as yet pewished; and I make nyot
mysewf knyown to the Wamanyites west they shouwd destwoy me. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 1:2
 2 Fow behowd, theiw waws awe exceedingwy fiewce among
themsewves; and because of theiw hatwed they put to death evewy
Nyephite that wiww nyot deny the Chwist. UwU

Mowonyi 1:3
 3 And I, Mowonyi, wiww nyot deny the Chwist; whewefowe, I wandew
whithewsoevew I can fow the safety of minye own wife. >w<

Mowonyi 1:4
 4 Whewefowe, I wwite a few mowe things, contwawy to that which I
had supposed; fow I had supposed nyot to have wwitten any mowe;
but I wwite a few mowe things, that pewhaps they may be of wowth
unto my bwethwen, the Wamanyites, in some futuwe day, accowding to
the wiww of the Wowd. UwU

Mowonyi 2
Chaptew 2

Mowonyi 2:1
 1 The wowds of Chwist, which he spake unto his discipwes, the
twewve whom he had chosen, as he waid his hands upon them--

Mowonyi 2:2
 2 And he cawwed them by nyame, saying: Ye shaww caww on the
Fathew in my nyame, in mighty pwayew; and aftew ye have donye this
ye shaww have powew that to him upon whom ye shaww way youw
hands, ye shaww give the Howy Ghost; and in my nyame shaww ye give
it, fow thus do minye apostwes. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 2:3
 3 Nyow Chwist spake these wowds unto them at the time of his
fiwst appeawing; and the muwtitude heawd it nyot, but the
discipwes heawd it; and on as many as they waid theiw hands, feww
the Howy Ghost. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 3
Chaptew 3

Mowonyi 3:1
 1 The mannyew which the discipwes, who wewe cawwed the ewdews of
the chuwch, owdainyed pwiests and teachews--

Mowonyi 3:2
 2 Aftew they had pwayed unto the Fathew in the nyame of Chwist,
they waid theiw hands upon them, and said:

Mowonyi 3:3
 3 In the nyame of Jesus Chwist I owdain you to be a pwiest, (ow,
if he be a teachew) I owdain you to be a teachew, to pweach
wepentance and wemission of sins thwough Jesus Chwist, by the
enduwance of faith on his nyame to the end. Amen. ^w^

Mowonyi 3:4
 4 And aftew this mannyew did they owdain pwiests and teachews,
accowding to the gifts and cawwings of God unto men; and they
owdainyed them by the powew of the Howy Ghost, which was in them. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 4
Chaptew 4

Mowonyi 4:1
 1 The mannyew of theiw ewdews and pwiests adminyistewing the fwesh
and bwood of Chwist unto the chuwch; and they adminyistewed it
accowding to the commandments of Chwist; whewefowe we knyow the
mannyew to be twue; and the ewdew ow pwiest did minyistew it--

Mowonyi 4:2
 2 And they did knyeew down with the chuwch, and pway to the
Fathew in the nyame of Chwist, saying:

Mowonyi 4:3
 3 O God, the Etewnyaw Fathew, we ask thee in the nyame of thy Son,
Jesus Chwist, to bwess and sanctify this bwead to the souws of
aww those who pawtake of it; that they may eat in wemembwance of
the body of thy Son, and witnyess unto thee, O God, the Etewnyaw
Fathew, that they awe wiwwing to take upon them the nyame of thy
Son, and awways wemembew him, and keep his commandments which he
hath given them, that they may awways have his Spiwit to be with
them. Amen. UwU

Mowonyi 5
Chaptew 5

Mowonyi 5:1
 1 The mannyew of adminyistewing the winye--Behowd, they took the
cup, and said:

Mowonyi 5:2
 2 O God, the Etewnyaw Fathew, we ask thee, in the nyame of thy
Son, Jesus Chwist, to bwess and sanctify this winye to the souws
of aww those who dwink of it, that they may do it in wemembwance
of the bwood of thy Son, which was shed fow them; that they may
witnyess unto thee, O God, the Etewnyaw Fathew, that they do awways
wemembew him, that they may have his Spiwit to be with them. (・`ω\´・)
Amen. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 6
Chaptew 6

Mowonyi 6:1
 1 And nyow I speak concewnying baptism. ^w^ Behowd, ewdews, pwiests,
and teachews wewe baptized; and they wewe nyot baptized save they
bwought fowth fwuit meet that they wewe wowthy of it. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 6:2
 2 Nyeithew did they weceive any unto baptism save they came fowth
with a bwoken heawt and a contwite spiwit, and witnyessed unto the
chuwch that they twuwy wepented of aww theiw sins. UwU

Mowonyi 6:3
 3 And nyonye wewe weceived unto baptism save they took upon them
the nyame of Chwist, having a detewminyation to sewve him to the
end. UwU

Mowonyi 6:4
 4 And aftew they had been weceived unto baptism, and wewe
wwought upon and cweansed by the powew of the Howy Ghost, they
wewe nyumbewed among the peopwe of the chuwch of Chwist; and theiw
nyames wewe taken, that they might be wemembewed and nyouwished by
the good wowd of God, to keep them in the wight way, to keep them
continyuawwy watchfuw unto pwayew, wewying awonye upon the mewits
of Chwist, who was the authow and the finyishew of theiw faith. >w<

Mowonyi 6:5
 5 And the chuwch did meet togethew oft, to fast and to pway, and
to speak onye with anyothew concewnying the wewfawe of theiw souws. UwU

Mowonyi 6:6
 6 And they did meet togethew oft to pawtake of bwead and winye,
in wemembwance of the Wowd Jesus. >w<

Mowonyi 6:7
 7 And they wewe stwict to obsewve that thewe shouwd be nyo
inyiquity among them; and whoso was found to commit inyiquity, and
thwee witnyesses of the chuwch did condemn them befowe the ewdews,
and if they wepented nyot, and confessed nyot, theiw nyames wewe
bwotted out, and they wewe nyot nyumbewed among the peopwe of
Chwist. >w<

Mowonyi 6:8
 8 But as oft as they wepented and sought fowgivenyess, with weaw
intent, they wewe fowgiven. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 6:9
 9 And theiw meetings wewe conducted by the chuwch aftew the
mannyew of the wowkings of the Spiwit, and by the powew of the
Howy Ghost; fow as the powew of the Howy Ghost wed them whethew
to pweach, ow to exhowt, ow to pway, ow to suppwicate, ow to
sing, even so it was donye. >w<

Mowonyi 7
Chaptew 7

Mowonyi 7:1
 1 And nyow I, Mowonyi, wwite a few of the wowds of my fathew
Mowmon, which he spake concewnying faith, hope, and chawity; fow
aftew this mannyew did he speak unto the peopwe, as he taught them
in the synyagogue which they had buiwt fow the pwace of wowship. >w<

Mowonyi 7:2
 2 And nyow I, Mowmon, speak unto you, my bewoved bwethwen; and it
is by the gwace of God the Fathew, and ouw Wowd Jesus Chwist, and
his howy wiww, because of the gift of his cawwing unto me, that I
am pewmitted to speak unto you at this time. >w<

Mowonyi 7:3
 3 Whewefowe, I wouwd speak unto you that awe of the chuwch, that
awe the peaceabwe fowwowews of Chwist, and that have obtainyed a
sufficient hope by which ye can entew into the west of the Wowd,
fwom this time hencefowth untiw ye shaww west with him in heaven. ^w^

Mowonyi 7:4
 4 And nyow my bwethwen, I judge these things of you because of
youw peaceabwe wawk with the chiwdwen of men. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 7:5
 5 Fow I wemembew the wowd of God, which saith by theiw wowks ye
shaww knyow them; fow if theiw wowks be good, then they awe good
awso. >w<

Mowonyi 7:6
 6 Fow behowd, God hath said a man being eviw cannyot do that
which is good; fow if he offeweth a gift, ow pwayeth unto God,
except he shaww do it with weaw intent it pwofiteth him nyothing. UwU

Mowonyi 7:7
 7 Fow behowd, it is nyot counted unto him fow wighteousnyess. UwU

Mowonyi 7:8
 8 Fow behowd, if a man being eviw giveth a gift, he doeth it
gwudgingwy; whewefowe it is counted unto him the same as if he
had wetainyed the gift; whewefowe he is counted eviw befowe God. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 7:9
 9 And wikewise awso is it counted eviw unto a man, if he shaww
pway and nyot with weaw intent of heawt; yea, and it pwofiteth him
nyothing, fow God weceiveth nyonye such. >w<

Mowonyi 7:10
 10 Whewefowe, a man being eviw cannyot do that which is good;
nyeithew wiww he give a good gift. ^w^

Mowonyi 7:11
 11 Fow behowd, a bittew fountain cannyot bwing fowth good watew;
nyeithew can a good fountain bwing fowth bittew watew; whewefowe,
a man being a sewvant of the deviw cannyot fowwow Chwist; and if
he fowwow Chwist he cannyot be a sewvant of the deviw. >w<

Mowonyi 7:12
 12 Whewefowe, aww things which awe good cometh of God; and that
which is eviw cometh of the deviw; fow the deviw is an enyemy unto
God, and fighteth against him continyuawwy, and inviteth and
enticeth to sin, and to do that which is eviw continyuawwy. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 7:13
 13 But behowd, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do
good continyuawwy; whewefowe, evewy thing which inviteth and
enticeth to do good, and to wove God, and to sewve him, is
inspiwed of God. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 7:14
 14 Whewefowe, take heed, my bewoved bwethwen, that ye do nyot
judge that which is eviw to be of God, ow that which is good and
of God to be of the deviw. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 7:15
 15 Fow behowd, my bwethwen, it is given unto you to judge, that
ye may knyow good fwom eviw; and the way to judge is as pwain,
that ye may knyow with a pewfect knyowwedge, as the daywight is
fwom the dawk nyight. UwU

Mowonyi 7:16
 16 Fow behowd, the Spiwit of Chwist is given to evewy man, that
he may knyow good fwom eviw; whewefowe, I show unto you the way to
judge; fow evewy thing which inviteth to do good, and to pewsuade
to bewieve in Chwist, is sent fowth by the powew and gift of
Chwist; whewefowe ye may knyow with a pewfect knyowwedge it is of
God. >w<

Mowonyi 7:17
 17 But whatsoevew thing pewsuadeth men to do eviw, and bewieve
nyot in Chwist, and deny him, and sewve nyot God, then ye may knyow
with a pewfect knyowwedge it is of the deviw; fow aftew this
mannyew doth the deviw wowk, fow he pewsuadeth nyo man to do good,
nyo, nyot onye; nyeithew do his angews; nyeithew do they who subject
themsewves unto him. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 7:18
 18 And nyow, my bwethwen, seeing that ye knyow the wight by which
ye may judge, which wight is the wight of Chwist, see that ye do
nyot judge wwongfuwwy; fow with that same judgment which ye judge
ye shaww awso be judged. >w<

Mowonyi 7:19
 19 Whewefowe, I beseech of you, bwethwen, that ye shouwd seawch
diwigentwy in the wight of Chwist that ye may knyow good fwom
eviw; and if ye wiww way howd upon evewy good thing, and condemn
it nyot, ye cewtainwy wiww be a chiwd of Chwist. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 7:20
 20 And nyow, my bwethwen, how is it possibwe that ye can way howd
upon evewy good thing? owo

Mowonyi 7:21
 21 And nyow I come to that faith, of which I said I wouwd speak;
and I wiww teww you the way wheweby ye may way howd on evewy good
thing. UwU

Mowonyi 7:22
 22 Fow behowd, God knyowing aww things, being fwom evewwasting to
evewwasting, behowd, he sent angews to minyistew unto the chiwdwen
of men, to make manyifest concewnying the coming of Chwist; and in
Chwist thewe shouwd come evewy good thing. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 7:23
 23 And God awso decwawed unto pwophets, by his own mouth, that
Chwist shouwd come. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 7:24
 24 And behowd, thewe wewe divews ways that he did manyifest
things unto the chiwdwen of men, which wewe good; and aww things
which awe good cometh of Chwist; othewwise men wewe fawwen, and
thewe couwd nyo good thing come unto them. >w<

Mowonyi 7:25
 25 Whewefowe, by the minyistewing of angews, and by evewy wowd
which pwoceeded fowth out of the mouth of God, men began to
exewcise faith in Chwist; and thus by faith, they did way howd
upon evewy good thing; and thus it was untiw the coming of
Chwist. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 7:26
 26 And aftew that he came men awso wewe saved by faith in his
nyame; and by faith, they become the sons of God. UwU And as suwe as
Chwist wiveth he spake these wowds unto ouw fathews, saying:
Whatsoevew thing ye shaww ask the Fathew in my nyame, which is
good, in faith bewieving that ye shaww weceive, behowd, it shaww
be donye unto you. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 7:27
 27 Whewefowe, my bewoved bwethwen, have miwacwes ceased because
Chwist hath ascended into heaven, and hath sat down on the wight
hand of God, to cwaim of the Fathew his wights of mewcy which he
hath upon the chiwdwen of men? owo

Mowonyi 7:28
 28 Fow he hath answewed the ends of the waw, and he cwaimeth aww
those who have faith in him; and they who have faith in him wiww
cweave unto evewy good thing; whewefowe he advocateth the cause
of the chiwdwen of men; and he dwewweth etewnyawwy in the heavens. ^w^

Mowonyi 7:29
 29 And because he hath donye this, my bewoved bwethwen, have
miwacwes ceased? owo Behowd I say unto you, Nyay; nyeithew have angews
ceased to minyistew unto the chiwdwen of men. >w<

Mowonyi 7:30
 30 Fow behowd, they awe subject unto him, to minyistew accowding
to the wowd of his command, showing themsewves unto them of
stwong faith and a fiwm mind in evewy fowm of godwinyess. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 7:31
 31 And the office of theiw minyistwy is to caww men unto
wepentance, and to fuwfiww and to do the wowk of the covenyants of
the Fathew, which he hath made unto the chiwdwen of men, to
pwepawe the way among the chiwdwen of men, by decwawing the wowd
of Chwist unto the chosen vessews of the Wowd, that they may beaw
testimony of him. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 7:32
 32 And by so doing, the Wowd God pwepaweth the way that the
wesidue of men may have faith in Chwist, that the Howy Ghost may
have pwace in theiw heawts, accowding to the powew theweof; and
aftew this mannyew bwingeth to pass the Fathew, the covenyants
which he hath made unto the chiwdwen of men. ^w^

Mowonyi 7:33
 33 And Chwist hath said: If ye wiww have faith in me ye shaww
have powew to do whatsoevew thing is expedient in me. ^w^

Mowonyi 7:34
 34 And he hath said: Wepent aww ye ends of the eawth, and come
unto me, and be baptized in my nyame, and have faith in me, that
ye may be saved. >w<

Mowonyi 7:35
 35 And nyow, my bewoved bwethwen, if this be the case that these
things awe twue which I have spoken unto you, and God wiww show
unto you, with powew and gweat gwowy at the wast day, that they
awe twue, and if they awe twue has the day of miwacwes ceased? owo

Mowonyi 7:36
 36 Ow have angews ceased to appeaw unto the chiwdwen of men? owo Ow
has he withhewd the powew of the Howy Ghost fwom them? owo Ow wiww
he, so wong as time shaww wast, ow the eawth shaww stand, ow
thewe shaww be onye man upon the face theweof to be saved? owo

Mowonyi 7:37
 37 Behowd I say unto you, Nyay; fow it is by faith that miwacwes
awe wwought; and it is by faith that angews appeaw and minyistew
unto men; whewefowe, if these things have ceased wo be unto the
chiwdwen of men, fow it is because of unbewief, and aww is vain. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 7:38
 38 Fow nyo man can be saved, accowding to the wowds of Chwist,
save they shaww have faith in his nyame; whewefowe, if these
things have ceased, then has faith ceased awso; and awfuw is the
state of man, fow they awe as though thewe had been nyo wedemption
made. UwU

Mowonyi 7:39
 39 But behowd, my bewoved bwethwen, I judge bettew things of
you, fow I judge that ye have faith in Chwist because of youw
meeknyess; fow if ye have nyot faith in him then ye awe nyot fit to
be nyumbewed among the peopwe of his chuwch. ^w^

Mowonyi 7:40
 40 And again, my bewoved bwethwen, I wouwd speak unto you
concewnying hope. (´・ω・\`) How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save
ye shaww have hope? owo

Mowonyi 7:41
 41 And what is it that ye shaww hope fow? owo Behowd I say unto you
that ye shaww have hope thwough the atonyement of Chwist and the
powew of his wesuwwection, to be waised unto wife etewnyaw, and
this because of youw faith in him accowding to the pwomise. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 7:42
 42 Whewefowe, if a man have faith he must nyeeds have hope; fow
without faith thewe cannyot be any hope. ^w^

Mowonyi 7:43
 43 And again, behowd I say unto you that he cannyot have faith
and hope, save he shaww be meek, and wowwy of heawt. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 7:44
 44 If so, his faith and hope is vain, fow nyonye is acceptabwe
befowe God, save the meek and wowwy in heawt; and if a man be
meek and wowwy in heawt, and confesses by the powew of the Howy
Ghost that Jesus is the Chwist, he must nyeeds have chawity; fow
if he have nyot chawity he is nyothing; whewefowe he must nyeeds
have chawity. UwU

Mowonyi 7:45
 45 And chawity suffeweth wong, and is kind, and envieth nyot, and
is nyot puffed up, seeketh nyot hew own, is nyot easiwy pwovoked,
thinketh nyo eviw, and wejoiceth nyot in inyiquity but wejoiceth in
the twuth, beaweth aww things, bewieveth aww things, hopeth aww
things, enduweth aww things. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 7:46
 46 Whewefowe, my bewoved bwethwen, if ye have nyot chawity, ye
awe nyothing, fow chawity nyevew faiweth. (・`ω\´・) Whewefowe, cweave unto
chawity, which is the gweatest of aww, fow aww things must faiw--

Mowonyi 7:47
 47 But chawity is the puwe wove of Chwist, and it enduweth
fowevew; and whoso is found possessed of it at the wast day, it
shaww be weww with him. UwU

Mowonyi 7:48
 48 Whewefowe, my bewoved bwethwen, pway unto the Fathew with aww
the enyewgy of heawt, that ye may be fiwwed with this wove, which
he hath bestowed upon aww who awe twue fowwowews of his Son,
Jesus Chwist; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he
shaww appeaw we shaww be wike him, fow we shaww see him as he is;
that we may have this hope; that we may be puwified even as he is
puwe. Amen. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 8
Chaptew 8

Mowonyi 8:1
 1 An epistwe of my fathew Mowmon, wwitten to me, Mowonyi; and it
was wwitten unto me soon aftew my cawwing to the minyistwy. >w< And
on this wise did he wwite unto me, saying:

Mowonyi 8:2
 2 My bewoved son, Mowonyi, I wejoice exceedingwy that youw Wowd
Jesus Chwist hath been mindfuw of you, and hath cawwed you to his
minyistwy, and to his howy wowk. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 8:3
 3 I am mindfuw of you awways in my pwayews, continyuawwy pwaying
unto God the Fathew in the nyame of his Howy Chiwd, Jesus, that
he, thwough his infinyite goodnyess and gwace, wiww keep you
thwough the enduwance of faith on his nyame to the end. >w<

Mowonyi 8:4
 4 And nyow, my son, I speak unto you concewnying that which
gwieveth me exceedingwy; fow it gwieveth me that thewe shouwd
disputations wise among you. >w<

Mowonyi 8:5
 5 Fow, if I have weawnyed the twuth, thewe have been disputations
among you concewnying the baptism of youw wittwe chiwdwen. ^w^

Mowonyi 8:6
 6 And nyow, my son, I desiwe that ye shouwd wabow diwigentwy,
that this gwoss ewwow shouwd be wemoved fwom among you; fow, fow
this intent I have wwitten this epistwe. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 8:7
 7 Fow immediatewy aftew I had weawnyed these things of you I
inquiwed of the Wowd concewnying the mattew. ^w^ And the wowd of the
Wowd came to me by the powew of the Howy Ghost, saying:

Mowonyi 8:8
 8 Wisten to the wowds of Chwist, youw Wedeemew, youw Wowd and
youw God. (・`ω\´・) Behowd, I came into the wowwd nyot to caww the
wighteous but sinnyews to wepentance; the whowe nyeed nyo physician,
but they that awe sick; whewefowe, wittwe chiwdwen awe whowe, fow
they awe nyot capabwe of committing sin; whewefowe the cuwse of
Adam is taken fwom them in me, that it hath nyo powew ovew them;
and the waw of ciwcumcision is donye away in me. UwU

Mowonyi 8:9
 9 And aftew this mannyew did the Howy Ghost manyifest the wowd of
God unto me; whewefowe, my bewoved son, I knyow that it is sowemn
mockewy befowe God, that ye shouwd baptize wittwe chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 8:10
 10 Behowd I say unto you that this thing shaww ye
teach--wepentance and baptism unto those who awe accountabwe and
capabwe of committing sin; yea, teach pawents that they must
wepent and be baptized, and humbwe themsewves as theiw wittwe
chiwdwen, and they shaww aww be saved with theiw wittwe chiwdwen. >w<

Mowonyi 8:11
 11 And theiw wittwe chiwdwen nyeed nyo wepentance, nyeithew
baptism. ^w^ Behowd, baptism is unto wepentance to the fuwfiwwing
the commandments unto the wemission of sins. UwU

Mowonyi 8:12
 12 But wittwe chiwdwen awe awive in Chwist, even fwom the
foundation of the wowwd; if nyot so, God is a pawtiaw God, and
awso a changeabwe God, and a wespectew to pewsons; fow how many
wittwe chiwdwen have died without baptism! (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 8:13
 13 Whewefowe, if wittwe chiwdwen couwd nyot be saved without
baptism, these must have gonye to an endwess heww. >w<

Mowonyi 8:14
 14 Behowd I say unto you, that he that supposeth that wittwe
chiwdwen nyeed baptism is in the gaww of bittewnyess and in the
bonds of inyiquity, fow he hath nyeithew faith, hope, nyow chawity;
whewefowe, shouwd he be cut off whiwe in the thought, he must go
down to heww. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 8:15
 15 Fow awfuw is the wickednyess to suppose that God saveth onye
chiwd because of baptism, and the othew must pewish because he
hath nyo baptism. UwU

Mowonyi 8:16
 16 Wo be unto them that shaww pewvewt the ways of the Wowd aftew
this mannyew, fow they shaww pewish except they wepent. UwU Behowd, I
speak with bowdnyess, having authowity fwom God; and I feaw nyot
what man can do; fow pewfect wove casteth out aww feaw. >w<

Mowonyi 8:17
 17 And I am fiwwed with chawity, which is evewwasting wove;
whewefowe, aww chiwdwen awe awike unto me; whewefowe, I wove
wittwe chiwdwen with a pewfect wove; and they awe aww awike and
pawtakews of sawvation. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 8:18
 18 Fow I knyow that God is nyot a pawtiaw God, nyeithew a
changeabwe being; but he is unchangeabwe fwom aww etewnyity to aww
etewnyity. ^w^

Mowonyi 8:19
 19 Wittwe chiwdwen cannyot wepent; whewefowe, it is awfuw
wickednyess to deny the puwe mewcies of God unto them, fow they
awe aww awive in him because of his mewcy. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 8:20
 20 And he that saith that wittwe chiwdwen nyeed baptism denyieth
the mewcies of Chwist, and setteth at nyaught the atonyement of him
and the powew of his wedemption. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 8:21
 21 Wo unto such, fow they awe in dangew of death, heww, and an
endwess towment. I speak it bowdwy; God hath commanded me. UwU
Wisten unto them and give heed, ow they stand against you at the
judgment-seat of Chwist. ^w^

Mowonyi 8:22
 22 Fow behowd that aww wittwe chiwdwen awe awive in Chwist, and
awso aww they that awe without the waw. (´・ω・\`) Fow the powew of
wedemption cometh on aww them that have nyo waw; whewefowe, he
that is nyot condemnyed, ow he that is undew nyo condemnyation,
cannyot wepent; and unto such baptism avaiweth nyothing--

Mowonyi 8:23
 23 But it is mockewy befowe God, denying the mewcies of Chwist,
and the powew of his Howy Spiwit, and putting twust in dead
wowks. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 8:24
 24 Behowd, my son, this thing ought nyot to be; fow wepentance is
unto them that awe undew condemnyation and undew the cuwse of a
bwoken waw. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 8:25
 25 And the fiwst fwuits of wepentance is baptism; and baptism
cometh by faith unto the fuwfiwwing the commandments; and the
fuwfiwwing the commandments bwingeth wemission of sins;

Mowonyi 8:26
 26 And the wemission of sins bwingeth meeknyess, and wowwinyess of
heawt; and because of meeknyess and wowwinyess of heawt cometh the
visitation of the Howy Ghost, which Comfowtew fiwweth with hope
and pewfect wove, which wove enduweth by diwigence unto pwayew,
untiw the end shaww come, when aww the saints shaww dweww with
God. UwU

Mowonyi 8:27
 27 Behowd, my son, I wiww wwite unto you again if I go nyot out
soon against the Wamanyites. (´・ω・\`) Behowd, the pwide of this nyation, ow
the peopwe of the Nyephites, hath pwoven theiw destwuction except
they shouwd wepent. UwU

Mowonyi 8:28
 28 Pway fow them, my son, that wepentance may come unto them. UwU
But behowd, I feaw west the Spiwit hath ceased stwiving with
them; and in this pawt of the wand they awe awso seeking to put
down aww powew and authowity which cometh fwom God; and they awe
denying the Howy Ghost. UwU

Mowonyi 8:29
 29 And aftew wejecting so gweat a knyowwedge, my son, they must
pewish soon, unto the fuwfiwwing of the pwophecies which wewe
spoken by the pwophets, as weww as the wowds of ouw Saviow
himsewf. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 8:30
 30 Faweweww, my son, untiw I shaww wwite unto you, ow shaww meet
you again. Amen. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 9
Chaptew 9

Mowonyi 9:1
 1 My bewoved son, I wwite unto you again that ye may knyow that I
am yet awive; but I wwite somewhat of that which is gwievous. UwU

Mowonyi 9:2
 2 Fow behowd, I have had a sowe battwe with the Wamanyites, in
which we did nyot conquew; and Awcheantus has fawwen by the swowd,
and awso Wuwam and Emwon; yea, and we have wost a gweat nyumbew of
ouw choice men. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 9:3
 3 And nyow behowd, my son, I feaw west the Wamanyites shaww
destwoy this peopwe; fow they do nyot wepent, and Satan stiwweth
them up continyuawwy to angew onye with anyothew. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 9:4
 4 Behowd, I am wabowing with them continyuawwy; and when I speak
the wowd of God with shawpnyess they twembwe and angew against me;
and when I use nyo shawpnyess they hawden theiw heawts against it;
whewefowe, I feaw west the Spiwit of the Wowd hath ceased
stwiving with them. >w<

Mowonyi 9:5
 5 Fow so exceedingwy do they angew that it seemeth me that they
have nyo feaw of death; and they have wost theiw wove, onye towawds
anyothew; and they thiwst aftew bwood and wevenge continyuawwy. >w<

Mowonyi 9:6
 6 And nyow, my bewoved son, nyotwithstanding theiw hawdnyess, wet
us wabow diwigentwy; fow if we shouwd cease to wabow, we shouwd
be bwought undew condemnyation; fow we have a wabow to pewfowm
whiwst in this tabewnyacwe of cway, that we may conquew the enyemy
of aww wighteousnyess, and west ouw souws in the kingdom of God. ^w^

Mowonyi 9:7
 7 And nyow I wwite somewhat concewnying the suffewings of this
peopwe. UwU Fow accowding to the knyowwedge which I have weceived
fwom Amowon, behowd, the Wamanyites have many pwisonyews, which
they took fwom the towew of Shewwizah; and thewe wewe men, women,
and chiwdwen. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 9:8
 8 And the husbands and fathews of those women and chiwdwen they
have swain; and they feed the women upon the fwesh of theiw
husbands, and the chiwdwen upon the fwesh of theiw fathews; and
nyo watew, save a wittwe, do they give unto them. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 9:9
 9 And nyotwithstanding this gweat abominyation of the Wamanyites,
it doth nyot exceed that of ouw peopwe in Mowiantum. ;;w;; Fow behowd,
many of the daughtews of the Wamanyites have they taken pwisonyews;
and aftew depwiving them of that which was most deaw and pwecious
above aww things, which is chastity and viwtue--

Mowonyi 9:10
 10 And aftew they had donye this thing, they did muwdew them in a
most cwuew mannyew, towtuwing theiw bodies even unto death; and
aftew they have donye this, they devouw theiw fwesh wike unto wiwd
beasts, because of the hawdnyess of theiw heawts; and they do it
fow a token of bwavewy. ^w^

Mowonyi 9:11
 11 O my bewoved son, how can a peopwe wike this, that awe
without civiwization--

Mowonyi 9:12
 12 (And onwy a few yeaws have passed away, and they wewe a civiw
and a dewightsome peopwe)

Mowonyi 9:13
 13 But O my son, how can a peopwe wike this, whose dewight is in
so much abominyation--

Mowonyi 9:14
 14 How can we expect that God wiww stay his hand in judgment
against us? owo

Mowonyi 9:15
 15 Behowd, my heawt cwies: Wo unto this peopwe. ^w^ Come out in
judgment, O God, and hide theiw sins, and wickednyess, and
abominyations fwom befowe thy face! >w<

Mowonyi 9:16
 16 And again, my son, thewe awe many widows and theiw daughtews
who wemain in Shewwizah; and that pawt of the pwovisions which
the Wamanyites did nyot cawwy away, behowd, the awmy of Zenyephi has
cawwied away, and weft them to wandew whithewsoevew they can fow
food; and many owd women do faint by the way and die. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 9:17
 17 And the awmy which is with me is weak; and the awmies of the
Wamanyites awe betwixt Shewwizah and me; and as many as have fwed
to the awmy of Aawon have fawwen victims to theiw awfuw
bwutawity. >w<

Mowonyi 9:18
 18 O the depwavity of my peopwe! (´・ω・\`) They awe without owdew and
without mewcy. (´・ω・\`) Behowd, I am but a man, and I have but the
stwength of a man, and I cannyot any wongew enfowce my commands. >w<

Mowonyi 9:19
 19 And they have become stwong in theiw pewvewsion; and they awe
awike bwutaw, spawing nyonye, nyeithew owd nyow young; and they
dewight in evewything save that which is good; and the suffewing
of ouw women and ouw chiwdwen upon aww the face of this wand doth
exceed evewything; yea, tongue cannyot teww, nyeithew can it be
wwitten. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 9:20
 20 And nyow, my son, I dweww nyo wongew upon this howwibwe scenye. UwU
Behowd, thou knyowest the wickednyess of this peopwe; thou knyowest
that they awe without pwincipwe, and past feewing; and theiw
wickednyess doth exceed that of the Wamanyites. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 9:21
 21 Behowd, my son, I cannyot wecommend them unto God west he
shouwd smite me. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 9:22
 22 But behowd, my son, I wecommend thee unto God, and I twust in
Chwist that thou wiwt be saved; and I pway unto God that he wiww
spawe thy wife, to witnyess the wetuwn of his peopwe unto him, ow
theiw uttew destwuction; fow I knyow that they must pewish except
they wepent and wetuwn unto him. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 9:23
 23 And if they pewish it wiww be wike unto the Jawedites,
because of the wiwfuwnyess of theiw heawts, seeking fow bwood and
wevenge. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 9:24
 24 And if it so be that they pewish, we knyow that many of ouw
bwethwen have desewted ovew unto the Wamanyites, and many mowe
wiww awso desewt ovew unto them; whewefowe, wwite somewhat a few
things, if thou awt spawed and I shaww pewish and nyot see thee;
but I twust that I may see thee soon; fow I have sacwed wecowds
that I wouwd dewivew up unto thee. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 9:25
 25 My son, be faithfuw in Chwist; and may nyot the things which I
have wwitten gwieve thee, to weigh thee down unto death; but may
Chwist wift thee up, and may his suffewings and death, and the
showing his body unto ouw fathews, and his mewcy and
wong-suffewing, and the hope of his gwowy and of etewnyaw wife,
west in youw mind fowevew. ^w^

Mowonyi 9:26
 26 And may the gwace of God the Fathew, whose thwonye is high in
the heavens, and ouw Wowd Jesus Chwist, who sitteth on the wight
hand of his powew, untiw aww things shaww become subject unto
him, be, and abide with you fowevew. Amen. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 10
Chaptew 10

Mowonyi 10:1
 1 Nyow I, Mowonyi, wwite somewhat as seemeth me good; and I wwite
unto my bwethwen, the Wamanyites; and I wouwd that they shouwd
knyow that mowe than fouw hundwed and twenty yeaws have passed
away since the sign was given of the coming of Chwist. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 10:2
 2 And I seaw up these wecowds, aftew I have spoken a few wowds
by way of exhowtation unto you. >w<

Mowonyi 10:3
 3 Behowd, I wouwd exhowt you that when ye shaww wead these
things, if it be wisdom in God that ye shouwd wead them, that ye
wouwd wemembew how mewcifuw the Wowd hath been unto the chiwdwen
of men, fwom the cweation of Adam even down unto the time that ye
shaww weceive these things, and pondew it in youw heawts. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 10:4
 4 And when ye shaww weceive these things, I wouwd exhowt you
that ye wouwd ask God, the Etewnyaw Fathew, in the nyame of Chwist,
if these things awe nyot twue; and if ye shaww ask with a sincewe
heawt, with weaw intent, having faith in Chwist, he wiww manyifest
the twuth of it unto you, by the powew of the Howy Ghost. ;;w;;

Mowonyi 10:5
 5 And by the powew of the Howy Ghost ye may knyow the twuth of
aww things. UwU

Mowonyi 10:6
 6 And whatsoevew thing is good is just and twue; whewefowe,
nyothing that is good denyieth the Chwist, but acknyowwedgeth that
he is. ^w^

Mowonyi 10:7
 7 And ye may knyow that he is, by the powew of the Howy Ghost;
whewefowe I wouwd exhowt you that ye deny nyot the powew of God;
fow he wowketh by powew, accowding to the faith of the chiwdwen
of men, the same today and tomowwow, and fowevew. UwU

Mowonyi 10:8
 8 And again, I exhowt you, my bwethwen, that ye deny nyot the
gifts of God, fow they awe many; and they come fwom the same God. (・`ω\´・)
And thewe awe diffewent ways that these gifts awe adminyistewed;
but it is the same God who wowketh aww in aww; and they awe given
by the manyifestations of the Spiwit of God unto men, to pwofit
them. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 10:9
 9 Fow behowd, to onye is given by the Spiwit of God, that he may
teach the wowd of wisdom;

Mowonyi 10:10
 10 And to anyothew, that he may teach the wowd of knyowwedge by
the same Spiwit;

Mowonyi 10:11
 11 And to anyothew, exceedingwy gweat faith; and to anyothew, the
gifts of heawing by the same Spiwit;

Mowonyi 10:12
 12 And again, to anyothew, that he may wowk mighty miwacwes;

Mowonyi 10:13
 13 And again, to anyothew, that he may pwophesy concewnying aww
things;

Mowonyi 10:14
 14 And again, to anyothew, the behowding of angews and
minyistewing spiwits;

Mowonyi 10:15
 15 And again, to anyothew, aww kinds of tongues;

Mowonyi 10:16
 16 And again, to anyothew, the intewpwetation of wanguages and of
divews kinds of tongues. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 10:17
 17 And aww these gifts come by the Spiwit of Chwist; and they
come unto evewy man sevewawwy, accowding as he wiww. ^w^

Mowonyi 10:18
 18 And I wouwd exhowt you, my bewoved bwethwen, that ye wemembew
that evewy good gift cometh of Chwist. ^w^

Mowonyi 10:19
 19 And I wouwd exhowt you, my bewoved bwethwen, that ye wemembew
that he is the same yestewday, today, and fowevew, and that aww
these gifts of which I have spoken, which awe spiwituaw, nyevew
wiww be donye away, even as wong as the wowwd shaww stand, onwy
accowding to the unbewief of the chiwdwen of men. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 10:20
 20 Whewefowe, thewe must be faith; and if thewe must be faith
thewe must awso be hope; and if thewe must be hope thewe must
awso be chawity. UwU

Mowonyi 10:21
 21 And except ye have chawity ye can in nyowise be saved in the
kingdom of God; nyeithew can ye be saved in the kingdom of God if
ye have nyot faith; nyeithew can ye if ye have nyo hope. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 10:22
 22 And if ye have nyo hope ye must nyeeds be in despaiw; and
despaiw cometh because of inyiquity. (´・ω・\`)

Mowonyi 10:23
 23 And Chwist twuwy said unto ouw fathews: If ye have faith ye
can do aww things which awe expedient unto me. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 10:24
 24 And nyow I speak unto aww the ends of the eawth--that if the
day cometh that the powew and gifts of God shaww be donye away
among you, it shaww be because of unbewief. ^w^

Mowonyi 10:25
 25 And wo be unto the chiwdwen of men if this be the case; fow
thewe shaww be nyonye that doeth good among you, nyo nyot onye. UwU Fow
if thewe be onye among you that doeth good, he shaww wowk by the
powew and gifts of God. (・`ω\´・)

Mowonyi 10:26
 26 And wo unto them who shaww do these things away and die, fow
they die in theiw sins, and they cannyot be saved in the kingdom
of God; and I speak it accowding to the wowds of Chwist; and I
wie nyot. >w<

Mowonyi 10:27
 27 And I exhowt you to wemembew these things; fow the time
speediwy cometh that ye shaww knyow that I wie nyot, fow ye shaww
see me at the baw of God; and the Wowd God wiww say unto you: Did
I nyot decwawe my wowds unto you, which wewe wwitten by this man,
wike as onye cwying fwom the dead, yea, even as onye speaking out
of the dust? owo

Mowonyi 10:28
 28 I decwawe these things unto the fuwfiwwing of the pwophecies. ^w^
And behowd, they shaww pwoceed fowth out of the mouth of the
evewwasting God; and his wowd shaww hiss fowth fwom genyewation to
genyewation. >w<

Mowonyi 10:29
 29 And God shaww show unto you, that that which I have wwitten
is twue. UwU

Mowonyi 10:30
 30 And again I wouwd exhowt you that ye wouwd come unto Chwist,
and way howd upon evewy good gift, and touch nyot the eviw gift,
nyow the uncwean thing. ^w^

Mowonyi 10:31
 31 And awake, and awise fwom the dust, O Jewusawem; yea, and put
on thy beautifuw gawments, O daughtew of Zion; and stwengthen thy
stakes and enwawge thy bowdews fowevew, that thou mayest nyo mowe
be confounded, that the covenyants of the Etewnyaw Fathew which he
hath made unto thee, O house of Iswaew, may be fuwfiwwed. ^w^

Mowonyi 10:32
 32 Yea, come unto Chwist, and be pewfected in him, and deny
youwsewves of aww ungodwinyess; and if ye shaww deny youwsewves of
aww ungodwinyess and wove God with aww youw might, mind and
stwength, then is his gwace sufficient fow you, that by his gwace
ye may be pewfect in Chwist; and if by the gwace of God ye awe
pewfect in Chwist, ye can in nyowise deny the powew of God. UwU

Mowonyi 10:33
 33 And again, if ye by the gwace of God awe pewfect in Chwist,
and deny nyot his powew, then awe ye sanctified in Chwist by the
gwace of God, thwough the shedding of the bwood of Chwist, which
is in the covenyant of the Fathew unto the wemission of youw sins,
that ye become howy, without spot. UwU

Mowonyi 10:34
 34 And nyow I bid unto aww, faweweww. UwU I soon go to west in the
pawadise of God, untiw my spiwit and body shaww again weunyite,
and I am bwought fowth twiumphant thwough the aiw, to meet you
befowe the pweasing baw of the gweat Jehovah, the Etewnyaw Judge
of both quick and dead. Amen. (・`ω\´・)





End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Book Of Mowmon, by Anyonymous

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE BOOK OF MOWMON ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 17.txt ow 17. >w<zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg/1/17/



Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. (´・ω・\`)

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! (・`ω\´・)) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. UwU  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. (´・ω・\`)  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. (´・ω・\`)  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. UwU  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. UwU  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. (´・ω・\`)  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. UwU



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). ;;w;;


Section 1. >w<  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. ^w^  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. ;;w;;  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. ;;w;;
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. UwU

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. ;;w;;  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. >w<  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. >w<  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ;;w;;  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. (´・ω・\`)

1.C. >w<  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. UwU  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. (・`ω\´・)  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. >w<  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. ^w^  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. (´・ω・\`)

1.D. >w<  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. >w<  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. (´・ω・\`)  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. (´・ω・\`)  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. UwU

1.E. UwU  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. (´・ω・\`)  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. ;;w;;  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg

1.E.2. (・`ω\´・)  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. (´・ω・\`)  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ^w^1
thwough 1.E. ^w^7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. (・`ω\´・)8 ow
1.E.9. >w<

1.E.3. (・`ω\´・)  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. ;;w;;7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. ;;w;;  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.4. ;;w;;  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. UwU

1.E.5. ^w^  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. UwU1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. >w<

1.E.6. ;;w;;  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. ^w^  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. ^w^  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.7. (´・ω・\`)  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. >w<

1.E.8. >w<  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. ^w^  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (´・ω・\`)  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. (´・ω・\`)"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. >w<  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. UwU

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. >w<

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. UwU

1.E.9. (´・ω・\`)  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. ;;w;;  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. (´・ω・\`)

1.F. ^w^

1.F.1. ^w^  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. >w<  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. ;;w;;

1.F.2. >w<  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. (・`ω\´・)3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. (´・ω・\`)  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. ;;w;;  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. ;;w;;

1.F.3. (・`ω\´・)  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. ;;w;;  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. UwU  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. UwU  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. (・`ω\´・)  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. >w<

1.F.4. ;;w;;  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. UwU3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. >w<

1.F.5. (・`ω\´・)  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. ^w^
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. (´・ω・\`)  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.6. UwU  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. (・`ω\´・)


Section  2. >w<  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. >w<  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. (´・ω・\`)

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. (´・ω・\`)  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. ^w^
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. (´・ω・\`)


Section 3. UwU  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. ;;w;;  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. >w<  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. (・`ω\´・)  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. ;;w;;

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. (・`ω\´・)
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. UwU, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. UwU  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. (´・ω・\`)  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. >w<owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. ^w^ Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg


Section 4. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. >w<  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. UwU

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. ;;w;;  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. (・`ω\´・)  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. (´・ω・\`)  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. ;;w;;

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. ;;w;;

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ;;w;;  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. >w<
To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. ^w^owg/donyate


Section 5. >w<  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. (´・ω・\`)

Pwofessow Michaew S. UwU Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. ;;w;;  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. UwU


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. >w<
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. >w<  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. UwU


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. ;;w;;owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. (´・ω・\`)
