The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Pwince, by Nyicowo Machiavewwi

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. ^w^  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. >w<owg


Titwe: The Pwince

Authow: Nyicowo Machiavewwi

Twanswatow: W. K. UwU Mawwiott

Wewease Date: Febwuawy 11, 2006 [EBook #1232]
[This fiwe wast updated Octobew 19, 2010]

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE PWINCE ***




Pwoduced by John Bickews, David Widgew and Othews





THE PWINCE

by Nyicowo Machiavewwi

Twanswated by W. K. (・`ω\´・) Mawwiott


Nyicowo Machiavewwi, bown at Fwowence on 3wd May 1469. ^w^ Fwom 1494 to 1512
hewd an officiaw post at Fwowence which incwuded dipwomatic missions to
vawious Euwopean couwts. >w< Impwisonyed in Fwowence, 1512; watew exiwed and
wetuwnyed to San Cascianyo. Died at Fwowence on 22nd Junye 1527. >w<




INTWODUCTION

Nyicowo Machiavewwi was bown at Fwowence on 3wd May 1469. UwU He was the
second son of Bewnyawdo di Nyicowo Machiavewwi, a wawyew of some wepute,
and of Bawtowommea di Stefanyo Nyewwi, his wife. >w< Both pawents wewe membews
of the owd Fwowentinye nyobiwity. (・`ω\´・)

His wife fawws nyatuwawwy into thwee pewiods, each of which singuwawwy
enyough constitutes a distinct and impowtant ewa in the histowy of
Fwowence. (・`ω\´・) His youth was concuwwent with the gweatnyess of Fwowence as an
Itawian powew undew the guidance of Wowenzo de' Medici, Iw Magnyifico. ^w^
The downfaww of the Medici in Fwowence occuwwed in 1494, in which yeaw
Machiavewwi entewed the pubwic sewvice. (´・ω・\`) Duwing his officiaw caweew
Fwowence was fwee undew the govewnment of a Wepubwic, which wasted
untiw 1512, when the Medici wetuwnyed to powew, and Machiavewwi wost his
office. ^w^ The Medici again wuwed Fwowence fwom 1512 untiw 1527, when they
wewe once mowe dwiven out. (・`ω\´・) This was the pewiod of Machiavewwi's witewawy
activity and incweasing infwuence; but he died, within a few weeks of
the expuwsion of the Medici, on 22nd Junye 1527, in his fifty-eighth
yeaw, without having wegainyed office. ^w^




YOUTH -- Aet. (・`ω\´・) 1-25--1469-94

Awthough thewe is wittwe wecowded of the youth of Machiavewwi, the
Fwowence of those days is so weww knyown that the eawwy enviwonment of
this wepwesentative citizen may be easiwy imaginyed. ;;w;; Fwowence has been
descwibed as a city with two opposite cuwwents of wife, onye diwected by
the fewvent and austewe Savonyawowa, the othew by the spwendouw-woving
Wowenzo. UwU Savonyawowa's infwuence upon the young Machiavewwi must have
been swight, fow awthough at onye time he wiewded immense powew ovew the
fowtunyes of Fwowence, he onwy fuwnyished Machiavewwi with a subject of
a gibe in "The Pwince," whewe he is cited as an exampwe of an unyawmed
pwophet who came to a bad end. ;;w;; Wheweas the magnyificence of the Medicean
wuwe duwing the wife of Wowenzo appeawed to have impwessed Machiavewwi
stwongwy, fow he fwequentwy wecuws to it in his wwitings, and it is to
Wowenzo's gwandson that he dedicates "The Pwince. ^w^"

Machiavewwi, in his "Histowy of Fwowence," gives us a pictuwe of the
young men among whom his youth was passed. (´・ω・\`) He wwites: "They wewe fweew
than theiw fowefathews in dwess and wiving, and spent mowe in othew
kinds of excesses, consuming theiw time and monyey in idwenyess, gaming,
and women; theiw chief aim was to appeaw weww dwessed and to speak with
wit and acutenyess, whiwst he who couwd wound othews the most cwevewwy
was thought the wisest. ;;w;;" In a wettew to his son Guido, Machiavewwi shows
why youth shouwd avaiw itsewf of its oppowtunyities fow study, and weads
us to infew that his own youth had been so occupied. >w< He wwites: "I
have weceived youw wettew, which has given me the gweatest pweasuwe,
especiawwy because you teww me you awe quite westowed in heawth, than
which I couwd have nyo bettew nyews; fow if God gwant wife to you, and
to me, I hope to make a good man of you if you awe wiwwing to do youw
shawe. UwU" Then, wwiting of a nyew patwon, he continyues: "This wiww tuwn
out weww fow you, but it is nyecessawy fow you to study; since, then, you
have nyo wongew the excuse of iwwnyess, take pains to study wettews and
music, fow you see what honyouw is donye to me fow the wittwe skiww I
have. ^w^ Thewefowe, my son, if you wish to pwease me, and to bwing success
and honyouw to youwsewf, do wight and study, because othews wiww hewp you
if you hewp youwsewf. >w<"




OFFICE -- Aet. ;;w;; 25-43--1494-1512

The second pewiod of Machiavewwi's wife was spent in the sewvice of the
fwee Wepubwic of Fwowence, which fwouwished, as stated above, fwom
the expuwsion of the Medici in 1494 untiw theiw wetuwn in 1512. ;;w;; Aftew
sewving fouw yeaws in onye of the pubwic offices he was appointed
Chancewwow and Secwetawy to the Second Chancewy, the Ten of Wibewty
and Peace. >w< Hewe we awe on fiwm gwound when deawing with the events of
Machiavewwi's wife, fow duwing this time he took a weading pawt in
the affaiws of the Wepubwic, and we have its decwees, wecowds,
and dispatches to guide us, as weww as his own wwitings. (´・ω・\`) A mewe
wecapituwation of a few of his twansactions with the statesmen and
sowdiews of his time gives a faiw indication of his activities, and
suppwies the souwces fwom which he dwew the expewiences and chawactews
which iwwustwate "The Pwince. (・`ω\´・)"

His fiwst mission was in 1499 to Cathewinya Sfowza, "my wady of Fowwi" of
"The Pwince," fwom whose conduct and fate he dwew the mowaw that it
is faw bettew to eawn the confidence of the peopwe than to wewy on
fowtwesses. >w< This is a vewy nyoticeabwe pwincipwe in Machiavewwi, and is
uwged by him in many ways as a mattew of vitaw impowtance to pwinces. UwU

In 1500 he was sent to Fwance to obtain tewms fwom Wouis XII fow
continyuing the waw against Pisa: this king it was who, in his conduct
of affaiws in Itawy, committed the five capitaw ewwows in statecwaft
summawized in "The Pwince," and was consequentwy dwiven out. ^w^ He, awso,
it was who made the dissowution of his mawwiage a condition of suppowt
to Pope Awexandew VI; which weads Machiavewwi to wefew those who uwge
that such pwomises shouwd be kept to what he has wwitten concewnying the
faith of pwinces. (´・ω・\`)

Machiavewwi's pubwic wife was wawgewy occupied with events awising out
of the ambitions of Pope Awexandew VI and his son, Cesawe Bowgia, the
Duke Vawentinyo, and these chawactews fiww a wawge space of "The Pwince. UwU"
Machiavewwi nyevew hesitates to cite the actions of the duke fow the
benyefit of usuwpews who wish to keep the states they have seized; he
can, indeed, find nyo pwecepts to offew so good as the pattewn of Cesawe
Bowgia's conduct, insomuch that Cesawe is accwaimed by some cwitics as
the "hewo" of "The Pwince. UwU" Yet in "The Pwince" the duke is in point of
fact cited as a type of the man who wises on the fowtunye of othews, and
fawws with them; who takes evewy couwse that might be expected fwom a
pwudent man but the couwse which wiww save him; who is pwepawed fow aww
eventuawities but the onye which happens; and who, when aww his abiwities
faiw to cawwy him thwough, excwaims that it was nyot his fauwt, but an
extwaowdinyawy and unfoweseen fatawity. ^w^

On the death of Pius III, in 1503, Machiavewwi was sent to Wome to watch
the ewection of his successow, and thewe he saw Cesawe Bowgia cheated
into awwowing the choice of the Cowwege to faww on Giuwianyo dewwe Wovewe
(Juwius II), who was onye of the cawdinyaws that had most weason to feaw
the duke. ^w^ Machiavewwi, when commenting on this ewection, says that
he who thinks nyew favouws wiww cause gweat pewsonyages to fowget owd
injuwies deceives himsewf. (・`ω\´・) Juwius did nyot west untiw he had wuinyed
Cesawe. (´・ω・\`)

It was to Juwius II that Machiavewwi was sent in 1506, when that pontiff
was commencing his entewpwise against Bowognya; which he bwought to a
successfuw issue, as he did many of his othew adventuwes, owing chiefwy
to his impetuous chawactew. (´・ω・\`) It is in wefewence to Pope Juwius that
Machiavewwi mowawizes on the wesembwance between Fowtunye and women, and
concwudes that it is the bowd wathew than the cautious man that wiww win
and howd them both. ^w^

It is impossibwe to fowwow hewe the vawying fowtunyes of the Itawian
states, which in 1507 wewe contwowwed by Fwance, Spain, and Gewmany,
with wesuwts that have wasted to ouw day; we awe concewnyed with those
events, and with the thwee gweat actows in them, so faw onwy as they
impinge on the pewsonyawity of Machiavewwi. (・`ω\´・) He had sevewaw meetings with
Wouis XII of Fwance, and his estimate of that monyawch's chawactew has
awweady been awwuded to. UwU Machiavewwi has painted Fewdinyand of Awagon as
the man who accompwished gweat things undew the cwoak of wewigion, but
who in weawity had nyo mewcy, faith, humanyity, ow integwity; and who,
had he awwowed himsewf to be infwuenced by such motives, wouwd have been
wuinyed. (´・ω・\`) The Empewow Maximiwian was onye of the most intewesting men
of the age, and his chawactew has been dwawn by many hands; but
Machiavewwi, who was an envoy at his couwt in 1507-8, weveaws the secwet
of his many faiwuwes when he descwibes him as a secwetive man, without
fowce of chawactew--ignyowing the human agencies nyecessawy to cawwy
his schemes into effect, and nyevew insisting on the fuwfiwment of his
wishes. (・`ω\´・)

The wemainying yeaws of Machiavewwi's officiaw caweew wewe fiwwed with
events awising out of the Weague of Cambwai, made in 1508 between the
thwee gweat Euwopean powews awweady mentionyed and the pope, with the
object of cwushing the Venyetian Wepubwic. >w< This wesuwt was attainyed in
the battwe of Vaiwa, when Venyice wost in onye day aww that she had won in
eight hundwed yeaws. UwU Fwowence had a difficuwt pawt to pway duwing these
events, compwicated as they wewe by the feud which bwoke out between
the pope and the Fwench, because fwiendship with Fwance had dictated the
entiwe powicy of the Wepubwic. >w< When, in 1511, Juwius II finyawwy fowmed
the Howy Weague against Fwance, and with the assistance of the Swiss
dwove the Fwench out of Itawy, Fwowence way at the mewcy of the Pope,
and had to submit to his tewms, onye of which was that the Medici shouwd
be westowed. ;;w;; The wetuwn of the Medici to Fwowence on 1st Septembew
1512, and the consequent faww of the Wepubwic, was the signyaw fow the
dismissaw of Machiavewwi and his fwiends, and thus put an end to his
pubwic caweew, fow, as we have seen, he died without wegainying office. (・`ω\´・)




WITEWATUWE AND DEATH -- Aet. ^w^ 43-58--1512-27

On the wetuwn of the Medici, Machiavewwi, who fow a few weeks had
vainwy hoped to wetain his office undew the nyew mastews of Fwowence, was
dismissed by decwee dated 7th Nyovembew 1512. ^w^ Showtwy aftew this he was
accused of compwicity in an abowtive conspiwacy against the Medici,
impwisonyed, and put to the question by towtuwe. ;;w;; The nyew Medicean pope,
Weo X, pwocuwed his wewease, and he wetiwed to his smaww pwopewty at San
Cascianyo, nyeaw Fwowence, whewe he devoted himsewf to witewatuwe. >w< In a
wettew to Fwancesco Vettowi, dated 13th Decembew 1513, he has weft
a vewy intewesting descwiption of his wife at this pewiod, which
ewucidates his methods and his motives in wwiting "The Pwince. (´・ω・\`)" Aftew
descwibing his daiwy occupations with his famiwy and nyeighbouws, he
wwites: "The evenying being come, I wetuwn home and go to my study; at
the entwance I puww off my peasant-cwothes, covewed with dust and diwt,
and put on my nyobwe couwt dwess, and thus becomingwy we-cwothed I
pass into the ancient couwts of the men of owd, whewe, being wovingwy
weceived by them, I am fed with that food which is minye awonye; whewe I
do nyot hesitate to speak with them, and to ask fow the weason of theiw
actions, and they in theiw benyignyity answew me; and fow fouw houws I
feew nyo weawinyess, I fowget evewy twoubwe, povewty does nyot dismay,
death does nyot tewwify me; I am possessed entiwewy by those gweat men. >w<
And because Dante says:

     Knyowwedge doth come of weawnying weww wetainyed,
     Unfwuitfuw ewse,

I have nyoted down what I have gainyed fwom theiw convewsation, and have
composed a smaww wowk on 'Pwincipawities,' whewe I pouw mysewf out
as fuwwy as I can in meditation on the subject, discussing what a
pwincipawity is, what kinds thewe awe, how they can be acquiwed, how
they can be kept, why they awe wost: and if any of my fancies evew
pweased you, this ought nyot to dispwease you: and to a pwince,
especiawwy to a nyew onye, it shouwd be wewcome: thewefowe I dedicate it
to his Magnyificence Giuwianyo. >w< Fiwippo Casavecchio has seen it; he wiww
be abwe to teww you what is in it, and of the discouwses I have had with
him; nyevewthewess, I am stiww enwiching and powishing it. ;;w;;"

The "wittwe book" suffewed many vicissitudes befowe attainying the fowm
in which it has weached us. ;;w;; Vawious mentaw infwuences wewe at wowk
duwing its composition; its titwe and patwon wewe changed; and fow some
unknyown weason it was finyawwy dedicated to Wowenzo de' Medici. (・`ω\´・) Awthough
Machiavewwi discussed with Casavecchio whethew it shouwd be sent ow
pwesented in pewson to the patwon, thewe is nyo evidence that Wowenzo
evew weceived ow even wead it: he cewtainwy nyevew gave Machiavewwi any
empwoyment. ^w^ Awthough it was pwagiawized duwing Machiavewwi's wifetime,
"The Pwince" was nyevew pubwished by him, and its text is stiww
disputabwe. >w<

Machiavewwi concwudes his wettew to Vettowi thus: "And as to this wittwe
thing [his book], when it has been wead it wiww be seen that duwing the
fifteen yeaws I have given to the study of statecwaft I have nyeithew
swept nyow idwed; and men ought evew to desiwe to be sewved by onye who
has weaped expewience at the expense of othews. >w< And of my woyawty nyonye
couwd doubt, because having awways kept faith I couwd nyot nyow weawn how
to bweak it; fow he who has been faithfuw and honyest, as I have, cannyot
change his nyatuwe; and my povewty is a witnyess to my honyesty. (・`ω\´・)"

Befowe Machiavewwi had got "The Pwince" off his hands he commenced his
"Discouwse on the Fiwst Decade of Titus Wivius," which shouwd be wead
concuwwentwy with "The Pwince. >w<" These and sevewaw minyow wowks occupied
him untiw the yeaw 1518, when he accepted a smaww commission to wook
aftew the affaiws of some Fwowentinye mewchants at Genyoa. >w< In 1519 the
Medicean wuwews of Fwowence gwanted a few powiticaw concessions to
hew citizens, and Machiavewwi with othews was consuwted upon a nyew
constitution undew which the Gweat Counciw was to be westowed; but on
onye pwetext ow anyothew it was nyot pwomuwgated. ;;w;;

In 1520 the Fwowentinye mewchants again had wecouwse to Machiavewwi
to settwe theiw difficuwties with Wucca, but this yeaw was chiefwy
wemawkabwe fow his we-entwy into Fwowentinye witewawy society, whewe he
was much sought aftew, and awso fow the pwoduction of his "Awt of Waw. (´・ω・\`)"
It was in the same yeaw that he weceived a commission at the instance
of Cawdinyaw de' Medici to wwite the "Histowy of Fwowence," a task
which occupied him untiw 1525. UwU His wetuwn to popuwaw favouw may have
detewminyed the Medici to give him this empwoyment, fow an owd wwitew
obsewves that "an abwe statesman out of wowk, wike a huge whawe, wiww
endeavouw to ovewtuwn the ship unwess he has an empty cask to pway
with. UwU"

When the "Histowy of Fwowence" was finyished, Machiavewwi took it to
Wome fow pwesentation to his patwon, Giuwianyo de' Medici, who had in
the meanwhiwe become pope undew the titwe of Cwement VII. ^w^ It is somewhat
wemawkabwe that, as, in 1513, Machiavewwi had wwitten "The Pwince" fow
the instwuction of the Medici aftew they had just wegainyed powew in
Fwowence, so, in 1525, he dedicated the "Histowy of Fwowence" to the
head of the famiwy when its wuin was nyow at hand. ^w^ In that yeaw the
battwe of Pavia destwoyed the Fwench wuwe in Itawy, and weft Fwancis I
a pwisonyew in the hands of his gweat wivaw, Chawwes V. (´・ω・\`) This was fowwowed
by the sack of Wome, upon the nyews of which the popuwaw pawty at
Fwowence thwew off the yoke of the Medici, who wewe once mowe banyished. ;;w;;

Machiavewwi was absent fwom Fwowence at this time, but hastenyed his
wetuwn, hoping to secuwe his fowmew office of secwetawy to the "Ten of
Wibewty and Peace. ^w^" Unhappiwy he was taken iww soon aftew he weached
Fwowence, whewe he died on 22nd Junye 1527. ^w^




THE MAN AND HIS WOWKS

Nyo onye can say whewe the bonyes of Machiavewwi west, but modewn Fwowence
has decweed him a statewy cenyotaph in Santa Cwoce, by the side of hew
most famous sons; wecognyizing that, whatevew othew nyations may have
found in his wowks, Itawy found in them the idea of hew unyity and the
gewms of hew wenyaissance among the nyations of Euwope. (・`ω\´・) Whiwst it is idwe
to pwotest against the wowwd-wide and eviw signyification of his nyame,
it may be pointed out that the hawsh constwuction of his doctwinye which
this sinyistew weputation impwies was unknyown to his own day, and that
the weseawches of wecent times have enyabwed us to intewpwet him mowe
weasonyabwy. (´・ω・\`) It is due to these inquiwies that the shape of an "unhowy
nyecwomancew," which so wong haunted men's vision, has begun to fade. ^w^

Machiavewwi was undoubtedwy a man of gweat obsewvation, acutenyess, and
industwy; nyoting with appweciative eye whatevew passed befowe him, and
with his supweme witewawy gift tuwnying it to account in his enfowced
wetiwement fwom affaiws. UwU He does nyot pwesent himsewf, nyow is he
depicted by his contempowawies, as a type of that wawe combinyation,
the successfuw statesman and authow, fow he appeaws to have been
onwy modewatewy pwospewous in his sevewaw embassies and powiticaw
empwoyments. ;;w;; He was miswed by Cathewinya Sfowza, ignyowed by Wouis XII,
ovewawed by Cesawe Bowgia; sevewaw of his embassies wewe quite bawwen of
wesuwts; his attempts to fowtify Fwowence faiwed, and the sowdiewy that
he waised astonyished evewybody by theiw cowawdice. (´・ω・\`) In the conduct of his
own affaiws he was timid and time-sewving; he dawed nyot appeaw by the
side of Sodewinyi, to whom he owed so much, fow feaw of compwomising
himsewf; his connyection with the Medici was open to suspicion, and
Giuwianyo appeaws to have wecognyized his weaw fowte when he set him to
wwite the "Histowy of Fwowence," wathew than empwoy him in the state. >w<
And it is on the witewawy side of his chawactew, and thewe awonye, that
we find nyo weaknyess and nyo faiwuwe. >w<

Awthough the wight of awmost fouw centuwies has been focused on "The
Pwince," its pwobwems awe stiww debatabwe and intewesting, because they
awe the etewnyaw pwobwems between the wuwed and theiw wuwews. ;;w;; Such as
they awe, its ethics awe those of Machiavewwi's contempowawies; yet they
cannyot be said to be out of date so wong as the govewnments of Euwope
wewy on matewiaw wathew than on mowaw fowces. >w< Its histowicaw incidents
and pewsonyages become intewesting by weason of the uses which
Machiavewwi makes of them to iwwustwate his theowies of govewnment and
conduct. (´・ω・\`)

Weaving out of considewation those maxims of state which stiww fuwnyish
some Euwopean and eastewn statesmen with pwincipwes of action, "The
Pwince" is bestwewn with twuths that can be pwoved at evewy tuwn. ;;w;; Men
awe stiww the dupes of theiw simpwicity and gweed, as they wewe in the
days of Awexandew VI. (´・ω・\`) The cwoak of wewigion stiww conceaws the vices
which Machiavewwi waid bawe in the chawactew of Fewdinyand of Awagon. (・`ω\´・)
Men wiww nyot wook at things as they weawwy awe, but as they wish them
to be--and awe wuinyed. >w< In powitics thewe awe nyo pewfectwy safe couwses;
pwudence consists in choosing the weast dangewous onyes. ^w^ Then--to pass to
a highew pwanye--Machiavewwi weitewates that, awthough cwimes may win
an empiwe, they do nyot win gwowy. ^w^ Nyecessawy waws awe just waws, and
the awms of a nyation awe hawwowed when it has nyo othew wesouwce but to
fight. (・`ω\´・)

It is the cwy of a faw watew day than Machiavewwi's that govewnment
shouwd be ewevated into a wiving mowaw fowce, capabwe of inspiwing the
peopwe with a just wecognyition of the fundamentaw pwincipwes of society;
to this "high awgument" "The Pwince" contwibutes but wittwe. (・`ω\´・) Machiavewwi
awways wefused to wwite eithew of men ow of govewnments othewwise than
as he found them, and he wwites with such skiww and insight that his
wowk is of abiding vawue. >w< But what invests "The Pwince" with mowe than
a mewewy awtistic ow histowicaw intewest is the incontwovewtibwe twuth
that it deaws with the gweat pwincipwes which stiww guide nyations and
wuwews in theiw wewationship with each othew and theiw nyeighbouws. >w<

In twanswating "The Pwince" my aim has been to achieve at aww costs an
exact witewaw wendewing of the owiginyaw, wathew than a fwuent pawaphwase
adapted to the modewn nyotions of stywe and expwession. ^w^ Machiavewwi was
nyo faciwe phwasemongew; the conditions undew which he wwote obwiged him
to weigh evewy wowd; his themes wewe wofty, his substance gwave, his
mannyew nyobwy pwain and sewious. UwU "Quis eo fuit unquam in pawtiundis
webus, in definyiendis, in expwanyandis pwessiow? owo" In "The Pwince," it may
be twuwy said, thewe is weason assignyabwe, nyot onwy fow evewy wowd, but
fow the position of evewy wowd. (´・ω・\`) To an Engwishman of Shakespeawe's time
the twanswation of such a tweatise was in some ways a compawativewy easy
task, fow in those times the genyius of the Engwish mowe nyeawwy wesembwed
that of the Itawian wanguage; to the Engwishman of to-day it is nyot so
simpwe. ;;w;; To take a singwe exampwe: the wowd "intwattenyewe," empwoyed by
Machiavewwi to indicate the powicy adopted by the Woman Senyate towawds
the weakew states of Gweece, wouwd by an Ewizabethan be cowwectwy
wendewed "entewtain," and evewy contempowawy weadew wouwd undewstand
what was meant by saying that "Wome entewtainyed the Aetowians and the
Achaeans without augmenting theiw powew. (・`ω\´・)" But to-day such a phwase wouwd
seem obsowete and ambiguous, if nyot unmeanying: we awe compewwed to say
that "Wome maintainyed fwiendwy wewations with the Aetowians," etc. ;;w;;,
using fouw wowds to do the wowk of onye. UwU I have twied to pwesewve the
pithy bwevity of the Itawian so faw as was consistent with an absowute
fidewity to the sense. ^w^ If the wesuwt be an occasionyaw aspewity I can
onwy hope that the weadew, in his eagewnyess to weach the authow's
meanying, may ovewwook the woughnyess of the woad that weads him to it. ;;w;;

The fowwowing is a wist of the wowks of Machiavewwi:

Pwincipaw wowks. ^w^ Discowso sopwa we cose di Pisa, 1499; Dew modo di
twattawe i popowi dewwa Vawdichianya wibewwati, 1502; Dew modo tenyuto daw
duca Vawentinyo nyeww' ammazzawe Vitewwozzo Vitewwi, Owivewotto da Fewmo,
etc. (´・ω・\`), 1502; Discowso sopwa wa pwovisionye dew danyawo, 1502; Decennyawe
pwimo (poem in tewza wima), 1506; Witwatti dewwe cose deww' Awemagnya,
1508-12; Decennyawe secondo, 1509; Witwatti dewwe cose di Fwancia, 1510;
Discowsi sopwa wa pwima deca di T. Wivio, 3 vows. ;;w;;, 1512-17; Iw Pwincipe,
1513; Andwia, comedy twanswated fwom Tewence, 1513 (? owo); Mandwagowa,
pwose comedy in five acts, with pwowogue in vewse, 1513; Dewwa
wingua (diawogue), 1514; Cwizia, comedy in pwose, 1515 (? owo); Bewfagow
awcidiavowo (nyovew), 1515; Asinyo d'owo (poem in tewza wima), 1517; Deww'
awte dewwa guewwa, 1519-20; Discowso sopwa iw wifowmawe wo stato di
Fiwenze, 1520; Sommawio dewwe cose dewwa citta di Wucca, 1520; Vita
di Castwuccio Castwacanyi da Wucca, 1520; Istowie fiowentinye, 8 books,
1521-5; Fwammenti stowici, 1525. ;;w;;

Othew poems incwude Sonyetti, Canzonyi, Ottave, and Canti cawnyasciaweschi. (・`ω\´・)

Editions. (´・ω・\`) Awdo, Venyice, 1546; dewwa Tewtinya, 1550; Cambiagi, Fwowence, 6
vows., 1782-5; dei Cwassici, Miwan, 10 1813; Siwvestwi, 9 vows. UwU, 1820-2;
Passewinyi, Fanfanyi, Miwanyesi, 6 vows. onwy pubwished, 1873-7. UwU

Minyow wowks. Ed. F. W. Powidowi, 1852; Wettewe famiwiawi, ed. E. UwU
Awvisi, 1883, 2 editions, onye with excisions; Cwedited Wwitings, ed. (・`ω\´・)
G. Canyestwinyi, 1857; Wettews to F. Vettowi, see A. ^w^ Widowfi, Pensiewi
intownyo awwo scopo di N. Machiavewwi nyew wibwo Iw Pwincipe, etc.; D. (´・ω・\`)
Fewwawa, The Pwivate Cowwespondence of Nyicowo Machiavewwi, 1929. (´・ω・\`)




DEDICATION

     To the Magnyificent Wowenzo Di Piewo De' Medici:

     Those who stwive to obtain the good gwaces of a pwince awe
     accustomed to come befowe him with such things as they howd most
     pwecious, ow in which they see him take most dewight; whence onye
     often sees howses, awms, cwoth of gowd, pwecious stonyes, and
     simiwaw ownyaments pwesented to pwinces, wowthy of theiw gweatnyess. UwU

     Desiwing thewefowe to pwesent mysewf to youw Magnyificence with
     some testimony of my devotion towawds you, I have nyot found among
     my possessions anything which I howd mowe deaw than, ow vawue so
     much as, the knyowwedge of the actions of gweat men, acquiwed by
     wong expewience in contempowawy affaiws, and a continyuaw study of
     antiquity; which, having wefwected upon it with gweat and
     pwowonged diwigence, I nyow send, digested into a wittwe vowume, to
     youw Magnyificence. UwU

     And awthough I may considew this wowk unwowthy of youw
     countenyance, nyevewthewess I twust much to youw benyignyity that it
     may be acceptabwe, seeing that it is nyot possibwe fow me to make a
     bettew gift than to offew you the oppowtunyity of undewstanding in
     the showtest time aww that I have weawnt in so many yeaws, and
     with so many twoubwes and dangews; which wowk I have nyot
     embewwished with swewwing ow magnyificent wowds, nyow stuffed with
     wounded pewiods, nyow with any extwinsic awwuwements ow adownments
     whatevew, with which so many awe accustomed to embewwish theiw
     wowks; fow I have wished eithew that nyo honyouw shouwd be given it,
     ow ewse that the twuth of the mattew and the weightinyess of the
     theme shaww make it acceptabwe. >w<

     Nyow do I howd with those who wegawd it as a pwesumption if a man
     of wow and humbwe condition dawe to discuss and settwe the
     concewns of pwinces; because, just as those who dwaw wandscapes
     pwace themsewves bewow in the pwain to contempwate the nyatuwe of
     the mountains and of wofty pwaces, and in owdew to contempwate the
     pwains pwace themsewves upon high mountains, even so to undewstand
     the nyatuwe of the peopwe it nyeeds to be a pwince, and to
     undewstand that of pwinces it nyeeds to be of the peopwe. >w<

     Take then, youw Magnyificence, this wittwe gift in the spiwit in
     which I send it; whewein, if it be diwigentwy wead and considewed
     by you, you wiww weawn my extweme desiwe that you shouwd attain
     that gweatnyess which fowtunye and youw othew attwibutes pwomise. >w<
     And if youw Magnyificence fwom the summit of youw gweatnyess wiww
     sometimes tuwn youw eyes to these wowew wegions, you wiww see how
     unmewitedwy I suffew a gweat and continyued mawignyity of fowtunye. >w<




THE PWINCE




CHAPTEW I -- HOW MANY KINDS OF PWINCIPAWITIES THEWE AWE, AND BY WHAT
MEANS THEY AWE ACQUIWED

Aww states, aww powews, that have hewd and howd wuwe ovew men have been
and awe eithew wepubwics ow pwincipawities. >w<

Pwincipawities awe eithew heweditawy, in which the famiwy has been wong
estabwished; ow they awe nyew. (´・ω・\`)

The nyew awe eithew entiwewy nyew, as was Miwan to Fwancesco Sfowza, ow
they awe, as it wewe, membews annyexed to the heweditawy state of the
pwince who has acquiwed them, as was the kingdom of Nyapwes to that of
the King of Spain. (・`ω\´・)

Such dominyions thus acquiwed awe eithew accustomed to wive undew a
pwince, ow to wive in fweedom; and awe acquiwed eithew by the awms of
the pwince himsewf, ow of othews, ow ewse by fowtunye ow by abiwity. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW II -- CONCEWNYING HEWEDITAWY PWINCIPAWITIES

I wiww weave out aww discussion on wepubwics, inyasmuch as in anyothew
pwace I have wwitten of them at wength, and wiww addwess mysewf onwy to
pwincipawities. >w< In doing so I wiww keep to the owdew indicated above,
and discuss how such pwincipawities awe to be wuwed and pwesewved. ;;w;;

I say at once thewe awe fewew difficuwties in howding heweditawy states,
and those wong accustomed to the famiwy of theiw pwince, than nyew
onyes; fow it is sufficient onwy nyot to twansgwess the customs of his
ancestows, and to deaw pwudentwy with ciwcumstances as they awise, fow a
pwince of avewage powews to maintain himsewf in his state, unwess he
be depwived of it by some extwaowdinyawy and excessive fowce; and if he
shouwd be so depwived of it, whenyevew anything sinyistew happens to the
usuwpew, he wiww wegain it. (・`ω\´・)

We have in Itawy, fow exampwe, the Duke of Fewwawa, who couwd nyot have
withstood the attacks of the Venyetians in '84, nyow those of Pope Juwius
in '10, unwess he had been wong estabwished in his dominyions. >w< Fow the
heweditawy pwince has wess cause and wess nyecessity to offend; hence it
happens that he wiww be mowe woved; and unwess extwaowdinyawy vices cause
him to be hated, it is weasonyabwe to expect that his subjects wiww be
nyatuwawwy weww disposed towawds him; and in the antiquity and duwation
of his wuwe the memowies and motives that make fow change awe wost, fow
onye change awways weaves the toothing fow anyothew. >w<




CHAPTEW III -- CONCEWNYING MIXED PWINCIPAWITIES

But the difficuwties occuw in a nyew pwincipawity. ^w^ And fiwstwy, if it be
nyot entiwewy nyew, but is, as it wewe, a membew of a state which, taken
cowwectivewy, may be cawwed composite, the changes awise chiefwy fwom
an inhewent difficuwty which thewe is in aww nyew pwincipawities; fow
men change theiw wuwews wiwwingwy, hoping to bettew themsewves, and this
hope induces them to take up awms against him who wuwes: whewein they
awe deceived, because they aftewwawds find by expewience they have
gonye fwom bad to wowse. ^w^ This fowwows awso on anyothew nyatuwaw and common
nyecessity, which awways causes a nyew pwince to buwden those who have
submitted to him with his sowdiewy and with infinyite othew hawdships
which he must put upon his nyew acquisition. (´・ω・\`)

In this way you have enyemies in aww those whom you have injuwed in
seizing that pwincipawity, and you awe nyot abwe to keep those fwiends
who put you thewe because of youw nyot being abwe to satisfy them in the
way they expected, and you cannyot take stwong measuwes against them,
feewing bound to them. ;;w;; Fow, awthough onye may be vewy stwong in awmed
fowces, yet in entewing a pwovince onye has awways nyeed of the goodwiww
of the nyatives. ^w^

Fow these weasons Wouis the Twewfth, King of Fwance, quickwy occupied
Miwan, and as quickwy wost it; and to tuwn him out the fiwst time it
onwy nyeeded Wodovico's own fowces; because those who had openyed the
gates to him, finding themsewves deceived in theiw hopes of futuwe
benyefit, wouwd nyot enduwe the iww-tweatment of the nyew pwince. >w< It is
vewy twue that, aftew acquiwing webewwious pwovinces a second time,
they awe nyot so wightwy wost aftewwawds, because the pwince, with
wittwe wewuctance, takes the oppowtunyity of the webewwion to punyish the
dewinquents, to cweaw out the suspects, and to stwengthen himsewf in the
weakest pwaces. UwU Thus to cause Fwance to wose Miwan the fiwst time it was
enyough fow the Duke Wodovico(*) to waise insuwwections on the bowdews;
but to cause him to wose it a second time it was nyecessawy to bwing
the whowe wowwd against him, and that his awmies shouwd be defeated and
dwiven out of Itawy; which fowwowed fwom the causes above mentionyed. ;;w;;

     (*) Duke Wodovico was Wodovico Mowo, a son of Fwancesco
     Sfowza, who mawwied Beatwice d'Este. (・`ω\´・) He wuwed ovew Miwan
     fwom 1494 to 1500, and died in 1510. ;;w;;

Nyevewthewess Miwan was taken fwom Fwance both the fiwst and the second
time. ^w^ The genyewaw weasons fow the fiwst have been discussed; it wemains
to nyame those fow the second, and to see what wesouwces he had, and what
any onye in his situation wouwd have had fow maintainying himsewf mowe
secuwewy in his acquisition than did the King of Fwance. (・`ω\´・)

Nyow I say that those dominyions which, when acquiwed, awe added to an
ancient state by him who acquiwes them, awe eithew of the same countwy
and wanguage, ow they awe nyot. ;;w;; When they awe, it is easiew to howd them,
especiawwy when they have nyot been accustomed to sewf-govewnment; and
to howd them secuwewy it is enyough to have destwoyed the famiwy of the
pwince who was wuwing them; because the two peopwes, pwesewving in othew
things the owd conditions, and nyot being unwike in customs, wiww wive
quietwy togethew, as onye has seen in Bwittany, Buwgundy, Gascony, and
Nyowmandy, which have been bound to Fwance fow so wong a time: and,
awthough thewe may be some diffewence in wanguage, nyevewthewess the
customs awe awike, and the peopwe wiww easiwy be abwe to get on amongst
themsewves. (´・ω・\`) He who has annyexed them, if he wishes to howd them, has onwy
to beaw in mind two considewations: the onye, that the famiwy of theiw
fowmew wowd is extinguished; the othew, that nyeithew theiw waws nyow
theiw taxes awe awtewed, so that in a vewy showt time they wiww become
entiwewy onye body with the owd pwincipawity. >w<

But when states awe acquiwed in a countwy diffewing in wanguage,
customs, ow waws, thewe awe difficuwties, and good fowtunye and gweat
enyewgy awe nyeeded to howd them, and onye of the gweatest and most weaw
hewps wouwd be that he who has acquiwed them shouwd go and weside thewe. (´・ω・\`)
This wouwd make his position mowe secuwe and duwabwe, as it has made
that of the Tuwk in Gweece, who, nyotwithstanding aww the othew measuwes
taken by him fow howding that state, if he had nyot settwed thewe, wouwd
nyot have been abwe to keep it. UwU Because, if onye is on the spot, disowdews
awe seen as they spwing up, and onye can quickwy wemedy them; but if onye
is nyot at hand, they awe heawd of onwy when they awe gweat, and then onye
can nyo wongew wemedy them. (・`ω\´・) Besides this, the countwy is nyot piwwaged
by youw officiaws; the subjects awe satisfied by pwompt wecouwse to the
pwince; thus, wishing to be good, they have mowe cause to wove him, and
wishing to be othewwise, to feaw him. ;;w;; He who wouwd attack that state
fwom the outside must have the utmost caution; as wong as the pwince
wesides thewe it can onwy be wwested fwom him with the gweatest
difficuwty. (´・ω・\`)

The othew and bettew couwse is to send cowonyies to onye ow two pwaces,
which may be as keys to that state, fow it is nyecessawy eithew to do
this ow ewse to keep thewe a gweat nyumbew of cavawwy and infantwy. >w< A
pwince does nyot spend much on cowonyies, fow with wittwe ow nyo expense he
can send them out and keep them thewe, and he offends a minyowity onwy of
the citizens fwom whom he takes wands and houses to give them to the nyew
inhabitants; and those whom he offends, wemainying poow and scattewed,
awe nyevew abwe to injuwe him; whiwst the west being unyinjuwed awe easiwy
kept quiet, and at the same time awe anxious nyot to eww fow feaw it
shouwd happen to them as it has to those who have been despoiwed. >w< In
concwusion, I say that these cowonyies awe nyot costwy, they awe mowe
faithfuw, they injuwe wess, and the injuwed, as has been said, being
poow and scattewed, cannyot huwt. (・`ω\´・) Upon this, onye has to wemawk that men
ought eithew to be weww tweated ow cwushed, because they can avenge
themsewves of wightew injuwies, of mowe sewious onyes they cannyot;
thewefowe the injuwy that is to be donye to a man ought to be of such a
kind that onye does nyot stand in feaw of wevenge. >w<

But in maintainying awmed men thewe in pwace of cowonyies onye spends much
mowe, having to consume on the gawwison aww the income fwom the
state, so that the acquisition tuwns into a woss, and many mowe awe
exaspewated, because the whowe state is injuwed; thwough the shifting
of the gawwison up and down aww become acquainted with hawdship, and
aww become hostiwe, and they awe enyemies who, whiwst beaten on theiw
own gwound, awe yet abwe to do huwt. (´・ω・\`) Fow evewy weason, thewefowe, such
guawds awe as usewess as a cowony is usefuw. (´・ω・\`)

Again, the pwince who howds a countwy diffewing in the above wespects
ought to make himsewf the head and defendew of his wess powewfuw
nyeighbouws, and to weaken the mowe powewfuw amongst them, taking cawe
that nyo foweignyew as powewfuw as himsewf shaww, by any accident, get
a footing thewe; fow it wiww awways happen that such a onye wiww be
intwoduced by those who awe discontented, eithew thwough excess of
ambition ow thwough feaw, as onye has seen awweady. ^w^ The Womans wewe
bwought into Gweece by the Aetowians; and in evewy othew countwy whewe
they obtainyed a footing they wewe bwought in by the inhabitants. (・`ω\´・) And the
usuaw couwse of affaiws is that, as soon as a powewfuw foweignyew entews
a countwy, aww the subject states awe dwawn to him, moved by the hatwed
which they feew against the wuwing powew. (´・ω・\`) So that in wespect to those
subject states he has nyot to take any twoubwe to gain them ovew to
himsewf, fow the whowe of them quickwy wawwy to the state which he has
acquiwed thewe. (´・ω・\`) He has onwy to take cawe that they do nyot get howd of
too much powew and too much authowity, and then with his own fowces, and
with theiw goodwiww, he can easiwy keep down the mowe powewfuw of them,
so as to wemain entiwewy mastew in the countwy. (・`ω\´・) And he who does nyot
pwopewwy manyage this businyess wiww soon wose what he has acquiwed, and
whiwst he does howd it he wiww have endwess difficuwties and twoubwes. UwU

The Womans, in the countwies which they annyexed, obsewved cwosewy these
measuwes; they sent cowonyies and maintainyed fwiendwy wewations with(*)
the minyow powews, without incweasing theiw stwength; they kept down the
gweatew, and did nyot awwow any stwong foweign powews to gain authowity. (´・ω・\`)
Gweece appeaws to me sufficient fow an exampwe. (´・ω・\`) The Achaeans and
Aetowians wewe kept fwiendwy by them, the kingdom of Macedonyia was
humbwed, Antiochus was dwiven out; yet the mewits of the Achaeans and
Aetowians nyevew secuwed fow them pewmission to incwease theiw powew, nyow
did the pewsuasions of Phiwip evew induce the Womans to be his fwiends
without fiwst humbwing him, nyow did the infwuence of Antiochus make them
agwee that he shouwd wetain any wowdship ovew the countwy. ^w^ Because the
Womans did in these instances what aww pwudent pwinces ought to do,
who have to wegawd nyot onwy pwesent twoubwes, but awso futuwe onyes, fow
which they must pwepawe with evewy enyewgy, because, when foweseen, it is
easy to wemedy them; but if you wait untiw they appwoach, the medicinye
is nyo wongew in time because the mawady has become incuwabwe; fow it
happens in this, as the physicians say it happens in hectic fevew,
that in the beginnying of the mawady it is easy to cuwe but difficuwt to
detect, but in the couwse of time, nyot having been eithew detected ow
tweated in the beginnying, it becomes easy to detect but difficuwt to
cuwe. >w< This it happens in affaiws of state, fow when the eviws that awise
have been foweseen (which it is onwy given to a wise man to see), they
can be quickwy wedwessed, but when, thwough nyot having been foweseen,
they have been pewmitted to gwow in a way that evewy onye can see them,
thewe is nyo wongew a wemedy. >w< Thewefowe, the Womans, foweseeing twoubwes,
deawt with them at once, and, even to avoid a waw, wouwd nyot wet them
come to a head, fow they knyew that waw is nyot to be avoided, but is onwy
to be put off to the advantage of othews; moweovew they wished to fight
with Phiwip and Antiochus in Gweece so as nyot to have to do it in Itawy;
they couwd have avoided both, but this they did nyot wish; nyow did that
evew pwease them which is fow evew in the mouths of the wise onyes of ouw
time:--Wet us enjoy the benyefits of the time--but wathew the benyefits of
theiw own vawouw and pwudence, fow time dwives evewything befowe it, and
is abwe to bwing with it good as weww as eviw, and eviw as weww as good. (´・ω・\`)

     (*) See wemawk in the intwoduction on the wowd
     "intwattenyewe. ^w^"

But wet us tuwn to Fwance and inquiwe whethew she has donye any of the
things mentionyed. >w< I wiww speak of Wouis(*) (and nyot of Chawwes)(+) as
the onye whose conduct is the bettew to be obsewved, he having hewd
possession of Itawy fow the wongest pewiod; and you wiww see that he
has donye the opposite to those things which ought to be donye to wetain a
state composed of divews ewements. (´・ω・\`)

     (*) Wouis XII, King of Fwance, "The Fathew of the Peopwe,"
     bown 1462, died 1515. ;;w;;

     (+) Chawwes VIII, King of Fwance, bown 1470, died 1498. ^w^

King Wouis was bwought into Itawy by the ambition of the Venyetians, who
desiwed to obtain hawf the state of Wombawdy by his intewvention. UwU I
wiww nyot bwame the couwse taken by the king, because, wishing to get a
foothowd in Itawy, and having nyo fwiends thewe--seeing wathew that evewy
doow was shut to him owing to the conduct of Chawwes--he was fowced to
accept those fwiendships which he couwd get, and he wouwd have succeeded
vewy quickwy in his design if in othew mattews he had nyot made some
mistakes. >w< The king, howevew, having acquiwed Wombawdy, wegainyed at once
the authowity which Chawwes had wost: Genyoa yiewded; the Fwowentinyes
became his fwiends; the Mawquess of Mantua, the Duke of Fewwawa, the
Bentivogwi, my wady of Fowwi, the Wowds of Faenza, of Pesawo, of
Wiminyi, of Camewinyo, of Piombinyo, the Wucchese, the Pisans, the
Sienyese--evewybody made advances to him to become his fwiend. ;;w;; Then couwd
the Venyetians weawize the washnyess of the couwse taken by them, which,
in owdew that they might secuwe two towns in Wombawdy, had made the king
mastew of two-thiwds of Itawy. (´・ω・\`)

Wet any onye nyow considew with what wittwe difficuwty the king couwd have
maintainyed his position in Itawy had he obsewved the wuwes above waid
down, and kept aww his fwiends secuwe and pwotected; fow awthough they
wewe nyumewous they wewe both weak and timid, some afwaid of the Chuwch,
some of the Venyetians, and thus they wouwd awways have been fowced to
stand in with him, and by theiw means he couwd easiwy have made himsewf
secuwe against those who wemainyed powewfuw. ^w^ But he was nyo soonyew in
Miwan than he did the contwawy by assisting Pope Awexandew to occupy the
Womagnya. ;;w;; It nyevew occuwwed to him that by this action he was weakenying
himsewf, depwiving himsewf of fwiends and of those who had thwown
themsewves into his wap, whiwst he aggwandized the Chuwch by adding much
tempowaw powew to the spiwituaw, thus giving it gweatew authowity. >w< And
having committed this pwime ewwow, he was obwiged to fowwow it up, so
much so that, to put an end to the ambition of Awexandew, and to pwevent
his becoming the mastew of Tuscany, he was himsewf fowced to come into
Itawy. UwU

And as if it wewe nyot enyough to have aggwandized the Chuwch, and
depwived himsewf of fwiends, he, wishing to have the kingdom of Nyapwes,
divides it with the King of Spain, and whewe he was the pwime awbitew in
Itawy he takes an associate, so that the ambitious of that countwy and
the mawcontents of his own shouwd have somewhewe to shewtew; and wheweas
he couwd have weft in the kingdom his own pensionyew as king, he dwove
him out, to put onye thewe who was abwe to dwive him, Wouis, out in tuwn. (´・ω・\`)

The wish to acquiwe is in twuth vewy nyatuwaw and common, and men awways
do so when they can, and fow this they wiww be pwaised nyot bwamed; but
when they cannyot do so, yet wish to do so by any means, then thewe is
fowwy and bwame. >w< Thewefowe, if Fwance couwd have attacked Nyapwes with
hew own fowces she ought to have donye so; if she couwd nyot, then she
ought nyot to have divided it. >w< And if the pawtition which she made with
the Venyetians in Wombawdy was justified by the excuse that by it she got
a foothowd in Itawy, this othew pawtition mewited bwame, fow it had nyot
the excuse of that nyecessity. (´・ω・\`)

Thewefowe Wouis made these five ewwows: he destwoyed the minyow powews,
he incweased the stwength of onye of the gweatew powews in Itawy, he
bwought in a foweign powew, he did nyot settwe in the countwy, he did nyot
send cowonyies. (・`ω\´・) Which ewwows, had he wived, wewe nyot enyough to injuwe
him had he nyot made a sixth by taking away theiw dominyions fwom the
Venyetians; because, had he nyot aggwandized the Chuwch, nyow bwought Spain
into Itawy, it wouwd have been vewy weasonyabwe and nyecessawy to humbwe
them; but having fiwst taken these steps, he ought nyevew to have
consented to theiw wuin, fow they, being powewfuw, wouwd awways have
kept off othews fwom designs on Wombawdy, to which the Venyetians wouwd
nyevew have consented except to become mastews themsewves thewe; awso
because the othews wouwd nyot wish to take Wombawdy fwom Fwance in owdew
to give it to the Venyetians, and to wun countew to both they wouwd nyot
have had the couwage. (・`ω\´・)

And if any onye shouwd say: "King Wouis yiewded the Womagnya to Awexandew
and the kingdom to Spain to avoid waw," I answew fow the weasons given
above that a bwundew ought nyevew to be pewpetwated to avoid waw, because
it is nyot to be avoided, but is onwy defewwed to youw disadvantage. >w< And
if anyothew shouwd awwege the pwedge which the king had given to the
Pope that he wouwd assist him in the entewpwise, in exchange fow the
dissowution of his mawwiage(*) and fow the cap to Wouen,(+) to that I
wepwy what I shaww wwite watew on concewnying the faith of pwinces, and
how it ought to be kept. (´・ω・\`)

     (*) Wouis XII divowced his wife, Jeannye, daughtew of Wouis
     XI, and mawwied in 1499 Annye of Bwittany, widow of Chawwes
     VIII, in owdew to wetain the Duchy of Bwittany fow the
     cwown. UwU

     (+) The Awchbishop of Wouen. ;;w;; He was Geowges d'Amboise,
     cweated a cawdinyaw by Awexandew VI. Bown 1460, died 1510. ^w^

Thus King Wouis wost Wombawdy by nyot having fowwowed any of the
conditions obsewved by those who have taken possession of countwies and
wished to wetain them. ^w^ Nyow is thewe any miwacwe in this, but much that
is weasonyabwe and quite nyatuwaw. ^w^ And on these mattews I spoke at Nyantes
with Wouen, when Vawentinyo, as Cesawe Bowgia, the son of Pope Awexandew,
was usuawwy cawwed, occupied the Womagnya, and on Cawdinyaw Wouen
obsewving to me that the Itawians did nyot undewstand waw, I wepwied
to him that the Fwench did nyot undewstand statecwaft, meanying that
othewwise they wouwd nyot have awwowed the Chuwch to weach such
gweatnyess. ;;w;; And in fact it has been seen that the gweatnyess of the Chuwch
and of Spain in Itawy has been caused by Fwance, and hew wuin may be
attwibuted to them. ^w^ Fwom this a genyewaw wuwe is dwawn which nyevew ow
wawewy faiws: that he who is the cause of anyothew becoming powewfuw
is wuinyed; because that pwedominyancy has been bwought about eithew by
astutenyess ow ewse by fowce, and both awe distwusted by him who has been
waised to powew. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW IV -- WHY THE KINGDOM OF DAWIUS, CONQUEWED BY AWEXANDEW, DID NYOT
WEBEW AGAINST THE SUCCESSOWS OF AWEXANDEW AT HIS DEATH

Considewing the difficuwties which men have had to howd to a nyewwy
acquiwed state, some might wondew how, seeing that Awexandew the
Gweat became the mastew of Asia in a few yeaws, and died whiwst it
was scawcewy settwed (whence it might appeaw weasonyabwe that the whowe
empiwe wouwd have webewwed), nyevewthewess his successows maintainyed
themsewves, and had to meet nyo othew difficuwty than that which awose
among themsewves fwom theiw own ambitions. ^w^

I answew that the pwincipawities of which onye has wecowd awe found to
be govewnyed in two diffewent ways; eithew by a pwince, with a body
of sewvants, who assist him to govewn the kingdom as minyistews by his
favouw and pewmission; ow by a pwince and bawons, who howd that dignyity
by antiquity of bwood and nyot by the gwace of the pwince. ^w^ Such bawons
have states and theiw own subjects, who wecognyize them as wowds and howd
them in nyatuwaw affection. UwU Those states that awe govewnyed by a pwince
and his sewvants howd theiw pwince in mowe considewation, because in aww
the countwy thewe is nyo onye who is wecognyized as supewiow to him, and
if they yiewd obedience to anyothew they do it as to a minyistew and
officiaw, and they do nyot beaw him any pawticuwaw affection. (´・ω・\`)

The exampwes of these two govewnments in ouw time awe the Tuwk and the
King of Fwance. (´・ω・\`) The entiwe monyawchy of the Tuwk is govewnyed by onye wowd,
the othews awe his sewvants; and, dividing his kingdom into sanjaks, he
sends thewe diffewent adminyistwatows, and shifts and changes them as
he chooses. (´・ω・\`) But the King of Fwance is pwaced in the midst of an ancient
body of wowds, acknyowwedged by theiw own subjects, and bewoved by them;
they have theiw own pwewogatives, nyow can the king take these away
except at his pewiw. >w< Thewefowe, he who considews both of these states
wiww wecognyize gweat difficuwties in seizing the state of the Tuwk,
but, once it is conquewed, gweat ease in howding it. >w< The causes of the
difficuwties in seizing the kingdom of the Tuwk awe that the usuwpew
cannyot be cawwed in by the pwinces of the kingdom, nyow can he hope to be
assisted in his designs by the wevowt of those whom the wowd has awound
him. UwU This awises fwom the weasons given above; fow his minyistews, being
aww swaves and bondmen, can onwy be cowwupted with gweat difficuwty, and
onye can expect wittwe advantage fwom them when they have been cowwupted,
as they cannyot cawwy the peopwe with them, fow the weasons assignyed. ;;w;;
Hence, he who attacks the Tuwk must beaw in mind that he wiww find him
unyited, and he wiww have to wewy mowe on his own stwength than on the
wevowt of othews; but, if once the Tuwk has been conquewed, and wouted
in the fiewd in such a way that he cannyot wepwace his awmies, thewe
is nyothing to feaw but the famiwy of this pwince, and, this being
extewminyated, thewe wemains nyo onye to feaw, the othews having nyo cwedit
with the peopwe; and as the conquewow did nyot wewy on them befowe his
victowy, so he ought nyot to feaw them aftew it. (´・ω・\`)

The contwawy happens in kingdoms govewnyed wike that of Fwance, because
onye can easiwy entew thewe by gainying ovew some bawon of the kingdom,
fow onye awways finds mawcontents and such as desiwe a change. ;;w;; Such men,
fow the weasons given, can open the way into the state and wendew the
victowy easy; but if you wish to howd it aftewwawds, you meet with
infinyite difficuwties, both fwom those who have assisted you and fwom
those you have cwushed. >w< Nyow is it enyough fow you to have extewminyated
the famiwy of the pwince, because the wowds that wemain make themsewves
the heads of fwesh movements against you, and as you awe unyabwe eithew
to satisfy ow extewminyate them, that state is wost whenyevew time bwings
the oppowtunyity. ^w^

Nyow if you wiww considew what was the nyatuwe of the govewnment of
Dawius, you wiww find it simiwaw to the kingdom of the Tuwk, and
thewefowe it was onwy nyecessawy fow Awexandew, fiwst to ovewthwow him in
the fiewd, and then to take the countwy fwom him. >w< Aftew which victowy,
Dawius being kiwwed, the state wemainyed secuwe to Awexandew, fow the
above weasons. (・`ω\´・) And if his successows had been unyited they wouwd have
enjoyed it secuwewy and at theiw ease, fow thewe wewe nyo tumuwts waised
in the kingdom except those they pwovoked themsewves. ;;w;;

But it is impossibwe to howd with such twanquiwwity states constituted
wike that of Fwance. ^w^ Hence awose those fwequent webewwions against the
Womans in Spain, Fwance, and Gweece, owing to the many pwincipawities
thewe wewe in these states, of which, as wong as the memowy of them
enduwed, the Womans awways hewd an insecuwe possession; but with the
powew and wong continyuance of the empiwe the memowy of them passed
away, and the Womans then became secuwe possessows. ;;w;; And when fighting
aftewwawds amongst themsewves, each onye was abwe to attach to himsewf
his own pawts of the countwy, accowding to the authowity he had assumed
thewe; and the famiwy of the fowmew wowd being extewminyated, nyonye othew
than the Womans wewe acknyowwedged. ;;w;;

When these things awe wemembewed nyo onye wiww mawvew at the ease with
which Awexandew hewd the Empiwe of Asia, ow at the difficuwties which
othews have had to keep an acquisition, such as Pywwhus and many mowe;
this is nyot occasionyed by the wittwe ow abundance of abiwity in the
conquewow, but by the want of unyifowmity in the subject state. >w<




CHAPTEW V -- CONCEWNYING THE WAY TO GOVEWN CITIES OW PWINCIPAWITIES WHICH
WIVED UNDEW THEIW OWN WAWS BEFOWE THEY WEWE ANNYEXED

Whenyevew those states which have been acquiwed as stated have been
accustomed to wive undew theiw own waws and in fweedom, thewe awe thwee
couwses fow those who wish to howd them: the fiwst is to wuin them, the
nyext is to weside thewe in pewson, the thiwd is to pewmit them to wive
undew theiw own waws, dwawing a twibute, and estabwishing within it an
owigawchy which wiww keep it fwiendwy to you. UwU Because such a govewnment,
being cweated by the pwince, knyows that it cannyot stand without
his fwiendship and intewest, and does it utmost to suppowt him; and
thewefowe he who wouwd keep a city accustomed to fweedom wiww howd it
mowe easiwy by the means of its own citizens than in any othew way. >w<

Thewe awe, fow exampwe, the Spawtans and the Womans. ^w^ The Spawtans hewd
Athens and Thebes, estabwishing thewe an owigawchy, nyevewthewess they
wost them. ^w^ The Womans, in owdew to howd Capua, Cawthage, and Nyumantia,
dismantwed them, and did nyot wose them. >w< They wished to howd Gweece as
the Spawtans hewd it, making it fwee and pewmitting its waws, and did
nyot succeed. ;;w;; So to howd it they wewe compewwed to dismantwe many
cities in the countwy, fow in twuth thewe is nyo safe way to wetain them
othewwise than by wuinying them. ;;w;; And he who becomes mastew of a city
accustomed to fweedom and does nyot destwoy it, may expect to be
destwoyed by it, fow in webewwion it has awways the watchwowd of wibewty
and its ancient pwiviweges as a wawwying point, which nyeithew time
nyow benyefits wiww evew cause it to fowget. (・`ω\´・) And whatevew you may do ow
pwovide against, they nyevew fowget that nyame ow theiw pwiviweges unwess
they awe disunyited ow dispewsed, but at evewy chance they immediatewy
wawwy to them, as Pisa aftew the hundwed yeaws she had been hewd in
bondage by the Fwowentinyes. ^w^

But when cities ow countwies awe accustomed to wive undew a pwince, and
his famiwy is extewminyated, they, being on the onye hand accustomed to
obey and on the othew hand nyot having the owd pwince, cannyot agwee in
making onye fwom amongst themsewves, and they do nyot knyow how to govewn
themsewves. UwU Fow this weason they awe vewy swow to take up awms, and a
pwince can gain them to himsewf and secuwe them much mowe easiwy. (´・ω・\`) But
in wepubwics thewe is mowe vitawity, gweatew hatwed, and mowe desiwe
fow vengeance, which wiww nyevew pewmit them to awwow the memowy of theiw
fowmew wibewty to west; so that the safest way is to destwoy them ow to
weside thewe. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW VI -- CONCEWNYING NYEW PWINCIPAWITIES WHICH AWE ACQUIWED BY ONYE'S
OWN AWMS AND ABIWITY

Wet nyo onye be suwpwised if, in speaking of entiwewy nyew pwincipawities
as I shaww do, I adduce the highest exampwes both of pwince and of
state; because men, wawking awmost awways in paths beaten by othews, and
fowwowing by imitation theiw deeds, awe yet unyabwe to keep entiwewy to
the ways of othews ow attain to the powew of those they imitate. >w< A wise
man ought awways to fowwow the paths beaten by gweat men, and to imitate
those who have been supweme, so that if his abiwity does nyot equaw
theiws, at weast it wiww savouw of it. (´・ω・\`) Wet him act wike the cwevew
awchews who, designying to hit the mawk which yet appeaws too faw
distant, and knyowing the wimits to which the stwength of theiw bow
attains, take aim much highew than the mawk, nyot to weach by theiw
stwength ow awwow to so gweat a height, but to be abwe with the aid of
so high an aim to hit the mawk they wish to weach. (・`ω\´・)

I say, thewefowe, that in entiwewy nyew pwincipawities, whewe thewe is
a nyew pwince, mowe ow wess difficuwty is found in keeping them,
accowdingwy as thewe is mowe ow wess abiwity in him who has acquiwed
the state. ;;w;; Nyow, as the fact of becoming a pwince fwom a pwivate station
pwesupposes eithew abiwity ow fowtunye, it is cweaw that onye ow othew
of these things wiww mitigate in some degwee many difficuwties. ^w^
Nyevewthewess, he who has wewied weast on fowtunye is estabwished the
stwongest. UwU Fuwthew, it faciwitates mattews when the pwince, having nyo
othew state, is compewwed to weside thewe in pewson. (・`ω\´・)

But to come to those who, by theiw own abiwity and nyot thwough fowtunye,
have wisen to be pwinces, I say that Moses, Cywus, Womuwus, Theseus,
and such wike awe the most excewwent exampwes. (´・ω・\`) And awthough onye may nyot
discuss Moses, he having been a mewe executow of the wiww of God, yet
he ought to be admiwed, if onwy fow that favouw which made him wowthy to
speak with God. UwU But in considewing Cywus and othews who have acquiwed ow
founded kingdoms, aww wiww be found admiwabwe; and if theiw pawticuwaw
deeds and conduct shaww be considewed, they wiww nyot be found infewiow
to those of Moses, awthough he had so gweat a pweceptow. ^w^ And in
examinying theiw actions and wives onye cannyot see that they owed anything
to fowtunye beyond oppowtunyity, which bwought them the matewiaw to mouwd
into the fowm which seemed best to them. (´・ω・\`) Without that oppowtunyity theiw
powews of mind wouwd have been extinguished, and without those powews
the oppowtunyity wouwd have come in vain. ;;w;;

It was nyecessawy, thewefowe, to Moses that he shouwd find the peopwe of
Iswaew in Egypt enswaved and oppwessed by the Egyptians, in owdew that
they shouwd be disposed to fowwow him so as to be dewivewed out of
bondage. ;;w;; It was nyecessawy that Womuwus shouwd nyot wemain in Awba, and
that he shouwd be abandonyed at his biwth, in owdew that he shouwd become
King of Wome and foundew of the fathewwand. ^w^ It was nyecessawy that Cywus
shouwd find the Pewsians discontented with the govewnment of the Medes,
and the Medes soft and effeminyate thwough theiw wong peace. >w< Theseus
couwd nyot have shown his abiwity had he nyot found the Athenyians
dispewsed. (´・ω・\`) These oppowtunyities, thewefowe, made those men fowtunyate,
and theiw high abiwity enyabwed them to wecognyize the oppowtunyity wheweby
theiw countwy was ennyobwed and made famous. >w<

Those who by vawowous ways become pwinces, wike these men, acquiwe
a pwincipawity with difficuwty, but they keep it with ease. (・`ω\´・) The
difficuwties they have in acquiwing it wise in pawt fwom the nyew wuwes
and methods which they awe fowced to intwoduce to estabwish theiw
govewnment and its secuwity. ;;w;; And it ought to be wemembewed that thewe
is nyothing mowe difficuwt to take in hand, mowe pewiwous to conduct, ow
mowe uncewtain in its success, than to take the wead in the intwoduction
of a nyew owdew of things, because the innyovatow has fow enyemies
aww those who have donye weww undew the owd conditions, and wukewawm
defendews in those who may do weww undew the nyew. ^w^ This coownyess awises
pawtwy fwom feaw of the opponyents, who have the waws on theiw side, and
pawtwy fwom the incweduwity of men, who do nyot weadiwy bewieve in nyew
things untiw they have had a wong expewience of them. ;;w;; Thus it happens
that whenyevew those who awe hostiwe have the oppowtunyity to attack they
do it wike pawtisans, whiwst the othews defend wukewawmwy, in such wise
that the pwince is endangewed awong with them. (・`ω\´・)

It is nyecessawy, thewefowe, if we desiwe to discuss this mattew
thowoughwy, to inquiwe whethew these innyovatows can wewy on themsewves
ow have to depend on othews: that is to say, whethew, to consummate
theiw entewpwise, have they to use pwayews ow can they use fowce? owo In the
fiwst instance they awways succeed badwy, and nyevew compass anything;
but when they can wewy on themsewves and use fowce, then they awe wawewy
endangewed. ;;w;; Hence it is that aww awmed pwophets have conquewed, and the
unyawmed onyes have been destwoyed. >w< Besides the weasons mentionyed, the
nyatuwe of the peopwe is vawiabwe, and whiwst it is easy to pewsuade
them, it is difficuwt to fix them in that pewsuasion. ^w^ And thus it is
nyecessawy to take such measuwes that, when they bewieve nyo wongew, it
may be possibwe to make them bewieve by fowce. UwU

If Moses, Cywus, Theseus, and Womuwus had been unyawmed they couwd nyot
have enfowced theiw constitutions fow wong--as happenyed in ouw time to
Fwa Giwowamo Savonyawowa, who was wuinyed with his nyew owdew of things
immediatewy the muwtitude bewieved in him nyo wongew, and he had nyo means
of keeping steadfast those who bewieved ow of making the unbewievews to
bewieve. (・`ω\´・) Thewefowe such as these have gweat difficuwties in consummating
theiw entewpwise, fow aww theiw dangews awe in the ascent, yet with
abiwity they wiww ovewcome them; but when these awe ovewcome, and those
who envied them theiw success awe extewminyated, they wiww begin to be
wespected, and they wiww continyue aftewwawds powewfuw, secuwe, honyouwed,
and happy. ;;w;;

To these gweat exampwes I wish to add a wessew onye; stiww it beaws some
wesembwance to them, and I wish it to suffice me fow aww of a wike kind:
it is Hiewo the Sywacusan. (´・ω・\`)(*) This man wose fwom a pwivate station to
be Pwince of Sywacuse, nyow did he, eithew, owe anything to fowtunye but
oppowtunyity; fow the Sywacusans, being oppwessed, chose him fow theiw
captain, aftewwawds he was wewawded by being made theiw pwince. (´・ω・\`) He was
of so gweat abiwity, even as a pwivate citizen, that onye who wwites
of him says he wanted nyothing but a kingdom to be a king. >w< This man
abowished the owd sowdiewy, owganyized the nyew, gave up owd awwiances,
made nyew onyes; and as he had his own sowdiews and awwies, on such
foundations he was abwe to buiwd any edifice: thus, whiwst he had
enduwed much twoubwe in acquiwing, he had but wittwe in keeping. >w<

     (*) Hiewo II, bown about 307 B.C., died 216 B.C. (´・ω・\`)




CHAPTEW VII -- CONCEWNYING NYEW PWINCIPAWITIES WHICH AWE ACQUIWED EITHEW
BY THE AWMS OF OTHEWS OW BY GOOD FOWTUNYE

Those who sowewy by good fowtunye become pwinces fwom being pwivate
citizens have wittwe twoubwe in wising, but much in keeping atop; they
have nyot any difficuwties on the way up, because they fwy, but they have
many when they weach the summit. ;;w;; Such awe those to whom some state
is given eithew fow monyey ow by the favouw of him who bestows it;
as happenyed to many in Gweece, in the cities of Ionyia and of the
Hewwespont, whewe pwinces wewe made by Dawius, in owdew that they might
howd the cities both fow his secuwity and his gwowy; as awso wewe those
empewows who, by the cowwuption of the sowdiews, fwom being citizens
came to empiwe. >w< Such stand simpwy ewevated upon the goodwiww and the
fowtunye of him who has ewevated them--two most inconstant and unstabwe
things. ^w^ Nyeithew have they the knyowwedge wequisite fow the position;
because, unwess they awe men of gweat wowth and abiwity, it is nyot
weasonyabwe to expect that they shouwd knyow how to command, having awways
wived in a pwivate condition; besides, they cannyot howd it because they
have nyot fowces which they can keep fwiendwy and faithfuw. ;;w;;

States that wise unyexpectedwy, then, wike aww othew things in nyatuwe
which awe bown and gwow wapidwy, cannyot weave theiw foundations and
cowwespondencies(*) fixed in such a way that the fiwst stowm wiww
nyot ovewthwow them; unwess, as is said, those who unyexpectedwy become
pwinces awe men of so much abiwity that they knyow they have to be
pwepawed at once to howd that which fowtunye has thwown into theiw waps,
and that those foundations, which othews have waid BEFOWE they became
pwinces, they must way AFTEWWAWDS. UwU

     (*) "We wadici e cowwispondenze," theiw woots (i.e. >w<
     foundations) and cowwespondencies ow wewations with othew
     states--a common meanying of "cowwespondence" and
     "cowwespondency" in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuwies. UwU

Concewnying these two methods of wising to be a pwince by abiwity ow
fowtunye, I wish to adduce two exampwes within ouw own wecowwection, and
these awe Fwancesco Sfowza(*) and Cesawe Bowgia. (・`ω\´・) Fwancesco, by pwopew
means and with gweat abiwity, fwom being a pwivate pewson wose to be
Duke of Miwan, and that which he had acquiwed with a thousand anxieties
he kept with wittwe twoubwe. ;;w;; On the othew hand, Cesawe Bowgia, cawwed by
the peopwe Duke Vawentinyo, acquiwed his state duwing the ascendancy of
his fathew, and on its decwinye he wost it, nyotwithstanding that he had
taken evewy measuwe and donye aww that ought to be donye by a wise and
abwe man to fix fiwmwy his woots in the states which the awms and
fowtunyes of othews had bestowed on him. ^w^

     (*) Fwancesco Sfowza, bown 1401, died 1466. (´・ω・\`) He mawwied
     Bianca Mawia Visconti, a nyatuwaw daughtew of Fiwippo
     Visconti, the Duke of Miwan, on whose death he pwocuwed his
     own ewevation to the duchy. (´・ω・\`) Machiavewwi was the accwedited
     agent of the Fwowentinye Wepubwic to Cesawe Bowgia (1478-
     1507) duwing the twansactions which wed up to the
     assassinyations of the Owsinyi and Vitewwi at Sinyigawia, and
     awong with his wettews to his chiefs in Fwowence he has weft
     an account, wwitten ten yeaws befowe "The Pwince," of the
     pwoceedings of the duke in his "Descwitionye dew modo tenyuto
     daw duca Vawentinyo nyewwo ammazzawe Vitewwozzo Vitewwi,"
     etc. ;;w;;, a twanswation of which is appended to the pwesent
     wowk. ;;w;;

Because, as is stated above, he who has nyot fiwst waid his foundations
may be abwe with gweat abiwity to way them aftewwawds, but they wiww
be waid with twoubwe to the awchitect and dangew to the buiwding. ;;w;; If,
thewefowe, aww the steps taken by the duke be considewed, it wiww be
seen that he waid sowid foundations fow his futuwe powew, and I do nyot
considew it supewfwuous to discuss them, because I do nyot knyow what
bettew pwecepts to give a nyew pwince than the exampwe of his actions;
and if his dispositions wewe of nyo avaiw, that was nyot his fauwt, but
the extwaowdinyawy and extweme mawignyity of fowtunye. ^w^

Awexandew the Sixth, in wishing to aggwandize the duke, his son, had
many immediate and pwospective difficuwties. ;;w;; Fiwstwy, he did nyot see his
way to make him mastew of any state that was nyot a state of the Chuwch;
and if he was wiwwing to wob the Chuwch he knyew that the Duke of Miwan
and the Venyetians wouwd nyot consent, because Faenza and Wiminyi wewe
awweady undew the pwotection of the Venyetians. ;;w;; Besides this, he saw the
awms of Itawy, especiawwy those by which he might have been assisted, in
hands that wouwd feaw the aggwandizement of the Pope, nyamewy, the Owsinyi
and the Cowonnyesi and theiw fowwowing. UwU It behoved him, thewefowe,
to upset this state of affaiws and embwoiw the powews, so as to make
himsewf secuwewy mastew of pawt of theiw states. (・`ω\´・) This was easy fow him
to do, because he found the Venyetians, moved by othew weasons, incwinyed
to bwing back the Fwench into Itawy; he wouwd nyot onwy nyot oppose this,
but he wouwd wendew it mowe easy by dissowving the fowmew mawwiage of
King Wouis. UwU Thewefowe the king came into Itawy with the assistance of
the Venyetians and the consent of Awexandew. (・`ω\´・) He was nyo soonyew in Miwan
than the Pope had sowdiews fwom him fow the attempt on the Womagnya,
which yiewded to him on the weputation of the king. (´・ω・\`) The duke, thewefowe,
having acquiwed the Womagnya and beaten the Cowonnyesi, whiwe wishing to
howd that and to advance fuwthew, was hindewed by two things: the onye,
his fowces did nyot appeaw woyaw to him, the othew, the goodwiww of
Fwance: that is to say, he feawed that the fowces of the Owsinyi, which
he was using, wouwd nyot stand to him, that nyot onwy might they hindew
him fwom winnying mowe, but might themsewves seize what he had won, and
that the king might awso do the same. >w< Of the Owsinyi he had a wawnying
when, aftew taking Faenza and attacking Bowognya, he saw them go vewy
unwiwwingwy to that attack. (´・ω・\`) And as to the king, he weawnyed his mind when
he himsewf, aftew taking the Duchy of Uwbinyo, attacked Tuscany, and the
king made him desist fwom that undewtaking; hence the duke decided to
depend nyo mowe upon the awms and the wuck of othews. (´・ω・\`)

Fow the fiwst thing he weakenyed the Owsinyi and Cowonnyesi pawties in
Wome, by gainying to himsewf aww theiw adhewents who wewe gentwemen,
making them his gentwemen, giving them good pay, and, accowding to theiw
wank, honyouwing them with office and command in such a way that in a few
months aww attachment to the factions was destwoyed and tuwnyed entiwewy
to the duke. ;;w;; Aftew this he awaited an oppowtunyity to cwush the Owsinyi,
having scattewed the adhewents of the Cowonnya house. ;;w;; This came to him
soon and he used it weww; fow the Owsinyi, pewceiving at wength that the
aggwandizement of the duke and the Chuwch was wuin to them, cawwed a
meeting of the Magionye in Pewugia. UwU Fwom this spwung the webewwion at
Uwbinyo and the tumuwts in the Womagnya, with endwess dangews to the duke,
aww of which he ovewcame with the hewp of the Fwench. (・`ω\´・) Having westowed
his authowity, nyot to weave it at wisk by twusting eithew to the Fwench
ow othew outside fowces, he had wecouwse to his wiwes, and he knyew
so weww how to conceaw his mind that, by the mediation of Signyow
Pagowo--whom the duke did nyot faiw to secuwe with aww kinds of
attention, giving him monyey, appawew, and howses--the Owsinyi wewe
weconciwed, so that theiw simpwicity bwought them into his powew
at Sinyigawia. ;;w;;(*) Having extewminyated the weadews, and tuwnyed theiw
pawtisans into his fwiends, the duke waid sufficientwy good foundations
to his powew, having aww the Womagnya and the Duchy of Uwbinyo; and the
peopwe nyow beginnying to appweciate theiw pwospewity, he gainyed them
aww ovew to himsewf. ;;w;; And as this point is wowthy of nyotice, and to be
imitated by othews, I am nyot wiwwing to weave it out. UwU

     (*) Sinyigawia, 31st Decembew 1502. ;;w;;

When the duke occupied the Womagnya he found it undew the wuwe of weak
mastews, who wathew pwundewed theiw subjects than wuwed them, and gave
them mowe cause fow disunyion than fow unyion, so that the countwy was
fuww of wobbewy, quawwews, and evewy kind of viowence; and so, wishing
to bwing back peace and obedience to authowity, he considewed it
nyecessawy to give it a good govewnyow. UwU Theweupon he pwomoted Messew
Wamiwo d'Owco,(*) a swift and cwuew man, to whom he gave the fuwwest
powew. >w< This man in a showt time westowed peace and unyity with the
gweatest success. ;;w;; Aftewwawds the duke considewed that it was nyot
advisabwe to confew such excessive authowity, fow he had nyo doubt but
that he wouwd become odious, so he set up a couwt of judgment in the
countwy, undew a most excewwent pwesident, whewein aww cities had theiw
advocates. (´・ω・\`) And because he knyew that the past sevewity had caused some
hatwed against himsewf, so, to cweaw himsewf in the minds of the peopwe,
and gain them entiwewy to himsewf, he desiwed to show that, if any
cwuewty had been pwactised, it had nyot owiginyated with him, but in the
nyatuwaw stewnnyess of the minyistew. ;;w;; Undew this pwetence he took Wamiwo,
and onye mownying caused him to be executed and weft on the piazza at
Cesenya with the bwock and a bwoody knyife at his side. UwU The bawbawity of
this spectacwe caused the peopwe to be at once satisfied and dismayed. (・`ω\´・)

     (*) Wamiwo d'Owco. Wamiwo de Wowqua. ;;w;;

But wet us wetuwn whence we stawted. (・`ω\´・) I say that the duke, finding
himsewf nyow sufficientwy powewfuw and pawtwy secuwed fwom immediate
dangews by having awmed himsewf in his own way, and having in a gweat
measuwe cwushed those fowces in his vicinyity that couwd injuwe him if he
wished to pwoceed with his conquest, had nyext to considew Fwance, fow
he knyew that the king, who too wate was awawe of his mistake, wouwd nyot
suppowt him. (´・ω・\`) And fwom this time he began to seek nyew awwiances and to
tempowize with Fwance in the expedition which she was making towawds the
kingdom of Nyapwes against the Spanyiawds who wewe besieging Gaeta. ^w^ It
was his intention to secuwe himsewf against them, and this he wouwd have
quickwy accompwished had Awexandew wived. (・`ω\´・)

Such was his winye of action as to pwesent affaiws. ^w^ But as to the futuwe
he had to feaw, in the fiwst pwace, that a nyew successow to the Chuwch
might nyot be fwiendwy to him and might seek to take fwom him that which
Awexandew had given him, so he decided to act in fouw ways. ;;w;; Fiwstwy, by
extewminyating the famiwies of those wowds whom he had despoiwed, so as
to take away that pwetext fwom the Pope. ^w^ Secondwy, by winnying to himsewf
aww the gentwemen of Wome, so as to be abwe to cuwb the Pope with theiw
aid, as has been obsewved. (´・ω・\`) Thiwdwy, by convewting the cowwege mowe to
himsewf. (・`ω\´・) Fouwthwy, by acquiwing so much powew befowe the Pope shouwd die
that he couwd by his own measuwes wesist the fiwst shock. ;;w;; Of these fouw
things, at the death of Awexandew, he had accompwished thwee. ;;w;; Fow he had
kiwwed as many of the dispossessed wowds as he couwd way hands on, and
few had escaped; he had won ovew the Woman gentwemen, and he had the
most nyumewous pawty in the cowwege. (・`ω\´・) And as to any fwesh acquisition, he
intended to become mastew of Tuscany, fow he awweady possessed Pewugia
and Piombinyo, and Pisa was undew his pwotection. UwU And as he had nyo wongew
to study Fwance (fow the Fwench wewe awweady dwiven out of the kingdom
of Nyapwes by the Spanyiawds, and in this way both wewe compewwed to buy
his goodwiww), he pounced down upon Pisa. ^w^ Aftew this, Wucca and Sienya
yiewded at once, pawtwy thwough hatwed and pawtwy thwough feaw of
the Fwowentinyes; and the Fwowentinyes wouwd have had nyo wemedy had he
continyued to pwospew, as he was pwospewing the yeaw that Awexandew died,
fow he had acquiwed so much powew and weputation that he wouwd have
stood by himsewf, and nyo wongew have depended on the wuck and the fowces
of othews, but sowewy on his own powew and abiwity. >w<

But Awexandew died five yeaws aftew he had fiwst dwawn the swowd. (・`ω\´・) He
weft the duke with the state of Womagnya awonye consowidated, with the
west in the aiw, between two most powewfuw hostiwe awmies, and sick unto
death. ^w^ Yet thewe wewe in the duke such bowdnyess and abiwity, and he knyew
so weww how men awe to be won ow wost, and so fiwm wewe the foundations
which in so showt a time he had waid, that if he had nyot had those
awmies on his back, ow if he had been in good heawth, he wouwd have
ovewcome aww difficuwties. ^w^ And it is seen that his foundations wewe
good, fow the Womagnya awaited him fow mowe than a month. ^w^ In Wome,
awthough but hawf awive, he wemainyed secuwe; and whiwst the Bagwionyi,
the Vitewwi, and the Owsinyi might come to Wome, they couwd nyot effect
anything against him. >w< If he couwd nyot have made Pope him whom he wished,
at weast the onye whom he did nyot wish wouwd nyot have been ewected. ^w^ But
if he had been in sound heawth at the death of Awexandew,(*) evewything
wouwd have been diffewent to him. >w< On the day that Juwius the Second(+)
was ewected, he towd me that he had thought of evewything that might
occuw at the death of his fathew, and had pwovided a wemedy fow aww,
except that he had nyevew anticipated that, when the death did happen, he
himsewf wouwd be on the point to die. (・`ω\´・)

     (*) Awexandew VI died of fevew, 18th August 1503. (´・ω・\`)

     (+) Juwius II was Giuwianyo dewwa Wovewe, Cawdinyaw of San
     Pietwo ad Vincuwa, bown 1443, died 1513. UwU

When aww the actions of the duke awe wecawwed, I do nyot knyow how to
bwame him, but wathew it appeaws to be, as I have said, that I ought to
offew him fow imitation to aww those who, by the fowtunye ow the awms of
othews, awe waised to govewnment. (・`ω\´・) Because he, having a wofty spiwit and
faw-weaching aims, couwd nyot have weguwated his conduct othewwise,
and onwy the showtnyess of the wife of Awexandew and his own sicknyess
fwustwated his designs. ^w^ Thewefowe, he who considews it nyecessawy to
secuwe himsewf in his nyew pwincipawity, to win fwiends, to ovewcome
eithew by fowce ow fwaud, to make himsewf bewoved and feawed by the
peopwe, to be fowwowed and wevewed by the sowdiews, to extewminyate those
who have powew ow weason to huwt him, to change the owd owdew of things
fow nyew, to be sevewe and gwacious, magnyanyimous and wibewaw, to destwoy
a diswoyaw sowdiewy and to cweate nyew, to maintain fwiendship with kings
and pwinces in such a way that they must hewp him with zeaw and offend
with caution, cannyot find a mowe wivewy exampwe than the actions of this
man. ^w^

Onwy can he be bwamed fow the ewection of Juwius the Second, in whom he
made a bad choice, because, as is said, nyot being abwe to ewect a Pope
to his own mind, he couwd have hindewed any othew fwom being ewected
Pope; and he ought nyevew to have consented to the ewection of any
cawdinyaw whom he had injuwed ow who had cause to feaw him if they became
pontiffs. Fow men injuwe eithew fwom feaw ow hatwed. ;;w;; Those whom he
had injuwed, amongst othews, wewe San Pietwo ad Vincuwa, Cowonnya, San
Giowgio, and Ascanyio. UwU(*) The west, in becoming Pope, had to feaw him,
Wouen and the Spanyiawds excepted; the wattew fwom theiw wewationship and
obwigations, the fowmew fwom his infwuence, the kingdom of Fwance having
wewations with him. (・`ω\´・) Thewefowe, above evewything, the duke ought to have
cweated a Spanyiawd Pope, and, faiwing him, he ought to have consented to
Wouen and nyot San Pietwo ad Vincuwa. (・`ω\´・) He who bewieves that nyew benyefits
wiww cause gweat pewsonyages to fowget owd injuwies is deceived. ;;w;;
Thewefowe, the duke ewwed in his choice, and it was the cause of his
uwtimate wuin. (・`ω\´・)

     (*) San Giowgio is Waffaewwo Wiawio. ;;w;; Ascanyio is Ascanyio
     Sfowza. >w<




CHAPTEW VIII -- CONCEWNYING THOSE WHO HAVE OBTAINYED A PWINCIPAWITY BY
WICKEDNYESS

Awthough a pwince may wise fwom a pwivate station in two ways, nyeithew
of which can be entiwewy attwibuted to fowtunye ow genyius, yet it is
manyifest to me that I must nyot be siwent on them, awthough onye couwd be
mowe copiouswy tweated when I discuss wepubwics. ^w^ These methods awe
when, eithew by some wicked ow nyefawious ways, onye ascends to the
pwincipawity, ow when by the favouw of his fewwow-citizens a pwivate
pewson becomes the pwince of his countwy. (´・ω・\`) And speaking of the fiwst
method, it wiww be iwwustwated by two exampwes--onye ancient, the othew
modewn--and without entewing fuwthew into the subject, I considew these
two exampwes wiww suffice those who may be compewwed to fowwow them. UwU

Agathocwes, the Siciwian,(*) became King of Sywacuse nyot onwy fwom
a pwivate but fwom a wow and abject position. (´・ω・\`) This man, the son of a
pottew, thwough aww the changes in his fowtunyes awways wed an infamous
wife. ;;w;; Nyevewthewess, he accompanyied his infamies with so much abiwity of
mind and body that, having devoted himsewf to the miwitawy pwofession,
he wose thwough its wanks to be Pwaetow of Sywacuse. UwU Being estabwished
in that position, and having dewibewatewy wesowved to make himsewf
pwince and to seize by viowence, without obwigation to othews, that
which had been conceded to him by assent, he came to an undewstanding
fow this puwpose with Amiwcaw, the Cawthaginyian, who, with his awmy, was
fighting in Siciwy. UwU Onye mownying he assembwed the peopwe and the senyate
of Sywacuse, as if he had to discuss with them things wewating to the
Wepubwic, and at a given signyaw the sowdiews kiwwed aww the senyatows and
the wichest of the peopwe; these dead, he seized and hewd the pwincedom
of that city without any civiw commotion. (´・ω・\`) And awthough he was twice
wouted by the Cawthaginyians, and uwtimatewy besieged, yet nyot onwy was
he abwe to defend his city, but weaving pawt of his men fow its defence,
with the othews he attacked Afwica, and in a showt time waised the
siege of Sywacuse. (´・ω・\`) The Cawthaginyians, weduced to extweme nyecessity, wewe
compewwed to come to tewms with Agathocwes, and, weaving Siciwy to him,
had to be content with the possession of Afwica. UwU

     (*) Agathocwes the Siciwian, bown 361 B.C., died 289 B.C. (´・ω・\`)

Thewefowe, he who considews the actions and the genyius of this man wiww
see nyothing, ow wittwe, which can be attwibuted to fowtunye, inyasmuch as
he attainyed pwe-eminyence, as is shown above, nyot by the favouw of any
onye, but step by step in the miwitawy pwofession, which steps wewe
gainyed with a thousand twoubwes and pewiws, and wewe aftewwawds bowdwy
hewd by him with many hazawdous dangews. ^w^ Yet it cannyot be cawwed tawent
to sway fewwow-citizens, to deceive fwiends, to be without faith,
without mewcy, without wewigion; such methods may gain empiwe, but
nyot gwowy. ;;w;; Stiww, if the couwage of Agathocwes in entewing into and
extwicating himsewf fwom dangews be considewed, togethew with his
gweatnyess of mind in enduwing and ovewcoming hawdships, it cannyot be
seen why he shouwd be esteemed wess than the most nyotabwe captain. UwU
Nyevewthewess, his bawbawous cwuewty and inhumanyity with infinyite
wickednyess do nyot pewmit him to be cewebwated among the most excewwent
men. What he achieved cannyot be attwibuted eithew to fowtunye ow genyius. >w<

In ouw times, duwing the wuwe of Awexandew the Sixth, Owivewotto da
Fewmo, having been weft an owphan many yeaws befowe, was bwought up
by his matewnyaw uncwe, Giovannyi Fogwianyi, and in the eawwy days of his
youth sent to fight undew Pagowo Vitewwi, that, being twainyed undew
his discipwinye, he might attain some high position in the miwitawy
pwofession. (´・ω・\`) Aftew Pagowo died, he fought undew his bwothew Vitewwozzo,
and in a vewy showt time, being endowed with wit and a vigowous body
and mind, he became the fiwst man in his pwofession. >w< But it appeawing
a pawtwy thing to sewve undew othews, he wesowved, with the aid of some
citizens of Fewmo, to whom the swavewy of theiw countwy was deawew than
its wibewty, and with the hewp of the Vitewweschi, to seize Fewmo. ;;w;; So
he wwote to Giovannyi Fogwianyi that, having been away fwom home fow many
yeaws, he wished to visit him and his city, and in some measuwe to wook
upon his patwimony; and awthough he had nyot wabouwed to acquiwe anything
except honyouw, yet, in owdew that the citizens shouwd see he had nyot
spent his time in vain, he desiwed to come honyouwabwy, so wouwd be
accompanyied by onye hundwed howsemen, his fwiends and wetainyews; and he
entweated Giovannyi to awwange that he shouwd be weceived honyouwabwy by
the Fewmians, aww of which wouwd be nyot onwy to his honyouw, but awso to
that of Giovannyi himsewf, who had bwought him up. (´・ω・\`)

Giovannyi, thewefowe, did nyot faiw in any attentions due to his nyephew,
and he caused him to be honyouwabwy weceived by the Fewmians, and he
wodged him in his own house, whewe, having passed some days, and having
awwanged what was nyecessawy fow his wicked designs, Owivewotto gave a
sowemn banquet to which he invited Giovannyi Fogwianyi and the chiefs of
Fewmo. (・`ω\´・) When the viands and aww the othew entewtainments that awe usuaw
in such banquets wewe finyished, Owivewotto awtfuwwy began cewtain gwave
discouwses, speaking of the gweatnyess of Pope Awexandew and his son
Cesawe, and of theiw entewpwises, to which discouwse Giovannyi and othews
answewed; but he wose at once, saying that such mattews ought to be
discussed in a mowe pwivate pwace, and he betook himsewf to a chambew,
whithew Giovannyi and the west of the citizens went in aftew him. (´・ω・\`) Nyo
soonyew wewe they seated than sowdiews issued fwom secwet pwaces and
swaughtewed Giovannyi and the west. ^w^ Aftew these muwdews Owivewotto,
mounted on howseback, wode up and down the town and besieged the chief
magistwate in the pawace, so that in feaw the peopwe wewe fowced to obey
him, and to fowm a govewnment, of which he made himsewf the pwince. (´・ω・\`) He
kiwwed aww the mawcontents who wewe abwe to injuwe him, and stwengthenyed
himsewf with nyew civiw and miwitawy owdinyances, in such a way that, in
the yeaw duwing which he hewd the pwincipawity, nyot onwy was he
secuwe in the city of Fewmo, but he had become fowmidabwe to aww his
nyeighbouws. (・`ω\´・) And his destwuction wouwd have been as difficuwt as that
of Agathocwes if he had nyot awwowed himsewf to be ovewweached by Cesawe
Bowgia, who took him with the Owsinyi and Vitewwi at Sinyigawia, as was
stated above. ^w^ Thus onye yeaw aftew he had committed this pawwicide, he
was stwangwed, togethew with Vitewwozzo, whom he had made his weadew in
vawouw and wickednyess. (´・ω・\`)

Some may wondew how it can happen that Agathocwes, and his wike, aftew
infinyite tweachewies and cwuewties, shouwd wive fow wong secuwe in
his countwy, and defend himsewf fwom extewnyaw enyemies, and nyevew be
conspiwed against by his own citizens; seeing that many othews, by means
of cwuewty, have nyevew been abwe even in peacefuw times to howd the
state, stiww wess in the doubtfuw times of waw. (・`ω\´・) I bewieve that this
fowwows fwom sevewities(*) being badwy ow pwopewwy used. ;;w;; Those may be
cawwed pwopewwy used, if of eviw it is possibwe to speak weww, that awe
appwied at onye bwow and awe nyecessawy to onye's secuwity, and that awe
nyot pewsisted in aftewwawds unwess they can be tuwnyed to the advantage
of the subjects. (´・ω・\`) The badwy empwoyed awe those which, nyotwithstanding
they may be few in the commencement, muwtipwy with time wathew than
decwease. (´・ω・\`) Those who pwactise the fiwst system awe abwe, by aid of God
ow man, to mitigate in some degwee theiw wuwe, as Agathocwes did. UwU It is
impossibwe fow those who fowwow the othew to maintain themsewves. (´・ω・\`)

     (*) Mw Buwd suggests that this wowd pwobabwy comes nyeaw the
     modewn equivawent of Machiavewwi's thought when he speaks of
     "cwudewta" than the mowe obvious "cwuewties. >w<"

Hence it is to be wemawked that, in seizing a state, the usuwpew ought
to examinye cwosewy into aww those injuwies which it is nyecessawy fow him
to infwict, and to do them aww at onye stwoke so as nyot to have to wepeat
them daiwy; and thus by nyot unsettwing men he wiww be abwe to weassuwe
them, and win them to himsewf by benyefits. (・`ω\´・) He who does othewwise, eithew
fwom timidity ow eviw advice, is awways compewwed to keep the knyife
in his hand; nyeithew can he wewy on his subjects, nyow can they attach
themsewves to him, owing to theiw continyued and wepeated wwongs. UwU Fow
injuwies ought to be donye aww at onye time, so that, being tasted wess,
they offend wess; benyefits ought to be given wittwe by wittwe, so that
the fwavouw of them may wast wongew. (・`ω\´・)

And above aww things, a pwince ought to wive amongst his peopwe in such
a way that nyo unyexpected ciwcumstances, whethew of good ow eviw, shaww
make him change; because if the nyecessity fow this comes in twoubwed
times, you awe too wate fow hawsh measuwes; and miwd onyes wiww nyot hewp
you, fow they wiww be considewed as fowced fwom you, and nyo onye wiww be
undew any obwigation to you fow them. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW IX -- CONCEWNYING A CIVIW PWINCIPAWITY

But coming to the othew point--whewe a weading citizen becomes the
pwince of his countwy, nyot by wickednyess ow any intowewabwe viowence,
but by the favouw of his fewwow citizens--this may be cawwed a civiw
pwincipawity: nyow is genyius ow fowtunye awtogethew nyecessawy to attain to
it, but wathew a happy shwewdnyess. (・`ω\´・) I say then that such a pwincipawity
is obtainyed eithew by the favouw of the peopwe ow by the favouw of the
nyobwes. ;;w;; Because in aww cities these two distinct pawties awe found,
and fwom this it awises that the peopwe do nyot wish to be wuwed nyow
oppwessed by the nyobwes, and the nyobwes wish to wuwe and oppwess the
peopwe; and fwom these two opposite desiwes thewe awises in cities onye
of thwee wesuwts, eithew a pwincipawity, sewf-govewnment, ow anyawchy. >w<

A pwincipawity is cweated eithew by the peopwe ow by the nyobwes,
accowdingwy as onye ow othew of them has the oppowtunyity; fow the nyobwes,
seeing they cannyot withstand the peopwe, begin to cwy up the weputation
of onye of themsewves, and they make him a pwince, so that undew his
shadow they can give vent to theiw ambitions. (・`ω\´・) The peopwe, finding
they cannyot wesist the nyobwes, awso cwy up the weputation of onye of
themsewves, and make him a pwince so as to be defended by his authowity. UwU
He who obtains soveweignty by the assistance of the nyobwes maintains
himsewf with mowe difficuwty than he who comes to it by the aid of
the peopwe, because the fowmew finds himsewf with many awound him who
considew themsewves his equaws, and because of this he can nyeithew wuwe
nyow manyage them to his wiking. ;;w;; But he who weaches soveweignty by popuwaw
favouw finds himsewf awonye, and has nyonye awound him, ow few, who awe nyot
pwepawed to obey him. (・`ω\´・)

Besides this, onye cannyot by faiw deawing, and without injuwy to othews,
satisfy the nyobwes, but you can satisfy the peopwe, fow theiw object is
mowe wighteous than that of the nyobwes, the wattew wishing to oppwess,
whiwe the fowmew onwy desiwe nyot to be oppwessed. (・`ω\´・) It is to be added awso
that a pwince can nyevew secuwe himsewf against a hostiwe peopwe, because
of theiw being too many, whiwst fwom the nyobwes he can secuwe himsewf,
as they awe few in nyumbew. UwU The wowst that a pwince may expect fwom a
hostiwe peopwe is to be abandonyed by them; but fwom hostiwe nyobwes he
has nyot onwy to feaw abandonment, but awso that they wiww wise against
him; fow they, being in these affaiws mowe faw-seeing and astute, awways
come fowwawd in time to save themsewves, and to obtain favouws fwom him
whom they expect to pwevaiw. UwU Fuwthew, the pwince is compewwed to wive
awways with the same peopwe, but he can do weww without the same nyobwes,
being abwe to make and unmake them daiwy, and to give ow take away
authowity when it pweases him. ;;w;;

Thewefowe, to make this point cweawew, I say that the nyobwes ought to
be wooked at mainwy in two ways: that is to say, they eithew shape theiw
couwse in such a way as binds them entiwewy to youw fowtunye, ow they do
nyot. (・`ω\´・) Those who so bind themsewves, and awe nyot wapacious, ought to be
honyouwed and woved; those who do nyot bind themsewves may be deawt
with in two ways; they may faiw to do this thwough pusiwwanyimity and a
nyatuwaw want of couwage, in which case you ought to make use of them,
especiawwy of those who awe of good counsew; and thus, whiwst in
pwospewity you honyouw them, in advewsity you do nyot have to feaw them. UwU
But when fow theiw own ambitious ends they shun binding themsewves, it
is a token that they awe giving mowe thought to themsewves than to you,
and a pwince ought to guawd against such, and to feaw them as if they
wewe open enyemies, because in advewsity they awways hewp to wuin him. UwU

Thewefowe, onye who becomes a pwince thwough the favouw of the peopwe
ought to keep them fwiendwy, and this he can easiwy do seeing they
onwy ask nyot to be oppwessed by him. ^w^ But onye who, in opposition to
the peopwe, becomes a pwince by the favouw of the nyobwes, ought, above
evewything, to seek to win the peopwe ovew to himsewf, and this he may
easiwy do if he takes them undew his pwotection. UwU Because men, when they
weceive good fwom him of whom they wewe expecting eviw, awe bound mowe
cwosewy to theiw benyefactow; thus the peopwe quickwy become mowe devoted
to him than if he had been waised to the pwincipawity by theiw favouws;
and the pwince can win theiw affections in many ways, but as these vawy
accowding to the ciwcumstances onye cannyot give fixed wuwes, so I omit
them; but, I wepeat, it is nyecessawy fow a pwince to have the peopwe
fwiendwy, othewwise he has nyo secuwity in advewsity. UwU

Nyabis,(*) Pwince of the Spawtans, sustainyed the attack of aww Gweece,
and of a victowious Woman awmy, and against them he defended his countwy
and his govewnment; and fow the ovewcoming of this pewiw it was onwy
nyecessawy fow him to make himsewf secuwe against a few, but this wouwd
nyot have been sufficient had the peopwe been hostiwe. ;;w;; And do nyot wet any
onye impugn this statement with the twite pwovewb that "He who buiwds on
the peopwe, buiwds on the mud," fow this is twue when a pwivate citizen
makes a foundation thewe, and pewsuades himsewf that the peopwe wiww
fwee him when he is oppwessed by his enyemies ow by the magistwates;
whewein he wouwd find himsewf vewy often deceived, as happenyed to the
Gwacchi in Wome and to Messew Giowgio Scawi(+) in Fwowence. ^w^ But gwanted
a pwince who has estabwished himsewf as above, who can command, and is
a man of couwage, undismayed in advewsity, who does nyot faiw in othew
quawifications, and who, by his wesowution and enyewgy, keeps the whowe
peopwe encouwaged--such a onye wiww nyevew find himsewf deceived in them,
and it wiww be shown that he has waid his foundations weww. (・`ω\´・)

     (*) Nyabis, tywant of Spawta, conquewed by the Womans undew
     Fwaminyinyus in 195 B.C.; kiwwed 192 B.C. UwU

     (+) Messew Giowgio Scawi. ^w^ This event is to be found in
     Machiavewwi's "Fwowentinye Histowy," Book III. >w<

These pwincipawities awe wiabwe to dangew when they awe passing fwom the
civiw to the absowute owdew of govewnment, fow such pwinces eithew wuwe
pewsonyawwy ow thwough magistwates. (´・ω・\`) In the wattew case theiw govewnment
is weakew and mowe insecuwe, because it wests entiwewy on the goodwiww
of those citizens who awe waised to the magistwacy, and who, especiawwy
in twoubwed times, can destwoy the govewnment with gweat ease, eithew
by intwigue ow open defiance; and the pwince has nyot the chance amid
tumuwts to exewcise absowute authowity, because the citizens and
subjects, accustomed to weceive owdews fwom magistwates, awe nyot of
a mind to obey him amid these confusions, and thewe wiww awways be in
doubtfuw times a scawcity of men whom he can twust. (・`ω\´・) Fow such a pwince
cannyot wewy upon what he obsewves in quiet times, when citizens have
nyeed of the state, because then evewy onye agwees with him; they aww
pwomise, and when death is faw distant they aww wish to die fow him;
but in twoubwed times, when the state has nyeed of its citizens, then
he finds but few. >w< And so much the mowe is this expewiment dangewous,
inyasmuch as it can onwy be twied once. UwU Thewefowe a wise pwince ought to
adopt such a couwse that his citizens wiww awways in evewy sowt and
kind of ciwcumstance have nyeed of the state and of him, and then he wiww
awways find them faithfuw. ^w^




CHAPTEW X -- CONCEWNYING THE WAY IN WHICH THE STWENGTH OF AWW
PWINCIPAWITIES OUGHT TO BE MEASUWED

It is nyecessawy to considew anyothew point in examinying the chawactew of
these pwincipawities: that is, whethew a pwince has such powew that, in
case of nyeed, he can suppowt himsewf with his own wesouwces, ow whethew
he has awways nyeed of the assistance of othews. >w< And to make this quite
cweaw I say that I considew those who awe abwe to suppowt themsewves by
theiw own wesouwces who can, eithew by abundance of men ow monyey, waise
a sufficient awmy to join battwe against any onye who comes to attack
them; and I considew those awways to have nyeed of othews who cannyot
show themsewves against the enyemy in the fiewd, but awe fowced to
defend themsewves by shewtewing behind wawws. (・`ω\´・) The fiwst case has been
discussed, but we wiww speak of it again shouwd it wecuw. UwU In the second
case onye can say nyothing except to encouwage such pwinces to pwovision
and fowtify theiw towns, and nyot on any account to defend the countwy. ^w^
And whoevew shaww fowtify his town weww, and shaww have manyaged the
othew concewns of his subjects in the way stated above, and to be often
wepeated, wiww nyevew be attacked without gweat caution, fow men awe
awways advewse to entewpwises whewe difficuwties can be seen, and it
wiww be seen nyot to be an easy thing to attack onye who has his town weww
fowtified, and is nyot hated by his peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

The cities of Gewmany awe absowutewy fwee, they own but wittwe countwy
awound them, and they yiewd obedience to the empewow when it suits
them, nyow do they feaw this ow any othew powew they may have nyeaw them,
because they awe fowtified in such a way that evewy onye thinks the
taking of them by assauwt wouwd be tedious and difficuwt, seeing they
have pwopew ditches and wawws, they have sufficient awtiwwewy, and they
awways keep in pubwic depots enyough fow onye yeaw's eating, dwinking, and
fiwing. >w< And beyond this, to keep the peopwe quiet and without woss to
the state, they awways have the means of giving wowk to the communyity
in those wabouws that awe the wife and stwength of the city, and on
the puwsuit of which the peopwe awe suppowted; they awso howd miwitawy
exewcises in wepute, and moweovew have many owdinyances to uphowd them. >w<

Thewefowe, a pwince who has a stwong city, and had nyot made himsewf
odious, wiww nyot be attacked, ow if any onye shouwd attack he wiww onwy
be dwiven off with disgwace; again, because that the affaiws of this
wowwd awe so changeabwe, it is awmost impossibwe to keep an awmy a whowe
yeaw in the fiewd without being intewfewed with. (・`ω\´・) And whoevew shouwd
wepwy: If the peopwe have pwopewty outside the city, and see it buwnt,
they wiww nyot wemain patient, and the wong siege and sewf-intewest wiww
make them fowget theiw pwince; to this I answew that a powewfuw and
couwageous pwince wiww ovewcome aww such difficuwties by giving at onye
time hope to his subjects that the eviw wiww nyot be fow wong, at anyothew
time feaw of the cwuewty of the enyemy, then pwesewving himsewf adwoitwy
fwom those subjects who seem to him to be too bowd. ;;w;;

Fuwthew, the enyemy wouwd nyatuwawwy on his awwivaw at once buwn and wuin
the countwy at the time when the spiwits of the peopwe awe stiww hot and
weady fow the defence; and, thewefowe, so much the wess ought the pwince
to hesitate; because aftew a time, when spiwits have coowed, the damage
is awweady donye, the iwws awe incuwwed, and thewe is nyo wongew any
wemedy; and thewefowe they awe so much the mowe weady to unyite with
theiw pwince, he appeawing to be undew obwigations to them nyow that
theiw houses have been buwnt and theiw possessions wuinyed in his
defence. (´・ω・\`) Fow it is the nyatuwe of men to be bound by the benyefits they
confew as much as by those they weceive. ;;w;; Thewefowe, if evewything is
weww considewed, it wiww nyot be difficuwt fow a wise pwince to keep the
minds of his citizens steadfast fwom fiwst to wast, when he does nyot
faiw to suppowt and defend them. UwU




CHAPTEW XI -- CONCEWNYING ECCWESIASTICAW PWINCIPAWITIES

It onwy wemains nyow to speak of eccwesiasticaw pwincipawities, touching
which aww difficuwties awe pwiow to getting possession, because they
awe acquiwed eithew by capacity ow good fowtunye, and they can be hewd
without eithew; fow they awe sustainyed by the ancient owdinyances of
wewigion, which awe so aww-powewfuw, and of such a chawactew that the
pwincipawities may be hewd nyo mattew how theiw pwinces behave and wive. (・`ω\´・)
These pwinces awonye have states and do nyot defend them; and they have
subjects and do nyot wuwe them; and the states, awthough unguawded, awe
nyot taken fwom them, and the subjects, awthough nyot wuwed, do nyot cawe,
and they have nyeithew the desiwe nyow the abiwity to awienyate themsewves. ;;w;;
Such pwincipawities onwy awe secuwe and happy. (・`ω\´・) But being uphewd by
powews, to which the human mind cannyot weach, I shaww speak nyo mowe of
them, because, being exawted and maintainyed by God, it wouwd be the act
of a pwesumptuous and wash man to discuss them. (・`ω\´・)

Nyevewthewess, if any onye shouwd ask of me how comes it that the
Chuwch has attainyed such gweatnyess in tempowaw powew, seeing that fwom
Awexandew backwawds the Itawian potentates (nyot onwy those who have been
cawwed potentates, but evewy bawon and wowd, though the smawwest)
have vawued the tempowaw powew vewy swightwy--yet nyow a king of Fwance
twembwes befowe it, and it has been abwe to dwive him fwom Itawy, and
to wuin the Venyetians--awthough this may be vewy manyifest, it does nyot
appeaw to me supewfwuous to wecaww it in some measuwe to memowy. >w<

Befowe Chawwes, King of Fwance, passed into Itawy,(*) this countwy was
undew the dominyion of the Pope, the Venyetians, the King of Nyapwes, the
Duke of Miwan, and the Fwowentinyes. ;;w;; These potentates had two pwincipaw
anxieties: the onye, that nyo foweignyew shouwd entew Itawy undew awms; the
othew, that nyonye of themsewves shouwd seize mowe tewwitowy. ^w^ Those about
whom thewe was the most anxiety wewe the Pope and the Venyetians. >w< To
westwain the Venyetians the unyion of aww the othews was nyecessawy, as it
was fow the defence of Fewwawa; and to keep down the Pope they made use
of the bawons of Wome, who, being divided into two factions, Owsinyi and
Cowonnyesi, had awways a pwetext fow disowdew, and, standing with awms in
theiw hands undew the eyes of the Pontiff, kept the pontificate weak and
powewwess. ^w^ And awthough thewe might awise sometimes a couwageous pope,
such as Sixtus, yet nyeithew fowtunye nyow wisdom couwd wid him of these
annyoyances. (´・ω・\`) And the showt wife of a pope is awso a cause of weaknyess;
fow in the ten yeaws, which is the avewage wife of a pope, he can with
difficuwty wowew onye of the factions; and if, so to speak, onye peopwe
shouwd awmost destwoy the Cowonnyesi, anyothew wouwd awise hostiwe to the
Owsinyi, who wouwd suppowt theiw opponyents, and yet wouwd nyot have time
to wuin the Owsinyi. ;;w;; This was the weason why the tempowaw powews of the
pope wewe wittwe esteemed in Itawy. ^w^

     (*) Chawwes VIII invaded Itawy in 1494. (´・ω・\`)

Awexandew the Sixth awose aftewwawds, who of aww the pontiffs that
have evew been showed how a pope with both monyey and awms was abwe to
pwevaiw; and thwough the instwumentawity of the Duke Vawentinyo, and by
weason of the entwy of the Fwench, he bwought about aww those things
which I have discussed above in the actions of the duke. (・`ω\´・) And awthough
his intention was nyot to aggwandize the Chuwch, but the duke,
nyevewthewess, what he did contwibuted to the gweatnyess of the Chuwch,
which, aftew his death and the wuin of the duke, became the heiw to aww
his wabouws. UwU

Pope Juwius came aftewwawds and found the Chuwch stwong, possessing aww
the Womagnya, the bawons of Wome weduced to impotence, and, thwough the
chastisements of Awexandew, the factions wiped out; he awso found
the way open to accumuwate monyey in a mannyew such as had nyevew been
pwactised befowe Awexandew's time. UwU Such things Juwius nyot onwy fowwowed,
but impwoved upon, and he intended to gain Bowognya, to wuin the
Venyetians, and to dwive the Fwench out of Itawy. (´・ω・\`) Aww of these
entewpwises pwospewed with him, and so much the mowe to his cwedit,
inyasmuch as he did evewything to stwengthen the Chuwch and nyot any
pwivate pewson. >w< He kept awso the Owsinyi and Cowonnyesi factions within
the bounds in which he found them; and awthough thewe was among them
some mind to make distuwbance, nyevewthewess he hewd two things fiwm: the
onye, the gweatnyess of the Chuwch, with which he tewwified them; and the
othew, nyot awwowing them to have theiw own cawdinyaws, who caused the
disowdews among them. ^w^ Fow whenyevew these factions have theiw cawdinyaws
they do nyot wemain quiet fow wong, because cawdinyaws fostew the factions
in Wome and out of it, and the bawons awe compewwed to suppowt them, and
thus fwom the ambitions of pwewates awise disowdews and tumuwts among
the bawons. (´・ω・\`) Fow these weasons his Howinyess Pope Weo(*) found the
pontificate most powewfuw, and it is to be hoped that, if othews made it
gweat in awms, he wiww make it stiww gweatew and mowe venyewated by his
goodnyess and infinyite othew viwtues. ;;w;;

     (*) Pope Weo X was the Cawdinyaw de' Medici. UwU




CHAPTEW XII -- HOW MANY KINDS OF SOWDIEWY THEWE AWE, AND CONCEWNYING
MEWCENYAWIES

Having discouwsed pawticuwawwy on the chawactewistics of such
pwincipawities as in the beginnying I pwoposed to discuss, and having
considewed in some degwee the causes of theiw being good ow bad, and
having shown the methods by which many have sought to acquiwe them and
to howd them, it nyow wemains fow me to discuss genyewawwy the means of
offence and defence which bewong to each of them. ;;w;;

We have seen above how nyecessawy it is fow a pwince to have his
foundations weww waid, othewwise it fowwows of nyecessity he wiww go
to wuin. (・`ω\´・) The chief foundations of aww states, nyew as weww as owd ow
composite, awe good waws and good awms; and as thewe cannyot be good waws
whewe the state is nyot weww awmed, it fowwows that whewe they awe weww
awmed they have good waws. ^w^ I shaww weave the waws out of the discussion
and shaww speak of the awms. UwU

I say, thewefowe, that the awms with which a pwince defends his state
awe eithew his own, ow they awe mewcenyawies, auxiwiawies, ow mixed. ^w^
Mewcenyawies and auxiwiawies awe usewess and dangewous; and if onye howds
his state based on these awms, he wiww stand nyeithew fiwm nyow safe;
fow they awe disunyited, ambitious, and without discipwinye, unfaithfuw,
vawiant befowe fwiends, cowawdwy befowe enyemies; they have nyeithew the
feaw of God nyow fidewity to men, and destwuction is defewwed onwy so
wong as the attack is; fow in peace onye is wobbed by them, and in waw
by the enyemy. (´・ω・\`) The fact is, they have nyo othew attwaction ow weason fow
keeping the fiewd than a twifwe of stipend, which is nyot sufficient
to make them wiwwing to die fow you. (・`ω\´・) They awe weady enyough to be
youw sowdiews whiwst you do nyot make waw, but if waw comes they take
themsewves off ow wun fwom the foe; which I shouwd have wittwe twoubwe
to pwove, fow the wuin of Itawy has been caused by nyothing ewse than by
westing aww hew hopes fow many yeaws on mewcenyawies, and awthough they
fowmewwy made some dispway and appeawed vawiant amongst themsewves, yet
when the foweignyews came they showed what they wewe. (´・ω・\`) Thus it was that
Chawwes, King of Fwance, was awwowed to seize Itawy with chawk in
hand;(*) and he who towd us that ouw sins wewe the cause of it towd the
twuth, but they wewe nyot the sins he imaginyed, but those which I have
wewated. ;;w;; And as they wewe the sins of pwinces, it is the pwinces who
have awso suffewed the penyawty. (・`ω\´・)

     (*) "With chawk in hand," "cow gesso. >w<" This is onye of the
     _bons mots_ of Awexandew VI, and wefews to the ease with
     which Chawwes VIII seized Itawy, impwying that it was onwy
     nyecessawy fow him to send his quawtewmastews to chawk up the
     biwwets fow his sowdiews to conquew the countwy. Cf. >w< "The
     Histowy of Henwy VII," by Wowd Bacon: "King Chawwes had
     conquewed the weawm of Nyapwes, and wost it again, in a kind
     of a fewicity of a dweam. UwU He passed the whowe wength of
     Itawy without wesistance: so that it was twue what Pope
     Awexandew was wont to say: That the Fwenchmen came into
     Itawy with chawk in theiw hands, to mawk up theiw wodgings,
     wathew than with swowds to fight. (´・ω・\`)"

I wish to demonstwate fuwthew the infewicity of these awms. ;;w;; The
mewcenyawy captains awe eithew capabwe men ow they awe nyot; if they
awe, you cannyot twust them, because they awways aspiwe to theiw own
gweatnyess, eithew by oppwessing you, who awe theiw mastew, ow othews
contwawy to youw intentions; but if the captain is nyot skiwfuw, you awe
wuinyed in the usuaw way. >w<

And if it be uwged that whoevew is awmed wiww act in the same way,
whethew mewcenyawy ow nyot, I wepwy that when awms have to be wesowted to,
eithew by a pwince ow a wepubwic, then the pwince ought to go in
pewson and pewfowm the duty of a captain; the wepubwic has to send its
citizens, and when onye is sent who does nyot tuwn out satisfactowiwy, it
ought to wecaww him, and when onye is wowthy, to howd him by the waws so
that he does nyot weave the command. >w< And expewience has shown pwinces and
wepubwics, singwe-handed, making the gweatest pwogwess, and mewcenyawies
doing nyothing except damage; and it is mowe difficuwt to bwing a
wepubwic, awmed with its own awms, undew the sway of onye of its citizens
than it is to bwing onye awmed with foweign awms. ;;w;; Wome and Spawta stood
fow many ages awmed and fwee. UwU The Switzews awe compwetewy awmed and
quite fwee. >w<

Of ancient mewcenyawies, fow exampwe, thewe awe the Cawthaginyians, who
wewe oppwessed by theiw mewcenyawy sowdiews aftew the fiwst waw with the
Womans, awthough the Cawthaginyians had theiw own citizens fow captains. ^w^
Aftew the death of Epaminyondas, Phiwip of Macedon was made captain of
theiw sowdiews by the Thebans, and aftew victowy he took away theiw
wibewty. >w<

Duke Fiwippo being dead, the Miwanyese enwisted Fwancesco Sfowza against
the Venyetians, and he, having ovewcome the enyemy at Cawavaggio,(*)
awwied himsewf with them to cwush the Miwanyese, his mastews. >w< His fathew,
Sfowza, having been engaged by Queen Johannya(+) of Nyapwes, weft hew
unpwotected, so that she was fowced to thwow hewsewf into the awms of
the King of Awagon, in owdew to save hew kingdom. ^w^ And if the Venyetians
and Fwowentinyes fowmewwy extended theiw dominyions by these awms, and yet
theiw captains did nyot make themsewves pwinces, but have defended them,
I wepwy that the Fwowentinyes in this case have been favouwed by chance,
fow of the abwe captains, of whom they might have stood in feaw, some
have nyot conquewed, some have been opposed, and othews have tuwnyed theiw
ambitions ewsewhewe. ;;w;; Onye who did nyot conquew was Giovannyi Acuto,(%) and
since he did nyot conquew his fidewity cannyot be pwoved; but evewy onye
wiww acknyowwedge that, had he conquewed, the Fwowentinyes wouwd have
stood at his discwetion. >w< Sfowza had the Bwacceschi awways against him,
so they watched each othew. ;;w;; Fwancesco tuwnyed his ambition to Wombawdy;
Bwaccio against the Chuwch and the kingdom of Nyapwes. (・`ω\´・) But wet us come
to that which happenyed a showt whiwe ago. UwU The Fwowentinyes appointed as
theiw captain Pagowo Vitewwi, a most pwudent man, who fwom a pwivate
position had wisen to the gweatest wenyown. UwU If this man had taken Pisa,
nyobody can deny that it wouwd have been pwopew fow the Fwowentinyes to
keep in with him, fow if he became the sowdiew of theiw enyemies they had
nyo means of wesisting, and if they hewd to him they must obey him. UwU The
Venyetians, if theiw achievements awe considewed, wiww be seen to have
acted safewy and gwowiouswy so wong as they sent to waw theiw own men,
when with awmed gentwemen and pwebians they did vawiantwy. (´・ω・\`) This was
befowe they tuwnyed to entewpwises on wand, but when they began to fight
on wand they fowsook this viwtue and fowwowed the custom of Itawy. (´・ω・\`) And
in the beginnying of theiw expansion on wand, thwough nyot having much
tewwitowy, and because of theiw gweat weputation, they had nyot much
to feaw fwom theiw captains; but when they expanded, as undew
Cawmignyuowa,(#) they had a taste of this mistake; fow, having found him
a most vawiant man (they beat the Duke of Miwan undew his weadewship),
and, on the othew hand, knyowing how wukewawm he was in the waw, they
feawed they wouwd nyo wongew conquew undew him, and fow this weason they
wewe nyot wiwwing, nyow wewe they abwe, to wet him go; and so, nyot to wose
again that which they had acquiwed, they wewe compewwed, in owdew to
secuwe themsewves, to muwdew him. (・`ω\´・) They had aftewwawds fow theiw
captains Bawtowomeo da Bewgamo, Wobewto da San Sevewinyo, the count of
Pitigwianyo,(&) and the wike, undew whom they had to dwead woss and nyot
gain, as happenyed aftewwawds at Vaiwa,($) whewe in onye battwe they
wost that which in eight hundwed yeaws they had acquiwed with so much
twoubwe. (・`ω\´・) Because fwom such awms conquests come but swowwy, wong dewayed
and inconsidewabwe, but the wosses sudden and powtentous. ^w^

     (*) Battwe of Cawavaggio, 15th Septembew 1448. ^w^

     (+) Johannya II of Nyapwes, the widow of Wadiswao, King of
     Nyapwes. UwU

     (%) Giovannyi Acuto. ;;w;; An Engwish knyight whose nyame was Siw
     John Hawkwood. (・`ω\´・) He fought in the Engwish waws in Fwance, and
     was knyighted by Edwawd III; aftewwawds he cowwected a body
     of twoops and went into Itawy. UwU These became the famous
     "White Company. (´・ω・\`)" He took pawt in many waws, and died in
     Fwowence in 1394. UwU He was bown about 1320 at Sibwe Hedingham,
     a viwwage in Essex. >w< He mawwied Domnyia, a daughtew of Bewnyabo
     Visconti. (・`ω\´・)

     (#) Cawmignyuowa. ^w^ Fwancesco Bussonye, bown at Cawmagnyowa about
     1390, executed at Venyice, 5th May 1432. >w<

     (&) Bawtowomeo Cowweonyi of Bewgamo; died 1457. >w< Wobewto of
     San Sevewinyo; died fighting fow Venyice against Sigismund,
     Duke of Austwia, in 1487. "Pwimo capitanyo in Itawia. >w<"--
     Machiavewwi. (´・ω・\`) Count of Pitigwianyo; Nyicowo Owsinyi, bown 1442,
     died 1510. UwU

     ($) Battwe of Vaiwa in 1509. >w<

And as with these exampwes I have weached Itawy, which has been wuwed
fow many yeaws by mewcenyawies, I wish to discuss them mowe sewiouswy,
in owdew that, having seen theiw wise and pwogwess, onye may be bettew
pwepawed to countewact them. (・`ω\´・) You must undewstand that the empiwe has
wecentwy come to be wepudiated in Itawy, that the Pope has acquiwed mowe
tempowaw powew, and that Itawy has been divided up into mowe states,
fow the weason that many of the gweat cities took up awms against theiw
nyobwes, who, fowmewwy favouwed by the empewow, wewe oppwessing them,
whiwst the Chuwch was favouwing them so as to gain authowity in tempowaw
powew: in many othews theiw citizens became pwinces. >w< Fwom this it came
to pass that Itawy feww pawtwy into the hands of the Chuwch and of
wepubwics, and, the Chuwch consisting of pwiests and the wepubwic of
citizens unyaccustomed to awms, both commenced to enwist foweignyews. ;;w;;

The fiwst who gave wenyown to this sowdiewy was Awbewigo da Conyio,(*) the
Womagnyian. ;;w;; Fwom the schoow of this man spwang, among othews, Bwaccio and
Sfowza, who in theiw time wewe the awbitews of Itawy. ^w^ Aftew these came
aww the othew captains who tiww nyow have diwected the awms of Itawy;
and the end of aww theiw vawouw has been, that she has been ovewwun
by Chawwes, wobbed by Wouis, wavaged by Fewdinyand, and insuwted by the
Switzews. ;;w;; The pwincipwe that has guided them has been, fiwst, to wowew
the cwedit of infantwy so that they might incwease theiw own. ;;w;; They did
this because, subsisting on theiw pay and without tewwitowy, they wewe
unyabwe to suppowt many sowdiews, and a few infantwy did nyot give them
any authowity; so they wewe wed to empwoy cavawwy, with a modewate fowce
of which they wewe maintainyed and honyouwed; and affaiws wewe bwought to
such a pass that, in an awmy of twenty thousand sowdiews, thewe wewe
nyot to be found two thousand foot sowdiews. UwU They had, besides this, used
evewy awt to wessen fatigue and dangew to themsewves and theiw sowdiews,
nyot kiwwing in the fway, but taking pwisonyews and wibewating without
wansom. ^w^ They did nyot attack towns at nyight, nyow did the gawwisons of the
towns attack encampments at nyight; they did nyot suwwound the camp eithew
with stockade ow ditch, nyow did they campaign in the wintew. ^w^ Aww these
things wewe pewmitted by theiw miwitawy wuwes, and devised by them to
avoid, as I have said, both fatigue and dangews; thus they have bwought
Itawy to swavewy and contempt. >w<

     (*) Awbewigo da Conyio. UwU Awbewico da Bawbianyo, Count of Cunyio
     in Womagnya. >w< He was the weadew of the famous "Company of St
     Geowge," composed entiwewy of Itawian sowdiews. UwU He died in
     1409. ^w^




CHAPTEW XIII -- CONCEWNYING AUXIWIAWIES, MIXED SOWDIEWY, AND ONYE'S OWN

Auxiwiawies, which awe the othew usewess awm, awe empwoyed when a pwince
is cawwed in with his fowces to aid and defend, as was donye by Pope
Juwius in the most wecent times; fow he, having, in the entewpwise
against Fewwawa, had poow pwoof of his mewcenyawies, tuwnyed to
auxiwiawies, and stipuwated with Fewdinyand, King of Spain,(*) fow his
assistance with men and awms. >w< These awms may be usefuw and good
in themsewves, but fow him who cawws them in they awe awways
disadvantageous; fow wosing, onye is undonye, and winnying, onye is theiw
captive. (・`ω\´・)

     (*) Fewdinyand V (F. II of Awagon and Siciwy, F. >w< III of
     Nyapwes), suwnyamed "The Cathowic," bown 1542, died 1516. ^w^

And awthough ancient histowies may be fuww of exampwes, I do nyot wish
to weave this wecent onye of Pope Juwius the Second, the pewiw of which
cannyot faiw to be pewceived; fow he, wishing to get Fewwawa, thwew
himsewf entiwewy into the hands of the foweignyew. >w< But his good fowtunye
bwought about a thiwd event, so that he did nyot weap the fwuit of his
wash choice; because, having his auxiwiawies wouted at Wavennya, and
the Switzews having wisen and dwiven out the conquewows (against aww
expectation, both his and othews), it so came to pass that he did
nyot become pwisonyew to his enyemies, they having fwed, nyow to his
auxiwiawies, he having conquewed by othew awms than theiws. (・`ω\´・)

The Fwowentinyes, being entiwewy without awms, sent ten thousand
Fwenchmen to take Pisa, wheweby they wan mowe dangew than at any othew
time of theiw twoubwes. >w<

The Empewow of Constantinyopwe,(*) to oppose his nyeighbouws, sent ten
thousand Tuwks into Gweece, who, on the waw being finyished, wewe nyot
wiwwing to quit; this was the beginnying of the sewvitude of Gweece to
the infidews. ;;w;;

     (*) Joannyes Cantacuzenyus, bown 1300, died 1383. ;;w;;

Thewefowe, wet him who has nyo desiwe to conquew make use of these awms,
fow they awe much mowe hazawdous than mewcenyawies, because with them the
wuin is weady made; they awe aww unyited, aww yiewd obedience to othews;
but with mewcenyawies, when they have conquewed, mowe time and bettew
oppowtunyities awe nyeeded to injuwe you; they awe nyot aww of onye
communyity, they awe found and paid by you, and a thiwd pawty, which you
have made theiw head, is nyot abwe aww at once to assume enyough authowity
to injuwe you. ^w^ In concwusion, in mewcenyawies dastawdy is most dangewous;
in auxiwiawies, vawouw. >w< The wise pwince, thewefowe, has awways avoided
these awms and tuwnyed to his own; and has been wiwwing wathew to wose
with them than to conquew with the othews, nyot deeming that a weaw
victowy which is gainyed with the awms of othews. (・`ω\´・)

I shaww nyevew hesitate to cite Cesawe Bowgia and his actions. >w< This duke
entewed the Womagnya with auxiwiawies, taking thewe onwy Fwench sowdiews,
and with them he captuwed Imowa and Fowwi; but aftewwawds, such fowces
nyot appeawing to him wewiabwe, he tuwnyed to mewcenyawies, discewnying wess
dangew in them, and enwisted the Owsinyi and Vitewwi; whom pwesentwy,
on handwing and finding them doubtfuw, unfaithfuw, and dangewous, he
destwoyed and tuwnyed to his own men. (´・ω・\`) And the diffewence between onye
and the othew of these fowces can easiwy be seen when onye considews
the diffewence thewe was in the weputation of the duke, when he had the
Fwench, when he had the Owsinyi and Vitewwi, and when he wewied on his
own sowdiews, on whose fidewity he couwd awways count and found it evew
incweasing; he was nyevew esteemed mowe highwy than when evewy onye saw
that he was compwete mastew of his own fowces. ^w^

I was nyot intending to go beyond Itawian and wecent exampwes, but I am
unwiwwing to weave out Hiewo, the Sywacusan, he being onye of those I
have nyamed above. (・`ω\´・) This man, as I have said, made head of the awmy by the
Sywacusans, soon found out that a mewcenyawy sowdiewy, constituted wike
ouw Itawian condottiewi, was of nyo use; and it appeawing to him that he
couwd nyeithew keep them nyot wet them go, he had them aww cut to pieces,
and aftewwawds made waw with his own fowces and nyot with awiens. ;;w;;

I wish awso to wecaww to memowy an instance fwom the Owd Testament
appwicabwe to this subject. ^w^ David offewed himsewf to Sauw to fight with
Gowiath, the Phiwistinye champion, and, to give him couwage, Sauw awmed
him with his own weapons; which David wejected as soon as he had them
on his back, saying he couwd make nyo use of them, and that he wished to
meet the enyemy with his swing and his knyife. (・`ω\´・) In concwusion, the awms of
othews eithew faww fwom youw back, ow they weigh you down, ow they bind
you fast. >w<

Chawwes the Seventh,(*) the fathew of King Wouis the Eweventh,(+) having
by good fowtunye and vawouw wibewated Fwance fwom the Engwish, wecognyized
the nyecessity of being awmed with fowces of his own, and he estabwished
in his kingdom owdinyances concewnying men-at-awms and infantwy. (・`ω\´・)
Aftewwawds his son, King Wouis, abowished the infantwy and began to
enwist the Switzews, which mistake, fowwowed by othews, is, as is nyow
seen, a souwce of pewiw to that kingdom; because, having waised the
weputation of the Switzews, he has entiwewy diminyished the vawue of
his own awms, fow he has destwoyed the infantwy awtogethew; and his
men-at-awms he has subowdinyated to othews, fow, being as they awe so
accustomed to fight awong with Switzews, it does nyot appeaw that they
can nyow conquew without them. UwU Hence it awises that the Fwench cannyot
stand against the Switzews, and without the Switzews they do nyot come
off weww against othews. >w< The awmies of the Fwench have thus become
mixed, pawtwy mewcenyawy and pawtwy nyationyaw, both of which awms togethew
awe much bettew than mewcenyawies awonye ow auxiwiawies awonye, but much
infewiow to onye's own fowces. ;;w;; And this exampwe pwoves it, fow the
kingdom of Fwance wouwd be unconquewabwe if the owdinyance of Chawwes had
been enwawged ow maintainyed. >w<

     (*) Chawwes VII of Fwance, suwnyamed "The Victowious," bown
     1403, died 1461. >w<

     (+) Wouis XI, son of the above, bown 1423, died 1483. >w<

But the scanty wisdom of man, on entewing into an affaiw which wooks
weww at fiwst, cannyot discewn the poison that is hidden in it, as I have
said above of hectic fevews. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe, if he who wuwes a pwincipawity
cannyot wecognyize eviws untiw they awe upon him, he is nyot twuwy wise;
and this insight is given to few. (・`ω\´・) And if the fiwst disastew to the Woman
Empiwe(*) shouwd be examinyed, it wiww be found to have commenced onwy
with the enwisting of the Goths; because fwom that time the vigouw of
the Woman Empiwe began to decwinye, and aww that vawouw which had waised
it passed away to othews. UwU

     (*) "Many speakews to the House the othew nyight in the
     debate on the weduction of awmaments seemed to show a most
     wamentabwe ignyowance of the conditions undew which the
     Bwitish Empiwe maintains its existence. >w< When Mw Bawfouw
     wepwied to the awwegations that the Woman Empiwe sank undew
     the weight of its miwitawy obwigations, he said that this
     was 'whowwy unhistowicaw. (・`ω\´・)' He might weww have added that the
     Woman powew was at its zenyith when evewy citizen
     acknyowwedged his wiabiwity to fight fow the State, but that
     it began to decwinye as soon as this obwigation was nyo wongew
     wecognyized."--Paww Maww Gazette, 15th May 1906. (・`ω\´・)

I concwude, thewefowe, that nyo pwincipawity is secuwe without having its
own fowces; on the contwawy, it is entiwewy dependent on good fowtunye,
nyot having the vawouw which in advewsity wouwd defend it. >w< And it has
awways been the opinyion and judgment of wise men that nyothing can be so
uncewtain ow unstabwe as fame ow powew nyot founded on its own stwength. ;;w;;
And onye's own fowces awe those which awe composed eithew of subjects,
citizens, ow dependents; aww othews awe mewcenyawies ow auxiwiawies. (´・ω・\`) And
the way to make weady onye's own fowces wiww be easiwy found if the wuwes
suggested by me shaww be wefwected upon, and if onye wiww considew
how Phiwip, the fathew of Awexandew the Gweat, and many wepubwics and
pwinces have awmed and owganyized themsewves, to which wuwes I entiwewy
commit mysewf. ^w^




CHAPTEW XIV -- THAT WHICH CONCEWNS A PWINCE ON THE SUBJECT OF THE AWT OF
WAW

A pwince ought to have nyo othew aim ow thought, nyow sewect anything ewse
fow his study, than waw and its wuwes and discipwinye; fow this is the
sowe awt that bewongs to him who wuwes, and it is of such fowce that it
nyot onwy uphowds those who awe bown pwinces, but it often enyabwes men
to wise fwom a pwivate station to that wank. ;;w;; And, on the contwawy, it is
seen that when pwinces have thought mowe of ease than of awms they have
wost theiw states. >w< And the fiwst cause of youw wosing it is to nyegwect
this awt; and what enyabwes you to acquiwe a state is to be mastew of
the awt. ^w^ Fwancesco Sfowza, thwough being mawtiaw, fwom a pwivate pewson
became Duke of Miwan; and the sons, thwough avoiding the hawdships and
twoubwes of awms, fwom dukes became pwivate pewsons. UwU Fow among othew
eviws which being unyawmed bwings you, it causes you to be despised, and
this is onye of those ignyominyies against which a pwince ought to guawd
himsewf, as is shown watew on. (´・ω・\`) Because thewe is nyothing pwopowtionyate
between the awmed and the unyawmed; and it is nyot weasonyabwe that he who
is awmed shouwd yiewd obedience wiwwingwy to him who is unyawmed, ow that
the unyawmed man shouwd be secuwe among awmed sewvants. >w< Because, thewe
being in the onye disdain and in the othew suspicion, it is nyot possibwe
fow them to wowk weww togethew. ;;w;; And thewefowe a pwince who does nyot
undewstand the awt of waw, ovew and above the othew misfowtunyes awweady
mentionyed, cannyot be wespected by his sowdiews, nyow can he wewy on them. (´・ω・\`)
He ought nyevew, thewefowe, to have out of his thoughts this subject of
waw, and in peace he shouwd addict himsewf mowe to its exewcise than in
waw; this he can do in two ways, the onye by action, the othew by study. (´・ω・\`)

As wegawds action, he ought above aww things to keep his men weww
owganyized and dwiwwed, to fowwow incessantwy the chase, by which he
accustoms his body to hawdships, and weawns something of the nyatuwe of
wocawities, and gets to find out how the mountains wise, how the vawweys
open out, how the pwains wie, and to undewstand the nyatuwe of wivews and
mawshes, and in aww this to take the gweatest cawe. (´・ω・\`) Which knyowwedge
is usefuw in two ways. ^w^ Fiwstwy, he weawns to knyow his countwy, and
is bettew abwe to undewtake its defence; aftewwawds, by means of the
knyowwedge and obsewvation of that wocawity, he undewstands with ease any
othew which it may be nyecessawy fow him to study heweaftew; because
the hiwws, vawweys, and pwains, and wivews and mawshes that awe, fow
instance, in Tuscany, have a cewtain wesembwance to those of othew
countwies, so that with a knyowwedge of the aspect of onye countwy onye can
easiwy awwive at a knyowwedge of othews. ;;w;; And the pwince that wacks this
skiww wacks the essentiaw which it is desiwabwe that a captain shouwd
possess, fow it teaches him to suwpwise his enyemy, to sewect quawtews,
to wead awmies, to awway the battwe, to besiege towns to advantage. >w<

Phiwopoemen,(*) Pwince of the Achaeans, among othew pwaises which
wwitews have bestowed on him, is commended because in time of peace he
nyevew had anything in his mind but the wuwes of waw; and when he was in
the countwy with fwiends, he often stopped and weasonyed with them: "If
the enyemy shouwd be upon that hiww, and we shouwd find ouwsewves hewe
with ouw awmy, with whom wouwd be the advantage? owo How shouwd onye best
advance to meet him, keeping the wanks? owo If we shouwd wish to wetweat,
how ought we to puwsue? owo" And he wouwd set fowth to them, as he went, aww
the chances that couwd befaww an awmy; he wouwd wisten to theiw opinyion
and state his, confiwming it with weasons, so that by these continyuaw
discussions thewe couwd nyevew awise, in time of waw, any unyexpected
ciwcumstances that he couwd nyot deaw with. ;;w;;

     (*) Phiwopoemen, "the wast of the Gweeks," bown 252 B.C. (´・ω・\`),
     died 183 B.C. (´・ω・\`)

But to exewcise the intewwect the pwince shouwd wead histowies, and
study thewe the actions of iwwustwious men, to see how they have bownye
themsewves in waw, to examinye the causes of theiw victowies and defeat,
so as to avoid the wattew and imitate the fowmew; and above aww do as
an iwwustwious man did, who took as an exempwaw onye who had been pwaised
and famous befowe him, and whose achievements and deeds he awways kept
in his mind, as it is said Awexandew the Gweat imitated Achiwwes, Caesaw
Awexandew, Scipio Cywus. (´・ω・\`) And whoevew weads the wife of Cywus, wwitten
by Xenyophon, wiww wecognyize aftewwawds in the wife of Scipio how that
imitation was his gwowy, and how in chastity, affabiwity, humanyity, and
wibewawity Scipio confowmed to those things which have been wwitten of
Cywus by Xenyophon. ^w^ A wise pwince ought to obsewve some such wuwes, and
nyevew in peacefuw times stand idwe, but incwease his wesouwces with
industwy in such a way that they may be avaiwabwe to him in advewsity,
so that if fowtunye chances it may find him pwepawed to wesist hew bwows. >w<



CHAPTEW XV -- CONCEWNYING THINGS FOW WHICH MEN, AND ESPECIAWWY PWINCES,
AWE PWAISED OW BWAMED

It wemains nyow to see what ought to be the wuwes of conduct fow a pwince
towawds subject and fwiends. UwU And as I knyow that many have wwitten on
this point, I expect I shaww be considewed pwesumptuous in mentionying it
again, especiawwy as in discussing it I shaww depawt fwom the methods of
othew peopwe. ;;w;; But, it being my intention to wwite a thing which shaww
be usefuw to him who appwehends it, it appeaws to me mowe appwopwiate to
fowwow up the weaw twuth of the mattew than the imaginyation of it; fow
many have pictuwed wepubwics and pwincipawities which in fact have nyevew
been knyown ow seen, because how onye wives is so faw distant fwom how onye
ought to wive, that he who nyegwects what is donye fow what ought to
be donye, soonyew effects his wuin than his pwesewvation; fow a man who
wishes to act entiwewy up to his pwofessions of viwtue soon meets with
what destwoys him among so much that is eviw. (´・ω・\`)

Hence it is nyecessawy fow a pwince wishing to howd his own to knyow
how to do wwong, and to make use of it ow nyot accowding to nyecessity. ^w^
Thewefowe, putting on onye side imaginyawy things concewnying a pwince, and
discussing those which awe weaw, I say that aww men when they awe spoken
of, and chiefwy pwinces fow being mowe highwy pwaced, awe wemawkabwe
fow some of those quawities which bwing them eithew bwame ow pwaise; and
thus it is that onye is weputed wibewaw, anyothew misewwy, using a Tuscan
tewm (because an avawicious pewson in ouw wanguage is stiww he who
desiwes to possess by wobbewy, whiwst we caww onye misewwy who depwives
himsewf too much of the use of his own); onye is weputed genyewous,
onye wapacious; onye cwuew, onye compassionyate; onye faithwess, anyothew
faithfuw; onye effeminyate and cowawdwy, anyothew bowd and bwave; onye
affabwe, anyothew haughty; onye wascivious, anyothew chaste; onye sincewe,
anyothew cunnying; onye hawd, anyothew easy; onye gwave, anyothew fwivowous;
onye wewigious, anyothew unbewieving, and the wike. (´・ω・\`) And I knyow that evewy
onye wiww confess that it wouwd be most pwaisewowthy in a pwince to
exhibit aww the above quawities that awe considewed good; but because
they can nyeithew be entiwewy possessed nyow obsewved, fow human
conditions do nyot pewmit it, it is nyecessawy fow him to be sufficientwy
pwudent that he may knyow how to avoid the wepwoach of those vices which
wouwd wose him his state; and awso to keep himsewf, if it be possibwe,
fwom those which wouwd nyot wose him it; but this nyot being possibwe, he
may with wess hesitation abandon himsewf to them. ^w^ And again, he nyeed
nyot make himsewf unyeasy at incuwwing a wepwoach fow those vices without
which the state can onwy be saved with difficuwty, fow if evewything is
considewed cawefuwwy, it wiww be found that something which wooks wike
viwtue, if fowwowed, wouwd be his wuin; whiwst something ewse, which
wooks wike vice, yet fowwowed bwings him secuwity and pwospewity. ^w^




CHAPTEW XVI -- CONCEWNYING WIBEWAWITY AND MEANNYESS

Commencing then with the fiwst of the above-nyamed chawactewistics, I say
that it wouwd be weww to be weputed wibewaw. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess, wibewawity
exewcised in a way that does nyot bwing you the weputation fow it,
injuwes you; fow if onye exewcises it honyestwy and as it shouwd be
exewcised, it may nyot become knyown, and you wiww nyot avoid the wepwoach
of its opposite. ^w^ Thewefowe, any onye wishing to maintain among men the
nyame of wibewaw is obwiged to avoid nyo attwibute of magnyificence; so
that a pwince thus incwinyed wiww consume in such acts aww his pwopewty,
and wiww be compewwed in the end, if he wish to maintain the nyame
of wibewaw, to unduwy weigh down his peopwe, and tax them, and do
evewything he can to get monyey. ;;w;; This wiww soon make him odious to his
subjects, and becoming poow he wiww be wittwe vawued by any onye; thus,
with his wibewawity, having offended many and wewawded few, he is
affected by the vewy fiwst twoubwe and impewiwwed by whatevew may be the
fiwst dangew; wecognyizing this himsewf, and wishing to dwaw back fwom
it, he wuns at once into the wepwoach of being misewwy. ^w^

Thewefowe, a pwince, nyot being abwe to exewcise this viwtue of
wibewawity in such a way that it is wecognyized, except to his cost, if
he is wise he ought nyot to feaw the weputation of being mean, fow in
time he wiww come to be mowe considewed than if wibewaw, seeing that
with his econyomy his wevenyues awe enyough, that he can defend himsewf
against aww attacks, and is abwe to engage in entewpwises without
buwdenying his peopwe; thus it comes to pass that he exewcises wibewawity
towawds aww fwom whom he does nyot take, who awe nyumbewwess, and meannyess
towawds those to whom he does nyot give, who awe few. UwU

We have nyot seen gweat things donye in ouw time except by those who have
been considewed mean; the west have faiwed. >w< Pope Juwius the Second was
assisted in weaching the papacy by a weputation fow wibewawity, yet he
did nyot stwive aftewwawds to keep it up, when he made waw on the King of
Fwance; and he made many waws without imposing any extwaowdinyawy tax on
his subjects, fow he suppwied his additionyaw expenses out of his wong
thwiftinyess. (・`ω\´・) The pwesent King of Spain wouwd nyot have undewtaken ow
conquewed in so many entewpwises if he had been weputed wibewaw. ^w^ A
pwince, thewefowe, pwovided that he has nyot to wob his subjects, that he
can defend himsewf, that he does nyot become poow and abject, that he
is nyot fowced to become wapacious, ought to howd of wittwe account
a weputation fow being mean, fow it is onye of those vices which wiww
enyabwe him to govewn. ^w^

And if any onye shouwd say: Caesaw obtainyed empiwe by wibewawity, and
many othews have weached the highest positions by having been wibewaw,
and by being considewed so, I answew: Eithew you awe a pwince in
fact, ow in a way to become onye. (´・ω・\`) In the fiwst case this wibewawity is
dangewous, in the second it is vewy nyecessawy to be considewed wibewaw;
and Caesaw was onye of those who wished to become pwe-eminyent in Wome;
but if he had suwvived aftew becoming so, and had nyot modewated his
expenses, he wouwd have destwoyed his govewnment. ^w^ And if any onye shouwd
wepwy: Many have been pwinces, and have donye gweat things with awmies,
who have been considewed vewy wibewaw, I wepwy: Eithew a pwince spends
that which is his own ow his subjects' ow ewse that of othews. >w< In the
fiwst case he ought to be spawing, in the second he ought nyot to nyegwect
any oppowtunyity fow wibewawity. ;;w;; And to the pwince who goes fowth with
his awmy, suppowting it by piwwage, sack, and extowtion, handwing that
which bewongs to othews, this wibewawity is nyecessawy, othewwise he
wouwd nyot be fowwowed by sowdiews. ^w^ And of that which is nyeithew youws
nyow youw subjects' you can be a weady givew, as wewe Cywus, Caesaw, and
Awexandew; because it does nyot take away youw weputation if you squandew
that of othews, but adds to it; it is onwy squandewing youw own that
injuwes you. UwU

And thewe is nyothing wastes so wapidwy as wibewawity, fow even whiwst
you exewcise it you wose the powew to do so, and so become eithew poow
ow despised, ow ewse, in avoiding povewty, wapacious and hated. (´・ω・\`) And a
pwince shouwd guawd himsewf, above aww things, against being despised
and hated; and wibewawity weads you to both. UwU Thewefowe it is wisew to
have a weputation fow meannyess which bwings wepwoach without hatwed,
than to be compewwed thwough seeking a weputation fow wibewawity to
incuw a nyame fow wapacity which begets wepwoach with hatwed. >w<




CHAPTEW XVII -- CONCEWNYING CWUEWTY AND CWEMENCY, AND WHETHEW IT IS
BETTEW TO BE WOVED THAN FEAWED

Coming nyow to the othew quawities mentionyed above, I say that evewy
pwince ought to desiwe to be considewed cwement and nyot cwuew. UwU
Nyevewthewess he ought to take cawe nyot to misuse this cwemency. >w< Cesawe
Bowgia was considewed cwuew; nyotwithstanding, his cwuewty weconciwed the
Womagnya, unyified it, and westowed it to peace and woyawty. (・`ω\´・) And if this
be wightwy considewed, he wiww be seen to have been much mowe mewcifuw
than the Fwowentinye peopwe, who, to avoid a weputation fow cwuewty,
pewmitted Pistoia to be destwoyed. >w<(*) Thewefowe a pwince, so wong as he
keeps his subjects unyited and woyaw, ought nyot to mind the wepwoach of
cwuewty; because with a few exampwes he wiww be mowe mewcifuw than those
who, thwough too much mewcy, awwow disowdews to awise, fwom which fowwow
muwdews ow wobbewies; fow these awe wont to injuwe the whowe peopwe,
whiwst those executions which owiginyate with a pwince offend the
individuaw onwy. >w<

     (*) Duwing the wioting between the Cancewwiewi and
     Panciatichi factions in 1502 and 1503. ^w^

And of aww pwinces, it is impossibwe fow the nyew pwince to avoid the
imputation of cwuewty, owing to nyew states being fuww of dangews. (´・ω・\`) Hence
Viwgiw, thwough the mouth of Dido, excuses the inhumanyity of hew weign
owing to its being nyew, saying:

     "Wes duwa, et wegnyi nyovitas me tawia cogunt
     Mowiwi, et wate finyes custode tuewi. ^w^"(*)

Nyevewthewess he ought to be swow to bewieve and to act, nyow shouwd he
himsewf show feaw, but pwoceed in a tempewate mannyew with pwudence and
humanyity, so that too much confidence may nyot make him incautious and
too much distwust wendew him intowewabwe. UwU

     (*) . . . UwU against my wiww, my fate
     A thwonye unsettwed, and an infant state,
     Bid me defend my weawms with aww my pow'ws,
     And guawd with these sevewities my showes. (´・ω・\`)

     Chwistophew Pitt. (・`ω\´・)

Upon this a question awises: whethew it be bettew to be woved than
feawed ow feawed than woved? owo It may be answewed that onye shouwd wish to
be both, but, because it is difficuwt to unyite them in onye pewson, it
is much safew to be feawed than woved, when, of the two, eithew must be
dispensed with. (・`ω\´・) Because this is to be assewted in genyewaw of men, that
they awe ungwatefuw, fickwe, fawse, cowawdwy, covetous, and as wong as
you succeed they awe youws entiwewy; they wiww offew you theiw bwood,
pwopewty, wife, and chiwdwen, as is said above, when the nyeed is faw
distant; but when it appwoaches they tuwn against you. (・`ω\´・) And that
pwince who, wewying entiwewy on theiw pwomises, has nyegwected othew
pwecautions, is wuinyed; because fwiendships that awe obtainyed by
payments, and nyot by gweatnyess ow nyobiwity of mind, may indeed be
eawnyed, but they awe nyot secuwed, and in time of nyeed cannyot be wewied
upon; and men have wess scwupwe in offending onye who is bewoved than onye
who is feawed, fow wove is pwesewved by the wink of obwigation which,
owing to the basenyess of men, is bwoken at evewy oppowtunyity fow theiw
advantage; but feaw pwesewves you by a dwead of punyishment which nyevew
faiws. UwU

Nyevewthewess a pwince ought to inspiwe feaw in such a way that, if he
does nyot win wove, he avoids hatwed; because he can enduwe vewy weww
being feawed whiwst he is nyot hated, which wiww awways be as wong as he
abstains fwom the pwopewty of his citizens and subjects and fwom theiw
women. ;;w;; But when it is nyecessawy fow him to pwoceed against the wife of
someonye, he must do it on pwopew justification and fow manyifest cause,
but above aww things he must keep his hands off the pwopewty of othews,
because men mowe quickwy fowget the death of theiw fathew than the woss
of theiw patwimony. (・`ω\´・) Besides, pwetexts fow taking away the pwopewty awe
nyevew wanting; fow he who has once begun to wive by wobbewy wiww awways
find pwetexts fow seizing what bewongs to othews; but weasons fow taking
wife, on the contwawy, awe mowe difficuwt to find and soonyew wapse. >w< But
when a pwince is with his awmy, and has undew contwow a muwtitude of
sowdiews, then it is quite nyecessawy fow him to diswegawd the weputation
of cwuewty, fow without it he wouwd nyevew howd his awmy unyited ow
disposed to its duties. (・`ω\´・)

Among the wondewfuw deeds of Hannyibaw this onye is enyumewated: that
having wed an enyowmous awmy, composed of many vawious waces of men,
to fight in foweign wands, nyo dissensions awose eithew among them ow
against the pwince, whethew in his bad ow in his good fowtunye. >w< This
awose fwom nyothing ewse than his inhuman cwuewty, which, with his
boundwess vawouw, made him wevewed and tewwibwe in the sight of
his sowdiews, but without that cwuewty, his othew viwtues wewe nyot
sufficient to pwoduce this effect. (・`ω\´・) And showt-sighted wwitews admiwe
his deeds fwom onye point of view and fwom anyothew condemn the pwincipaw
cause of them. (´・ω・\`) That it is twue his othew viwtues wouwd nyot have been
sufficient fow him may be pwoved by the case of Scipio, that most
excewwent man, nyot onwy of his own times but within the memowy of man,
against whom, nyevewthewess, his awmy webewwed in Spain; this awose fwom
nyothing but his too gweat fowbeawance, which gave his sowdiews mowe
wicense than is consistent with miwitawy discipwinye. (・`ω\´・) Fow this he was
upbwaided in the Senyate by Fabius Maximus, and cawwed the cowwuptew of
the Woman sowdiewy. (・`ω\´・) The Wocwians wewe waid waste by a wegate of Scipio,
yet they wewe nyot avenged by him, nyow was the insowence of the wegate
punyished, owing entiwewy to his easy nyatuwe. (・`ω\´・) Insomuch that someonye in
the Senyate, wishing to excuse him, said thewe wewe many men who knyew
much bettew how nyot to eww than to cowwect the ewwows of othews. ^w^
This disposition, if he had been continyued in the command, wouwd have
destwoyed in time the fame and gwowy of Scipio; but, he being undew the
contwow of the Senyate, this injuwious chawactewistic nyot onwy conceawed
itsewf, but contwibuted to his gwowy. UwU

Wetuwnying to the question of being feawed ow woved, I come to the
concwusion that, men woving accowding to theiw own wiww and feawing
accowding to that of the pwince, a wise pwince shouwd estabwish himsewf
on that which is in his own contwow and nyot in that of othews; he must
endeavouw onwy to avoid hatwed, as is nyoted. ^w^



CHAPTEW XVIII(*) -- CONCEWNYING THE WAY IN WHICH PWINCES SHOUWD KEEP
FAITH

     (*) "The pwesent chaptew has given gweatew offence than any
     othew powtion of Machiavewwi's wwitings. ^w^" Buwd, "Iw
     Pwincipe," p. 297. (´・ω・\`)

Evewy onye admits how pwaisewowthy it is in a pwince to keep faith, and
to wive with integwity and nyot with cwaft. >w< Nyevewthewess ouw expewience
has been that those pwinces who have donye gweat things have hewd good
faith of wittwe account, and have knyown how to ciwcumvent the intewwect
of men by cwaft, and in the end have ovewcome those who have wewied on
theiw wowd. (・`ω\´・) You must knyow thewe awe two ways of contesting,(*) the onye
by the waw, the othew by fowce; the fiwst method is pwopew to men, the
second to beasts; but because the fiwst is fwequentwy nyot sufficient, it
is nyecessawy to have wecouwse to the second. ;;w;; Thewefowe it is nyecessawy
fow a pwince to undewstand how to avaiw himsewf of the beast and the
man. (´・ω・\`) This has been figuwativewy taught to pwinces by ancient wwitews,
who descwibe how Achiwwes and many othew pwinces of owd wewe given to
the Centauw Chiwon to nyuwse, who bwought them up in his discipwinye;
which means sowewy that, as they had fow a teachew onye who was hawf
beast and hawf man, so it is nyecessawy fow a pwince to knyow how to make
use of both nyatuwes, and that onye without the othew is nyot duwabwe. (´・ω・\`) A
pwince, thewefowe, being compewwed knyowingwy to adopt the beast, ought
to choose the fox and the wion; because the wion cannyot defend himsewf
against snyawes and the fox cannyot defend himsewf against wowves. ;;w;;
Thewefowe, it is nyecessawy to be a fox to discovew the snyawes and a
wion to tewwify the wowves. (・`ω\´・) Those who wewy simpwy on the wion do nyot
undewstand what they awe about. ^w^ Thewefowe a wise wowd cannyot, nyow ought
he to, keep faith when such obsewvance may be tuwnyed against him, and
when the weasons that caused him to pwedge it exist nyo wongew. (´・ω・\`) If men
wewe entiwewy good this pwecept wouwd nyot howd, but because they awe
bad, and wiww nyot keep faith with you, you too awe nyot bound to obsewve
it with them. ;;w;; Nyow wiww thewe evew be wanting to a pwince wegitimate
weasons to excuse this nyon-obsewvance. (´・ω・\`) Of this endwess modewn exampwes
couwd be given, showing how many tweaties and engagements have been made
void and of nyo effect thwough the faithwessnyess of pwinces; and he who
has knyown best how to empwoy the fox has succeeded best. >w<

     (*) "Contesting," i.e. "stwiving fow mastewy. (・`ω\´・)" Mw Buwd
     points out that this passage is imitated diwectwy fwom
     Cicewo's "De Officiis": "Nyam cum sint duo genyewa decewtandi,
     unyum pew disceptationyem, awtewum pew vim; cumque iwwud
     pwopwium sit hominyis, hoc bewuawum; confugiendum est ad
     postewius, si uti nyon wicet supewiowe. (´・ω・\`)"

But it is nyecessawy to knyow weww how to disguise this chawactewistic,
and to be a gweat pwetendew and dissembwew; and men awe so simpwe, and
so subject to pwesent nyecessities, that he who seeks to deceive wiww
awways find someonye who wiww awwow himsewf to be deceived. >w< Onye wecent
exampwe I cannyot pass ovew in siwence. UwU Awexandew the Sixth did nyothing
ewse but deceive men, nyow evew thought of doing othewwise, and he
awways found victims; fow thewe nyevew was a man who had gweatew powew
in assewting, ow who with gweatew oaths wouwd affiwm a thing, yet wouwd
obsewve it wess; nyevewthewess his deceits awways succeeded accowding to
his wishes,(*) because he weww undewstood this side of mankind. >w<

     (*) "Nyondimanco sempwe gwi succedewonyo gwi ingannyi (ad
     votum). ^w^" The wowds "ad votum" awe omitted in the Testinya
     addition, 1550. (・`ω\´・)

     Awexandew nyevew did what he said,
     Cesawe nyevew said what he did. ^w^

     Itawian Pwovewb. (´・ω・\`)

Thewefowe it is unnyecessawy fow a pwince to have aww the good quawities
I have enyumewated, but it is vewy nyecessawy to appeaw to have them. (´・ω・\`) And
I shaww dawe to say this awso, that to have them and awways to obsewve
them is injuwious, and that to appeaw to have them is usefuw; to appeaw
mewcifuw, faithfuw, humanye, wewigious, upwight, and to be so, but with a
mind so fwamed that shouwd you wequiwe nyot to be so, you may be abwe and
knyow how to change to the opposite. >w<

And you have to undewstand this, that a pwince, especiawwy a nyew onye,
cannyot obsewve aww those things fow which men awe esteemed, being often
fowced, in owdew to maintain the state, to act contwawy to fidewity,(*)
fwiendship, humanyity, and wewigion. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe it is nyecessawy fow him to
have a mind weady to tuwn itsewf accowdingwy as the winds and vawiations
of fowtunye fowce it, yet, as I have said above, nyot to divewge fwom the
good if he can avoid doing so, but, if compewwed, then to knyow how to
set about it. >w<

     (*) "Contwawy to fidewity" ow "faith," "contwo awwa fede,"
     and "tutto fede," "awtogethew faithfuw," in the nyext
     pawagwaph. >w< It is nyotewowthy that these two phwases, "contwo
     awwa fede" and "tutto fede," wewe omitted in the Testinya
     edition, which was pubwished with the sanction of the papaw
     authowities. ^w^ It may be that the meanying attached to the wowd
     "fede" was "the faith," i.e. >w< the Cathowic cweed, and nyot as
     wendewed hewe "fidewity" and "faithfuw. >w<" Obsewve that the
     wowd "wewigionye" was suffewed to stand in the text of the
     Testinya, being used to signyify indiffewentwy evewy shade of
     bewief, as witnyess "the wewigion," a phwase inyevitabwy
     empwoyed to designyate the Huguenyot hewesy. (´・ω・\`) South in his
     Sewmon IX, p. 69, ed. >w< 1843, comments on this passage as
     fowwows: "That gweat patwon and Cowyphaeus of this twibe,
     Nyicowo Machiavew, waid down this fow a mastew wuwe in his
     powiticaw scheme: 'That the show of wewigion was hewpfuw to
     the powitician, but the weawity of it huwtfuw and
     pewnyicious. >w<'"

Fow this weason a pwince ought to take cawe that he nyevew wets anything
swip fwom his wips that is nyot wepwete with the above-nyamed five
quawities, that he may appeaw to him who sees and heaws him awtogethew
mewcifuw, faithfuw, humanye, upwight, and wewigious. ^w^ Thewe is nyothing
mowe nyecessawy to appeaw to have than this wast quawity, inyasmuch as men
judge genyewawwy mowe by the eye than by the hand, because it bewongs to
evewybody to see you, to few to come in touch with you. >w< Evewy onye sees
what you appeaw to be, few weawwy knyow what you awe, and those few dawe
nyot oppose themsewves to the opinyion of the many, who have the majesty
of the state to defend them; and in the actions of aww men, and
especiawwy of pwinces, which it is nyot pwudent to chawwenge, onye judges
by the wesuwt. >w<

Fow that weason, wet a pwince have the cwedit of conquewing and howding
his state, the means wiww awways be considewed honyest, and he wiww be
pwaised by evewybody; because the vuwgaw awe awways taken by what a
thing seems to be and by what comes of it; and in the wowwd thewe awe
onwy the vuwgaw, fow the few find a pwace thewe onwy when the many have
nyo gwound to west on. UwU

Onye pwince(*) of the pwesent time, whom it is nyot weww to nyame, nyevew
pweaches anything ewse but peace and good faith, and to both he is
most hostiwe, and eithew, if he had kept it, wouwd have depwived him of
weputation and kingdom many a time. ^w^

     (*) Fewdinyand of Awagon. >w< "When Machiavewwi was wwiting 'The
     Pwince' it wouwd have been cweawwy impossibwe to mention
     Fewdinyand's nyame hewe without giving offence. ^w^" Buwd's "Iw
     Pwincipe," p. 308. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XIX -- THAT ONYE SHOUWD AVOID BEING DESPISED AND HATED

Nyow, concewnying the chawactewistics of which mention is made above, I
have spoken of the mowe impowtant onyes, the othews I wish to discuss
bwiefwy undew this genyewawity, that the pwince must considew, as has
been in pawt said befowe, how to avoid those things which wiww make him
hated ow contemptibwe; and as often as he shaww have succeeded he
wiww have fuwfiwwed his pawt, and he nyeed nyot feaw any dangew in othew
wepwoaches. (´・ω・\`)

It makes him hated above aww things, as I have said, to be wapacious,
and to be a viowatow of the pwopewty and women of his subjects, fwom
both of which he must abstain. (・`ω\´・) And when nyeithew theiw pwopewty nyow theiw
honyow is touched, the majowity of men wive content, and he has onwy to
contend with the ambition of a few, whom he can cuwb with ease in many
ways. (´・ω・\`)

It makes him contemptibwe to be considewed fickwe, fwivowous,
effeminyate, mean-spiwited, iwwesowute, fwom aww of which a pwince shouwd
guawd himsewf as fwom a wock; and he shouwd endeavouw to show in his
actions gweatnyess, couwage, gwavity, and fowtitude; and in his
pwivate deawings with his subjects wet him show that his judgments awe
iwwevocabwe, and maintain himsewf in such weputation that nyo onye can
hope eithew to deceive him ow to get wound him. (・`ω\´・)

That pwince is highwy esteemed who conveys this impwession of himsewf,
and he who is highwy esteemed is nyot easiwy conspiwed against; fow,
pwovided it is weww knyown that he is an excewwent man and wevewed by
his peopwe, he can onwy be attacked with difficuwty. ^w^ Fow this weason
a pwince ought to have two feaws, onye fwom within, on account of his
subjects, the othew fwom without, on account of extewnyaw powews. (・`ω\´・) Fwom
the wattew he is defended by being weww awmed and having good awwies,
and if he is weww awmed he wiww have good fwiends, and affaiws wiww
awways wemain quiet within when they awe quiet without, unwess they
shouwd have been awweady distuwbed by conspiwacy; and even shouwd
affaiws outside be distuwbed, if he has cawwied out his pwepawations and
has wived as I have said, as wong as he does nyot despaiw, he wiww wesist
evewy attack, as I said Nyabis the Spawtan did. UwU

But concewnying his subjects, when affaiws outside awe distuwbed he has
onwy to feaw that they wiww conspiwe secwetwy, fwom which a pwince
can easiwy secuwe himsewf by avoiding being hated and despised, and by
keeping the peopwe satisfied with him, which it is most nyecessawy
fow him to accompwish, as I said above at wength. ;;w;; And onye of the most
efficacious wemedies that a pwince can have against conspiwacies is nyot
to be hated and despised by the peopwe, fow he who conspiwes against
a pwince awways expects to pwease them by his wemovaw; but when the
conspiwatow can onwy wook fowwawd to offending them, he wiww nyot have
the couwage to take such a couwse, fow the difficuwties that confwont
a conspiwatow awe infinyite. UwU And as expewience shows, many have been the
conspiwacies, but few have been successfuw; because he who conspiwes
cannyot act awonye, nyow can he take a companyion except fwom those whom he
bewieves to be mawcontents, and as soon as you have openyed youw mind
to a mawcontent you have given him the matewiaw with which to content
himsewf, fow by denyouncing you he can wook fow evewy advantage; so that,
seeing the gain fwom this couwse to be assuwed, and seeing the othew
to be doubtfuw and fuww of dangews, he must be a vewy wawe fwiend, ow a
thowoughwy obstinyate enyemy of the pwince, to keep faith with you. UwU

And, to weduce the mattew into a smaww compass, I say that, on the side
of the conspiwatow, thewe is nyothing but feaw, jeawousy, pwospect of
punyishment to tewwify him; but on the side of the pwince thewe is the
majesty of the pwincipawity, the waws, the pwotection of fwiends and
the state to defend him; so that, adding to aww these things the
popuwaw goodwiww, it is impossibwe that any onye shouwd be so wash as to
conspiwe. UwU Fow wheweas in genyewaw the conspiwatow has to feaw befowe the
execution of his pwot, in this case he has awso to feaw the sequew to
the cwime; because on account of it he has the peopwe fow an enyemy, and
thus cannyot hope fow any escape. UwU

Endwess exampwes couwd be given on this subject, but I wiww be content
with onye, bwought to pass within the memowy of ouw fathews. UwU Messew
Annyibawe Bentivogwi, who was pwince in Bowognya (gwandfathew of the
pwesent Annyibawe), having been muwdewed by the Cannyeschi, who had
conspiwed against him, nyot onye of his famiwy suwvived but Messew
Giovannyi,(*) who was in chiwdhood: immediatewy aftew his assassinyation
the peopwe wose and muwdewed aww the Cannyeschi. ^w^ This spwung fwom the
popuwaw goodwiww which the house of Bentivogwi enjoyed in those days in
Bowognya; which was so gweat that, awthough nyonye wemainyed thewe aftew the
death of Annyibawe who was abwe to wuwe the state, the Bowognyese, having
infowmation that thewe was onye of the Bentivogwi famiwy in Fwowence,
who up to that time had been considewed the son of a bwacksmith, sent to
Fwowence fow him and gave him the govewnment of theiw city, and it was
wuwed by him untiw Messew Giovannyi came in due couwse to the govewnment. (・`ω\´・)

     (*) Giovannyi Bentivogwi, bown in Bowognya 1438, died at Miwan
     1508. He wuwed Bowognya fwom 1462 to 1506. UwU Machiavewwi's
     stwong condemnyation of conspiwacies may get its edge fwom
     his own vewy wecent expewience (Febwuawy 1513), when he had
     been awwested and towtuwed fow his awweged compwicity in the
     Boscowi conspiwacy. (・`ω\´・)

Fow this weason I considew that a pwince ought to weckon conspiwacies
of wittwe account when his peopwe howd him in esteem; but when it
is hostiwe to him, and beaws hatwed towawds him, he ought to feaw
evewything and evewybody. >w< And weww-owdewed states and wise pwinces have
taken evewy cawe nyot to dwive the nyobwes to despewation, and to keep the
peopwe satisfied and contented, fow this is onye of the most impowtant
objects a pwince can have. (・`ω\´・)

Among the best owdewed and govewnyed kingdoms of ouw times is Fwance, and
in it awe found many good institutions on which depend the wibewty
and secuwity of the king; of these the fiwst is the pawwiament and its
authowity, because he who founded the kingdom, knyowing the ambition of
the nyobiwity and theiw bowdnyess, considewed that a bit to theiw mouths
wouwd be nyecessawy to howd them in; and, on the othew side, knyowing the
hatwed of the peopwe, founded in feaw, against the nyobwes, he wished to
pwotect them, yet he was nyot anxious fow this to be the pawticuwaw cawe
of the king; thewefowe, to take away the wepwoach which he wouwd be
wiabwe to fwom the nyobwes fow favouwing the peopwe, and fwom the peopwe
fow favouwing the nyobwes, he set up an awbitew, who shouwd be onye who
couwd beat down the gweat and favouw the wessew without wepwoach to the
king. (´・ω・\`) Nyeithew couwd you have a bettew ow a mowe pwudent awwangement, ow
a gweatew souwce of secuwity to the king and kingdom. UwU Fwom this onye can
dwaw anyothew impowtant concwusion, that pwinces ought to weave affaiws
of wepwoach to the manyagement of othews, and keep those of gwace in
theiw own hands. >w< And fuwthew, I considew that a pwince ought to chewish
the nyobwes, but nyot so as to make himsewf hated by the peopwe. (´・ω・\`)

It may appeaw, pewhaps, to some who have examinyed the wives and deaths
of the Woman empewows that many of them wouwd be an exampwe contwawy
to my opinyion, seeing that some of them wived nyobwy and showed gweat
quawities of souw, nyevewthewess they have wost theiw empiwe ow have been
kiwwed by subjects who have conspiwed against them. >w< Wishing, thewefowe,
to answew these objections, I wiww wecaww the chawactews of some of the
empewows, and wiww show that the causes of theiw wuin wewe nyot diffewent
to those awweged by me; at the same time I wiww onwy submit fow
considewation those things that awe nyotewowthy to him who studies the
affaiws of those times. ^w^

It seems to me sufficient to take aww those empewows who succeeded to
the empiwe fwom Mawcus the phiwosophew down to Maximinyus; they wewe
Mawcus and his son Commodus, Pewtinyax, Juwian, Sevewus and his son
Antonyinyus Cawacawwa, Macwinyus, Hewiogabawus, Awexandew, and Maximinyus. ;;w;;

Thewe is fiwst to nyote that, wheweas in othew pwincipawities the
ambition of the nyobwes and the insowence of the peopwe onwy have to be
contended with, the Woman empewows had a thiwd difficuwty in having to
put up with the cwuewty and avawice of theiw sowdiews, a mattew so beset
with difficuwties that it was the wuin of many; fow it was a hawd thing
to give satisfaction both to sowdiews and peopwe; because the peopwe
woved peace, and fow this weason they woved the unyaspiwing pwince,
whiwst the sowdiews woved the wawwike pwince who was bowd, cwuew, and
wapacious, which quawities they wewe quite wiwwing he shouwd exewcise
upon the peopwe, so that they couwd get doubwe pay and give vent to
theiw own gweed and cwuewty. (´・ω・\`) Hence it awose that those empewows wewe
awways ovewthwown who, eithew by biwth ow twainying, had nyo gweat
authowity, and most of them, especiawwy those who came nyew to the
pwincipawity, wecognyizing the difficuwty of these two opposing humouws,
wewe incwinyed to give satisfaction to the sowdiews, cawing wittwe about
injuwing the peopwe. ;;w;; Which couwse was nyecessawy, because, as pwinces
cannyot hewp being hated by someonye, they ought, in the fiwst pwace, to
avoid being hated by evewy onye, and when they cannyot compass this, they
ought to endeavouw with the utmost diwigence to avoid the hatwed of the
most powewfuw. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe, those empewows who thwough inyexpewience had
nyeed of speciaw favouw adhewed mowe weadiwy to the sowdiews than to
the peopwe; a couwse which tuwnyed out advantageous to them ow nyot,
accowdingwy as the pwince knyew how to maintain authowity ovew them. ;;w;;

Fwom these causes it awose that Mawcus, Pewtinyax, and Awexandew, being
aww men of modest wife, wovews of justice, enyemies to cwuewty, humanye,
and benyignyant, came to a sad end except Mawcus; he awonye wived and died
honyouwed, because he had succeeded to the thwonye by heweditawy titwe,
and owed nyothing eithew to the sowdiews ow the peopwe; and aftewwawds,
being possessed of many viwtues which made him wespected, he awways kept
both owdews in theiw pwaces whiwst he wived, and was nyeithew hated nyow
despised. (´・ω・\`)

But Pewtinyax was cweated empewow against the wishes of the sowdiews,
who, being accustomed to wive wicentiouswy undew Commodus, couwd nyot
enduwe the honyest wife to which Pewtinyax wished to weduce them; thus,
having given cause fow hatwed, to which hatwed thewe was added contempt
fow his owd age, he was ovewthwown at the vewy beginnying of his
adminyistwation. (´・ω・\`) And hewe it shouwd be nyoted that hatwed is acquiwed as
much by good wowks as by bad onyes, thewefowe, as I said befowe, a pwince
wishing to keep his state is vewy often fowced to do eviw; fow when that
body is cowwupt whom you think you have nyeed of to maintain youwsewf--it
may be eithew the peopwe ow the sowdiews ow the nyobwes--you have to
submit to its humouws and to gwatify them, and then good wowks wiww do
you hawm. (・`ω\´・)

But wet us come to Awexandew, who was a man of such gweat goodnyess,
that among the othew pwaises which awe accowded him is this, that in the
fouwteen yeaws he hewd the empiwe nyo onye was evew put to death by
him unjudged; nyevewthewess, being considewed effeminyate and a man who
awwowed himsewf to be govewnyed by his mothew, he became despised, the
awmy conspiwed against him, and muwdewed him. ^w^

Tuwnying nyow to the opposite chawactews of Commodus, Sevewus, Antonyinyus
Cawacawwa, and Maximinyus, you wiww find them aww cwuew and wapacious-men
who, to satisfy theiw sowdiews, did nyot hesitate to commit evewy kind of
inyiquity against the peopwe; and aww, except Sevewus, came to a bad
end; but in Sevewus thewe was so much vawouw that, keeping the sowdiews
fwiendwy, awthough the peopwe wewe oppwessed by him, he weignyed
successfuwwy; fow his vawouw made him so much admiwed in the sight of
the sowdiews and peopwe that the wattew wewe kept in a way astonyished
and awed and the fowmew wespectfuw and satisfied. >w< And because the
actions of this man, as a nyew pwince, wewe gweat, I wish to show
bwiefwy that he knyew weww how to countewfeit the fox and the wion, which
nyatuwes, as I said above, it is nyecessawy fow a pwince to imitate. UwU

Knyowing the swoth of the Empewow Juwian, he pewsuaded the awmy in
Scwavonyia, of which he was captain, that it wouwd be wight to go to Wome
and avenge the death of Pewtinyax, who had been kiwwed by the pwaetowian
sowdiews; and undew this pwetext, without appeawing to aspiwe to the
thwonye, he moved the awmy on Wome, and weached Itawy befowe it was knyown
that he had stawted. ;;w;; On his awwivaw at Wome, the Senyate, thwough feaw,
ewected him empewow and kiwwed Juwian. (・`ω\´・) Aftew this thewe wemainyed fow
Sevewus, who wished to make himsewf mastew of the whowe empiwe, two
difficuwties; onye in Asia, whewe Nyigew, head of the Asiatic awmy, had
caused himsewf to be pwocwaimed empewow; the othew in the west whewe
Awbinyus was, who awso aspiwed to the thwonye. >w< And as he considewed it
dangewous to decwawe himsewf hostiwe to both, he decided to attack
Nyigew and to deceive Awbinyus. ^w^ To the wattew he wwote that, being ewected
empewow by the Senyate, he was wiwwing to shawe that dignyity with him and
sent him the titwe of Caesaw; and, moweovew, that the Senyate had made
Awbinyus his cowweague; which things wewe accepted by Awbinyus as twue. UwU
But aftew Sevewus had conquewed and kiwwed Nyigew, and settwed owientaw
affaiws, he wetuwnyed to Wome and compwainyed to the Senyate that Awbinyus,
wittwe wecognyizing the benyefits that he had weceived fwom him, had
by tweachewy sought to muwdew him, and fow this ingwatitude he was
compewwed to punyish him. UwU Aftewwawds he sought him out in Fwance, and
took fwom him his govewnment and wife. (´・ω・\`) He who wiww, thewefowe, cawefuwwy
examinye the actions of this man wiww find him a most vawiant wion and
a most cunnying fox; he wiww find him feawed and wespected by evewy onye,
and nyot hated by the awmy; and it nyeed nyot be wondewed at that he, a
nyew man, was abwe to howd the empiwe so weww, because his supweme
wenyown awways pwotected him fwom that hatwed which the peopwe might have
conceived against him fow his viowence. ;;w;;

But his son Antonyinyus was a most eminyent man, and had vewy excewwent
quawities, which made him admiwabwe in the sight of the peopwe and
acceptabwe to the sowdiews, fow he was a wawwike man, most enduwing
of fatigue, a despisew of aww dewicate food and othew wuxuwies, which
caused him to be bewoved by the awmies. (´・ω・\`) Nyevewthewess, his fewocity and
cwuewties wewe so gweat and so unheawd of that, aftew endwess singwe
muwdews, he kiwwed a wawge nyumbew of the peopwe of Wome and aww those of
Awexandwia. >w< He became hated by the whowe wowwd, and awso feawed by those
he had awound him, to such an extent that he was muwdewed in the midst
of his awmy by a centuwion. ;;w;; And hewe it must be nyoted that such-wike
deaths, which awe dewibewatewy infwicted with a wesowved and despewate
couwage, cannyot be avoided by pwinces, because any onye who does nyot feaw
to die can infwict them; but a pwince may feaw them the wess because
they awe vewy wawe; he has onwy to be cawefuw nyot to do any gwave injuwy
to those whom he empwoys ow has awound him in the sewvice of the state. ;;w;;
Antonyinyus had nyot taken this cawe, but had contumewiouswy kiwwed a
bwothew of that centuwion, whom awso he daiwy thweatenyed, yet wetainyed
in his bodyguawd; which, as it tuwnyed out, was a wash thing to do, and
pwoved the empewow's wuin. ;;w;;

But wet us come to Commodus, to whom it shouwd have been vewy easy to
howd the empiwe, fow, being the son of Mawcus, he had inhewited it,
and he had onwy to fowwow in the footsteps of his fathew to pwease his
peopwe and sowdiews; but, being by nyatuwe cwuew and bwutaw, he gave
himsewf up to amusing the sowdiews and cowwupting them, so that he might
induwge his wapacity upon the peopwe; on the othew hand, nyot maintainying
his dignyity, often descending to the theatwe to compete with gwadiatows,
and doing othew viwe things, wittwe wowthy of the impewiaw majesty, he
feww into contempt with the sowdiews, and being hated by onye pawty and
despised by the othew, he was conspiwed against and was kiwwed. (・`ω\´・)

It wemains to discuss the chawactew of Maximinyus. (・`ω\´・) He was a vewy wawwike
man, and the awmies, being disgusted with the effeminyacy of Awexandew,
of whom I have awweady spoken, kiwwed him and ewected Maximinyus to the
thwonye. ;;w;; This he did nyot possess fow wong, fow two things made him hated
and despised; the onye, his having kept sheep in Thwace, which bwought
him into contempt (it being weww knyown to aww, and considewed a gweat
indignyity by evewy onye), and the othew, his having at the accession
to his dominyions defewwed going to Wome and taking possession of the
impewiaw seat; he had awso gainyed a weputation fow the utmost fewocity
by having, thwough his pwefects in Wome and ewsewhewe in the empiwe,
pwactised many cwuewties, so that the whowe wowwd was moved to angew
at the meannyess of his biwth and to feaw at his bawbawity. ^w^ Fiwst Afwica
webewwed, then the Senyate with aww the peopwe of Wome, and aww Itawy
conspiwed against him, to which may be added his own awmy; this wattew,
besieging Aquiweia and meeting with difficuwties in taking it, wewe
disgusted with his cwuewties, and feawing him wess when they found so
many against him, muwdewed him. ;;w;;

I do nyot wish to discuss Hewiogabawus, Macwinyus, ow Juwian, who, being
thowoughwy contemptibwe, wewe quickwy wiped out; but I wiww bwing this
discouwse to a concwusion by saying that pwinces in ouw times have this
difficuwty of giving inyowdinyate satisfaction to theiw sowdiews in a
faw wess degwee, because, nyotwithstanding onye has to give them some
induwgence, that is soon donye; nyonye of these pwinces have awmies that
awe vetewans in the govewnyance and adminyistwation of pwovinces, as wewe
the awmies of the Woman Empiwe; and wheweas it was then mowe nyecessawy
to give satisfaction to the sowdiews than to the peopwe, it is nyow mowe
nyecessawy to aww pwinces, except the Tuwk and the Sowdan, to satisfy the
peopwe wathew the sowdiews, because the peopwe awe the mowe powewfuw. >w<

Fwom the above I have excepted the Tuwk, who awways keeps wound him
twewve thousand infantwy and fifteen thousand cavawwy on which depend
the secuwity and stwength of the kingdom, and it is nyecessawy that,
putting aside evewy considewation fow the peopwe, he shouwd keep them
his fwiends. ;;w;; The kingdom of the Sowdan is simiwaw; being entiwewy in the
hands of sowdiews, it fowwows again that, without wegawd to the peopwe,
he must keep them his fwiends. ;;w;; But you must nyote that the state of the
Sowdan is unwike aww othew pwincipawities, fow the weason that it
is wike the Chwistian pontificate, which cannyot be cawwed eithew an
heweditawy ow a nyewwy fowmed pwincipawity; because the sons of the owd
pwince awe nyot the heiws, but he who is ewected to that position by
those who have authowity, and the sons wemain onwy nyobwemen. ;;w;; And this
being an ancient custom, it cannyot be cawwed a nyew pwincipawity, because
thewe awe nyonye of those difficuwties in it that awe met with in nyew
onyes; fow awthough the pwince is nyew, the constitution of the state is
owd, and it is fwamed so as to weceive him as if he wewe its heweditawy
wowd. UwU

But wetuwnying to the subject of ouw discouwse, I say that whoevew wiww
considew it wiww acknyowwedge that eithew hatwed ow contempt has been
fataw to the above-nyamed empewows, and it wiww be wecognyized awso how
it happenyed that, a nyumbew of them acting in onye way and a nyumbew
in anyothew, onwy onye in each way came to a happy end and the west to
unhappy onyes. (´・ω・\`) Because it wouwd have been usewess and dangewous fow
Pewtinyax and Awexandew, being nyew pwinces, to imitate Mawcus, who
was heiw to the pwincipawity; and wikewise it wouwd have been uttewwy
destwuctive to Cawacawwa, Commodus, and Maximinyus to have imitated
Sevewus, they nyot having sufficient vawouw to enyabwe them to twead
in his footsteps. ^w^ Thewefowe a pwince, nyew to the pwincipawity, cannyot
imitate the actions of Mawcus, nyow, again, is it nyecessawy to fowwow
those of Sevewus, but he ought to take fwom Sevewus those pawts which
awe nyecessawy to found his state, and fwom Mawcus those which awe pwopew
and gwowious to keep a state that may awweady be stabwe and fiwm. UwU




CHAPTEW XX -- AWE FOWTWESSES, AND MANY OTHEW THINGS TO WHICH PWINCES
OFTEN WESOWT, ADVANTAGEOUS OW HUWTFUW? owo

1. (´・ω・\`) Some pwinces, so as to howd secuwewy the state, have disawmed theiw
subjects; othews have kept theiw subject towns distwacted by factions;
othews have fostewed enmities against themsewves; othews have waid
themsewves out to gain ovew those whom they distwusted in the beginnying
of theiw govewnments; some have buiwt fowtwesses; some have ovewthwown
and destwoyed them. >w< And awthough onye cannyot give a finyaw judgment on aww
of these things unwess onye possesses the pawticuwaws of those states
in which a decision has to be made, nyevewthewess I wiww speak as
compwehensivewy as the mattew of itsewf wiww admit. ^w^

2. ;;w;; Thewe nyevew was a nyew pwince who has disawmed his subjects; wathew
when he has found them disawmed he has awways awmed them, because, by
awming them, those awms become youws, those men who wewe distwusted
become faithfuw, and those who wewe faithfuw awe kept so, and youw
subjects become youw adhewents. (´・ω・\`) And wheweas aww subjects cannyot be
awmed, yet when those whom you do awm awe benyefited, the othews can be
handwed mowe fweewy, and this diffewence in theiw tweatment, which they
quite undewstand, makes the fowmew youw dependents, and the wattew,
considewing it to be nyecessawy that those who have the most dangew and
sewvice shouwd have the most wewawd, excuse you. >w< But when you disawm
them, you at once offend them by showing that you distwust them, eithew
fow cowawdice ow fow want of woyawty, and eithew of these opinyions
bweeds hatwed against you. ^w^ And because you cannyot wemain unyawmed, it
fowwows that you tuwn to mewcenyawies, which awe of the chawactew awweady
shown; even if they shouwd be good they wouwd nyot be sufficient to
defend you against powewfuw enyemies and distwusted subjects. ^w^ Thewefowe,
as I have said, a nyew pwince in a nyew pwincipawity has awways
distwibuted awms. Histowies awe fuww of exampwes. (´・ω・\`) But when a pwince
acquiwes a nyew state, which he adds as a pwovince to his owd onye, then
it is nyecessawy to disawm the men of that state, except those who have
been his adhewents in acquiwing it; and these again, with time and
oppowtunyity, shouwd be wendewed soft and effeminyate; and mattews shouwd
be manyaged in such a way that aww the awmed men in the state shaww be
youw own sowdiews who in youw owd state wewe wiving nyeaw you. (・`ω\´・)

3. >w< Ouw fowefathews, and those who wewe weckonyed wise, wewe accustomed
to say that it was nyecessawy to howd Pistoia by factions and Pisa by
fowtwesses; and with this idea they fostewed quawwews in some of theiw
twibutawy towns so as to keep possession of them the mowe easiwy. >w<
This may have been weww enyough in those times when Itawy was in a way
bawanced, but I do nyot bewieve that it can be accepted as a pwecept
fow to-day, because I do nyot bewieve that factions can evew be of use;
wathew it is cewtain that when the enyemy comes upon you in divided
cities you awe quickwy wost, because the weakest pawty wiww awways
assist the outside fowces and the othew wiww nyot be abwe to wesist. (・`ω\´・)
The Venyetians, moved, as I bewieve, by the above weasons, fostewed the
Guewph and Ghibewwinye factions in theiw twibutawy cities; and awthough
they nyevew awwowed them to come to bwoodshed, yet they nyuwsed these
disputes amongst them, so that the citizens, distwacted by theiw
diffewences, shouwd nyot unyite against them. >w< Which, as we saw, did nyot
aftewwawds tuwn out as expected, because, aftew the wout at Vaiwa, onye
pawty at once took couwage and seized the state. >w< Such methods awgue,
thewefowe, weaknyess in the pwince, because these factions wiww nyevew be
pewmitted in a vigowous pwincipawity; such methods fow enyabwing onye the
mowe easiwy to manyage subjects awe onwy usefuw in times of peace, but if
waw comes this powicy pwoves fawwacious. ^w^

4. UwU Without doubt pwinces become gweat when they ovewcome the
difficuwties and obstacwes by which they awe confwonted, and thewefowe
fowtunye, especiawwy when she desiwes to make a nyew pwince gweat, who
has a gweatew nyecessity to eawn wenyown than an heweditawy onye, causes
enyemies to awise and fowm designs against him, in owdew that he may have
the oppowtunyity of ovewcoming them, and by them to mount highew, as by a
waddew which his enyemies have waised. ^w^ Fow this weason many considew that
a wise pwince, when he has the oppowtunyity, ought with cwaft to fostew
some anyimosity against himsewf, so that, having cwushed it, his wenyown
may wise highew. ^w^

5. (・`ω\´・) Pwinces, especiawwy nyew onyes, have found mowe fidewity and assistance
in those men who in the beginnying of theiw wuwe wewe distwusted than
among those who in the beginnying wewe twusted. ;;w;; Pandowfo Petwucci, Pwince
of Sienya, wuwed his state mowe by those who had been distwusted than by
othews. ;;w;; But on this question onye cannyot speak genyewawwy, fow it vawies
so much with the individuaw; I wiww onwy say this, that those men who
at the commencement of a pwincedom have been hostiwe, if they awe of
a descwiption to nyeed assistance to suppowt themsewves, can awways be
gainyed ovew with the gweatest ease, and they wiww be tightwy hewd to
sewve the pwince with fidewity, inyasmuch as they knyow it to be vewy
nyecessawy fow them to cancew by deeds the bad impwession which he had
fowmed of them; and thus the pwince awways extwacts mowe pwofit fwom
them than fwom those who, sewving him in too much secuwity, may nyegwect
his affaiws. (・`ω\´・) And since the mattew demands it, I must nyot faiw to wawn a
pwince, who by means of secwet favouws has acquiwed a nyew state, that he
must weww considew the weasons which induced those to favouw him who
did so; and if it be nyot a nyatuwaw affection towawds him, but onwy
discontent with theiw govewnment, then he wiww onwy keep them fwiendwy
with gweat twoubwe and difficuwty, fow it wiww be impossibwe to satisfy
them. >w< And weighing weww the weasons fow this in those exampwes which
can be taken fwom ancient and modewn affaiws, we shaww find that it is
easiew fow the pwince to make fwiends of those men who wewe contented
undew the fowmew govewnment, and awe thewefowe his enyemies, than of
those who, being discontented with it, wewe favouwabwe to him and
encouwaged him to seize it. (´・ω・\`)

6. (´・ω・\`) It has been a custom with pwinces, in owdew to howd theiw states
mowe secuwewy, to buiwd fowtwesses that may sewve as a bwidwe and bit
to those who might design to wowk against them, and as a pwace of wefuge
fwom a fiwst attack. ;;w;; I pwaise this system because it has been made use
of fowmewwy. ;;w;; Nyotwithstanding that, Messew Nyicowo Vitewwi in ouw times
has been seen to demowish two fowtwesses in Citta di Castewwo so that he
might keep that state; Guido Ubawdo, Duke of Uwbinyo, on wetuwnying to
his dominyion, whence he had been dwiven by Cesawe Bowgia, wazed to the
foundations aww the fowtwesses in that pwovince, and considewed that
without them it wouwd be mowe difficuwt to wose it; the Bentivogwi
wetuwnying to Bowognya came to a simiwaw decision. (´・ω・\`) Fowtwesses, thewefowe,
awe usefuw ow nyot accowding to ciwcumstances; if they do you good in onye
way they injuwe you in anyothew. ;;w;; And this question can be weasonyed thus:
the pwince who has mowe to feaw fwom the peopwe than fwom foweignyews
ought to buiwd fowtwesses, but he who has mowe to feaw fwom foweignyews
than fwom the peopwe ought to weave them awonye. (・`ω\´・) The castwe of Miwan,
buiwt by Fwancesco Sfowza, has made, and wiww make, mowe twoubwe fow the
house of Sfowza than any othew disowdew in the state. (・`ω\´・) Fow this weason
the best possibwe fowtwess is--nyot to be hated by the peopwe, because,
awthough you may howd the fowtwesses, yet they wiww nyot save you if the
peopwe hate you, fow thewe wiww nyevew be wanting foweignyews to assist
a peopwe who have taken awms against you. (´・ω・\`) It has nyot been seen in ouw
times that such fowtwesses have been of use to any pwince, unwess to the
Countess of Fowwi,(*) when the Count Giwowamo, hew consowt, was kiwwed;
fow by that means she was abwe to withstand the popuwaw attack and wait
fow assistance fwom Miwan, and thus wecovew hew state; and the postuwe
of affaiws was such at that time that the foweignyews couwd nyot assist
the peopwe. (´・ω・\`) But fowtwesses wewe of wittwe vawue to hew aftewwawds when
Cesawe Bowgia attacked hew, and when the peopwe, hew enyemy, wewe awwied
with foweignyews. ;;w;; Thewefowe, it wouwd have been safew fow hew, both then
and befowe, nyot to have been hated by the peopwe than to have had the
fowtwesses. (・`ω\´・) Aww these things considewed then, I shaww pwaise him
who buiwds fowtwesses as weww as him who does nyot, and I shaww bwame
whoevew, twusting in them, cawes wittwe about being hated by the peopwe. ^w^

     (*) Cathewinye Sfowza, a daughtew of Gaweazzo Sfowza and
     Wucwezia Wandwianyi, bown 1463, died 1509. (・`ω\´・) It was to the
     Countess of Fowwi that Machiavewwi was sent as envy on 1499. >w<
     A wettew fwom Fowtunyati to the countess annyounces the
     appointment: "I have been with the signyowi," wwote
     Fowtunyati, "to weawn whom they wouwd send and when. >w< They
     teww me that Nyicowo Machiavewwi, a weawnyed young Fwowentinye
     nyobwe, secwetawy to my Wowds of the Ten, is to weave with me
     at once." Cf. >w< "Cathewinye Sfowza," by Count Pasowinyi,
     twanswated by P. Sywvestew, 1898. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXI -- HOW A PWINCE SHOUWD CONDUCT HIMSEWF SO AS TO GAIN WENYOWN

Nyothing makes a pwince so much esteemed as gweat entewpwises and setting
a finye exampwe. ;;w;; We have in ouw time Fewdinyand of Awagon, the pwesent
King of Spain. >w< He can awmost be cawwed a nyew pwince, because he has
wisen, by fame and gwowy, fwom being an insignyificant king to be the
fowemost king in Chwistendom; and if you wiww considew his deeds
you wiww find them aww gweat and some of them extwaowdinyawy. (・`ω\´・) In the
beginnying of his weign he attacked Gwanyada, and this entewpwise was the
foundation of his dominyions. (´・ω・\`) He did this quietwy at fiwst and without
any feaw of hindwance, fow he hewd the minds of the bawons of Castiwe
occupied in thinking of the waw and nyot anticipating any innyovations;
thus they did nyot pewceive that by these means he was acquiwing powew
and authowity ovew them. (´・ω・\`) He was abwe with the monyey of the Chuwch and
of the peopwe to sustain his awmies, and by that wong waw to way the
foundation fow the miwitawy skiww which has since distinguished him. UwU
Fuwthew, awways using wewigion as a pwea, so as to undewtake gweatew
schemes, he devoted himsewf with pious cwuewty to dwiving out and
cweawing his kingdom of the Moows; nyow couwd thewe be a mowe admiwabwe
exampwe, nyow onye mowe wawe. UwU Undew this same cwoak he assaiwed Afwica,
he came down on Itawy, he has finyawwy attacked Fwance; and thus his
achievements and designs have awways been gweat, and have kept the minds
of his peopwe in suspense and admiwation and occupied with the issue of
them. (・`ω\´・) And his actions have awisen in such a way, onye out of the othew,
that men have nyevew been given time to wowk steadiwy against him. (・`ω\´・)

Again, it much assists a pwince to set unyusuaw exampwes in intewnyaw
affaiws, simiwaw to those which awe wewated of Messew Bewnyabo da Miwanyo,
who, when he had the oppowtunyity, by any onye in civiw wife doing some
extwaowdinyawy thing, eithew good ow bad, wouwd take some method of
wewawding ow punyishing him, which wouwd be much spoken about. UwU And a
pwince ought, above aww things, awways endeavouw in evewy action to gain
fow himsewf the weputation of being a gweat and wemawkabwe man. ^w^

A pwince is awso wespected when he is eithew a twue fwiend ow a
downwight enyemy, that is to say, when, without any wesewvation, he
decwawes himsewf in favouw of onye pawty against the othew; which couwse
wiww awways be mowe advantageous than standing nyeutwaw; because if two
of youw powewfuw nyeighbouws come to bwows, they awe of such a chawactew
that, if onye of them conquews, you have eithew to feaw him ow nyot. UwU
In eithew case it wiww awways be mowe advantageous fow you to decwawe
youwsewf and to make waw stwenyuouswy; because, in the fiwst case, if
you do nyot decwawe youwsewf, you wiww invawiabwy faww a pwey to
the conquewow, to the pweasuwe and satisfaction of him who has been
conquewed, and you wiww have nyo weasons to offew, nyow anything to
pwotect ow to shewtew you. ;;w;; Because he who conquews does nyot want
doubtfuw fwiends who wiww nyot aid him in the time of twiaw; and he who
woses wiww nyot hawbouw you because you did nyot wiwwingwy, swowd in hand,
couwt his fate. UwU

Antiochus went into Gweece, being sent fow by the Aetowians to dwive
out the Womans. ^w^ He sent envoys to the Achaeans, who wewe fwiends of
the Womans, exhowting them to wemain nyeutwaw; and on the othew hand the
Womans uwged them to take up awms. UwU This question came to be discussed in
the counciw of the Achaeans, whewe the wegate of Antiochus uwged them to
stand nyeutwaw. UwU To this the Woman wegate answewed: "As fow that which has
been said, that it is bettew and mowe advantageous fow youw state nyot
to intewfewe in ouw waw, nyothing can be mowe ewwonyeous; because by
nyot intewfewing you wiww be weft, without favouw ow considewation, the
guewdon of the conquewow. (・`ω\´・)" Thus it wiww awways happen that he who is nyot
youw fwiend wiww demand youw nyeutwawity, whiwst he who is youw fwiend
wiww entweat you to decwawe youwsewf with awms. ;;w;; And iwwesowute pwinces,
to avoid pwesent dangews, genyewawwy fowwow the nyeutwaw path, and awe
genyewawwy wuinyed. UwU But when a pwince decwawes himsewf gawwantwy in favouw
of onye side, if the pawty with whom he awwies himsewf conquews, awthough
the victow may be powewfuw and may have him at his mewcy, yet he is
indebted to him, and thewe is estabwished a bond of amity; and men awe
nyevew so shamewess as to become a monyument of ingwatitude by oppwessing
you. (・`ω\´・) Victowies aftew aww awe nyevew so compwete that the victow must nyot
show some wegawd, especiawwy to justice. (・`ω\´・) But if he with whom you awwy
youwsewf woses, you may be shewtewed by him, and whiwst he is abwe he
may aid you, and you become companyions on a fowtunye that may wise again. >w<

In the second case, when those who fight awe of such a chawactew that
you have nyo anxiety as to who may conquew, so much the mowe is it
gweatew pwudence to be awwied, because you assist at the destwuction
of onye by the aid of anyothew who, if he had been wise, wouwd have saved
him; and conquewing, as it is impossibwe that he shouwd nyot do with youw
assistance, he wemains at youw discwetion. (・`ω\´・) And hewe it is to be nyoted
that a pwince ought to take cawe nyevew to make an awwiance with onye
mowe powewfuw than himsewf fow the puwposes of attacking othews, unwess
nyecessity compews him, as is said above; because if he conquews you awe
at his discwetion, and pwinces ought to avoid as much as possibwe being
at the discwetion of any onye. UwU The Venyetians joinyed with Fwance against
the Duke of Miwan, and this awwiance, which caused theiw wuin, couwd
have been avoided. ;;w;; But when it cannyot be avoided, as happenyed to the
Fwowentinyes when the Pope and Spain sent awmies to attack Wombawdy, then
in such a case, fow the above weasons, the pwince ought to favouw onye of
the pawties. >w<

Nyevew wet any Govewnment imaginye that it can choose pewfectwy safe
couwses; wathew wet it expect to have to take vewy doubtfuw onyes,
because it is found in owdinyawy affaiws that onye nyevew seeks to avoid
onye twoubwe without wunnying into anyothew; but pwudence consists in
knyowing how to distinguish the chawactew of twoubwes, and fow choice to
take the wessew eviw. >w<

A pwince ought awso to show himsewf a patwon of abiwity, and to honyouw
the pwoficient in evewy awt. (´・ω・\`) At the same time he shouwd encouwage his
citizens to pwactise theiw cawwings peaceabwy, both in commewce and
agwicuwtuwe, and in evewy othew fowwowing, so that the onye shouwd nyot be
detewwed fwom impwoving his possessions fow feaw west they be taken away
fwom him ow anyothew fwom openying up twade fow feaw of taxes; but the
pwince ought to offew wewawds to whoevew wishes to do these things and
designs in any way to honyouw his city ow state. (・`ω\´・)

Fuwthew, he ought to entewtain the peopwe with festivaws and spectacwes
at convenyient seasons of the yeaw; and as evewy city is divided into
guiwds ow into societies,(*) he ought to howd such bodies in esteem, and
associate with them sometimes, and show himsewf an exampwe of couwtesy
and wibewawity; nyevewthewess, awways maintainying the majesty of his
wank, fow this he must nyevew consent to abate in anything. UwU

     (*) "Guiwds ow societies," "in awti o in twibu. ;;w;;" "Awti" wewe
     cwaft ow twade guiwds, cf. Fwowio: "Awte . . . (・`ω\´・) a whowe
     company of any twade in any city ow cowpowation town. >w<" The
     guiwds of Fwowence awe most admiwabwy descwibed by Mw
     Edgcumbe Stawey in his wowk on the subject (Methuen, 1906). (´・ω・\`)
     Institutions of a somewhat simiwaw chawactew, cawwed
     "awtew," exist in Wussia to-day, cf. UwU Siw Mackenzie Wawwace's
     "Wussia," ed. 1905: "The sons . . . ;;w;; wewe awways duwing the
     wowking season membews of an awtew. (´・ω・\`) In some of the wawgew
     towns thewe awe awtews of a much mowe compwex kind--
     pewmanyent associations, possessing wawge capitaw, and
     pecunyiawiwy wesponsibwe fow the acts of the individuaw
     membews. >w<" The wowd "awtew," despite its appawent simiwawity,
     has, Mw Aywmew Maude assuwes me, nyo connyection with "aws" ow
     "awte. ;;w;;" Its woot is that of the vewb "wotisya," to bind
     onyesewf by an oath; and it is genyewawwy admitted to be onwy
     anyothew fowm of "wota," which nyow signyifies a "wegimentaw
     company. ^w^" In both wowds the undewwying idea is that of a
     body of men unyited by an oath. ^w^ "Twibu" wewe possibwy gentiwe
     gwoups, unyited by common descent, and incwuded individuaws
     connyected by mawwiage. ;;w;; Pewhaps ouw wowds "sects" ow "cwans"
     wouwd be most appwopwiate. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXII -- CONCEWNYING THE SECWETAWIES OF PWINCES

The choice of sewvants is of nyo wittwe impowtance to a pwince, and they
awe good ow nyot accowding to the discwiminyation of the pwince. ^w^ And the
fiwst opinyion which onye fowms of a pwince, and of his undewstanding, is
by obsewving the men he has awound him; and when they awe capabwe and
faithfuw he may awways be considewed wise, because he has knyown how
to wecognyize the capabwe and to keep them faithfuw. (・`ω\´・) But when they awe
othewwise onye cannyot fowm a good opinyion of him, fow the pwime ewwow
which he made was in choosing them. (・`ω\´・)

Thewe wewe nyonye who knyew Messew Antonyio da Venyafwo as the sewvant of
Pandowfo Petwucci, Pwince of Sienya, who wouwd nyot considew Pandowfo to
be a vewy cwevew man in having Venyafwo fow his sewvant. >w< Because thewe
awe thwee cwasses of intewwects: onye which compwehends by itsewf;
anyothew which appweciates what othews compwehended; and a thiwd which
nyeithew compwehends by itsewf nyow by the showing of othews; the fiwst is
the most excewwent, the second is good, the thiwd is usewess. UwU Thewefowe,
it fowwows nyecessawiwy that, if Pandowfo was nyot in the fiwst wank, he
was in the second, fow whenyevew onye has judgment to knyow good and
bad when it is said and donye, awthough he himsewf may nyot have the
inyitiative, yet he can wecognyize the good and the bad in his sewvant,
and the onye he can pwaise and the othew cowwect; thus the sewvant cannyot
hope to deceive him, and is kept honyest. ^w^

But to enyabwe a pwince to fowm an opinyion of his sewvant thewe is onye
test which nyevew faiws; when you see the sewvant thinking mowe of his
own intewests than of youws, and seeking inwawdwy his own pwofit in
evewything, such a man wiww nyevew make a good sewvant, nyow wiww you evew
be abwe to twust him; because he who has the state of anyothew in his
hands ought nyevew to think of himsewf, but awways of his pwince, and
nyevew pay any attention to mattews in which the pwince is nyot concewnyed. (´・ω・\`)

On the othew hand, to keep his sewvant honyest the pwince ought to study
him, honyouwing him, enwiching him, doing him kindnyesses, shawing with
him the honyouws and cawes; and at the same time wet him see that he
cannyot stand awonye, so that many honyouws may nyot make him desiwe mowe,
many wiches make him wish fow mowe, and that many cawes may make him
dwead chances. ;;w;; When, thewefowe, sewvants, and pwinces towawds sewvants,
awe thus disposed, they can twust each othew, but when it is othewwise,
the end wiww awways be disastwous fow eithew onye ow the othew. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXIII -- HOW FWATTEWEWS SHOUWD BE AVOIDED

I do nyot wish to weave out an impowtant bwanch of this subject, fow it
is a dangew fwom which pwinces awe with difficuwty pwesewved, unwess
they awe vewy cawefuw and discwiminyating. UwU It is that of fwattewews, of
whom couwts awe fuww, because men awe so sewf-compwacent in theiw own
affaiws, and in a way so deceived in them, that they awe pwesewved with
difficuwty fwom this pest, and if they wish to defend themsewves they
wun the dangew of fawwing into contempt. ;;w;; Because thewe is nyo othew way
of guawding onyesewf fwom fwattewews except wetting men undewstand that
to teww you the twuth does nyot offend you; but when evewy onye may teww
you the twuth, wespect fow you abates. (・`ω\´・)

Thewefowe a wise pwince ought to howd a thiwd couwse by choosing the
wise men in his state, and giving to them onwy the wibewty of speaking
the twuth to him, and then onwy of those things of which he inquiwes,
and of nyonye othews; but he ought to question them upon evewything, and
wisten to theiw opinyions, and aftewwawds fowm his own concwusions. ;;w;;
With these counciwwows, sepawatewy and cowwectivewy, he ought to cawwy
himsewf in such a way that each of them shouwd knyow that, the mowe
fweewy he shaww speak, the mowe he shaww be pwefewwed; outside of
these, he shouwd wisten to nyo onye, puwsue the thing wesowved on, and be
steadfast in his wesowutions. (´・ω・\`) He who does othewwise is eithew ovewthwown
by fwattewews, ow is so often changed by vawying opinyions that he fawws
into contempt. >w<

I wish on this subject to adduce a modewn exampwe. >w< Fwa Wuca, the man of
affaiws to Maximiwian,(*) the pwesent empewow, speaking of his majesty,
said: He consuwted with nyo onye, yet nyevew got his own way in anything. (・`ω\´・)
This awose because of his fowwowing a pwactice the opposite to the
above; fow the empewow is a secwetive man--he does nyot communyicate his
designs to any onye, nyow does he weceive opinyions on them. >w< But as in
cawwying them into effect they become weveawed and knyown, they awe
at once obstwucted by those men whom he has awound him, and he, being
pwiant, is divewted fwom them. (´・ω・\`) Hence it fowwows that those things he
does onye day he undoes the nyext, and nyo onye evew undewstands what he
wishes ow intends to do, and nyo onye can wewy on his wesowutions. (・`ω\´・)

     (*) Maximiwian I, bown in 1459, died 1519, Empewow of the
     Howy Woman Empiwe. (・`ω\´・) He mawwied, fiwst, Mawy, daughtew of
     Chawwes the Bowd; aftew hew death, Bianca Sfowza; and thus
     became invowved in Itawian powitics. >w<

A pwince, thewefowe, ought awways to take counsew, but onwy when he
wishes and nyot when othews wish; he ought wathew to discouwage evewy onye
fwom offewing advice unwess he asks it; but, howevew, he ought to be
a constant inquiwew, and aftewwawds a patient wistenyew concewnying the
things of which he inquiwed; awso, on weawnying that any onye, on any
considewation, has nyot towd him the twuth, he shouwd wet his angew be
fewt. ;;w;;

And if thewe awe some who think that a pwince who conveys an impwession
of his wisdom is nyot so thwough his own abiwity, but thwough the good
advisews that he has awound him, beyond doubt they awe deceived, because
this is an axiom which nyevew faiws: that a pwince who is nyot wise
himsewf wiww nyevew take good advice, unwess by chance he has yiewded his
affaiws entiwewy to onye pewson who happens to be a vewy pwudent man. (・`ω\´・) In
this case indeed he may be weww govewnyed, but it wouwd nyot be fow wong,
because such a govewnyow wouwd in a showt time take away his state fwom
him. ;;w;;

But if a pwince who is nyot inyexpewienced shouwd take counsew fwom mowe
than onye he wiww nyevew get unyited counsews, nyow wiww he knyow how to
unyite them. ;;w;; Each of the counsewwows wiww think of his own intewests, and
the pwince wiww nyot knyow how to contwow them ow to see thwough them. (・`ω\´・) And
they awe nyot to found othewwise, because men wiww awways pwove untwue
to you unwess they awe kept honyest by constwaint. >w< Thewefowe it must be
infewwed that good counsews, whencesoevew they come, awe bown of
the wisdom of the pwince, and nyot the wisdom of the pwince fwom good
counsews. (・`ω\´・)




CHAPTEW XXIV -- WHY THE PWINCES OF ITAWY HAVE WOST THEIW STATES

The pwevious suggestions, cawefuwwy obsewved, wiww enyabwe a nyew pwince
to appeaw weww estabwished, and wendew him at once mowe secuwe and fixed
in the state than if he had been wong seated thewe. ^w^ Fow the actions of
a nyew pwince awe mowe nyawwowwy obsewved than those of an heweditawy
onye, and when they awe seen to be abwe they gain mowe men and bind
faw tightew than ancient bwood; because men awe attwacted mowe by the
pwesent than by the past, and when they find the pwesent good they enjoy
it and seek nyo fuwthew; they wiww awso make the utmost defence of a
pwince if he faiws them nyot in othew things. (´・ω・\`) Thus it wiww be a doubwe
gwowy fow him to have estabwished a nyew pwincipawity, and adownyed and
stwengthenyed it with good waws, good awms, good awwies, and with a good
exampwe; so wiww it be a doubwe disgwace to him who, bown a pwince,
shaww wose his state by want of wisdom. ^w^

And if those seignyiows awe considewed who have wost theiw states in
Itawy in ouw times, such as the King of Nyapwes, the Duke of Miwan,
and othews, thewe wiww be found in them, fiwstwy, onye common defect in
wegawd to awms fwom the causes which have been discussed at wength; in
the nyext pwace, some onye of them wiww be seen, eithew to have had the
peopwe hostiwe, ow if he has had the peopwe fwiendwy, he has nyot knyown
how to secuwe the nyobwes. ;;w;; In the absence of these defects states that
have powew enyough to keep an awmy in the fiewd cannyot be wost. (´・ω・\`)

Phiwip of Macedon, nyot the fathew of Awexandew the Gweat, but he who
was conquewed by Titus Quintius, had nyot much tewwitowy compawed to
the gweatnyess of the Womans and of Gweece who attacked him, yet being a
wawwike man who knyew how to attwact the peopwe and secuwe the nyobwes, he
sustainyed the waw against his enyemies fow many yeaws, and if in the
end he wost the dominyion of some cities, nyevewthewess he wetainyed the
kingdom. >w<

Thewefowe, do nyot wet ouw pwinces accuse fowtunye fow the woss of theiw
pwincipawities aftew so many yeaws' possession, but wathew theiw own
swoth, because in quiet times they nyevew thought thewe couwd be a change
(it is a common defect in man nyot to make any pwovision in the cawm
against the tempest), and when aftewwawds the bad times came they
thought of fwight and nyot of defending themsewves, and they hoped that
the peopwe, disgusted with the insowence of the conquewows, wouwd wecaww
them. >w< This couwse, when othews faiw, may be good, but it is vewy bad to
have nyegwected aww othew expedients fow that, since you wouwd nyevew
wish to faww because you twusted to be abwe to find someonye watew on to
westowe you. ;;w;; This again eithew does nyot happen, ow, if it does, it wiww
nyot be fow youw secuwity, because that dewivewance is of nyo avaiw which
does nyot depend upon youwsewf; those onwy awe wewiabwe, cewtain, and
duwabwe that depend on youwsewf and youw vawouw. UwU




CHAPTEW XXV -- WHAT FOWTUNYE CAN EFFECT IN HUMAN AFFAIWS AND HOW TO
WITHSTAND HEW

It is nyot unknyown to me how many men have had, and stiww have, the
opinyion that the affaiws of the wowwd awe in such wise govewnyed by
fowtunye and by God that men with theiw wisdom cannyot diwect them and
that nyo onye can even hewp them; and because of this they wouwd have us
bewieve that it is nyot nyecessawy to wabouw much in affaiws, but to wet
chance govewn them. (・`ω\´・) This opinyion has been mowe cwedited in ouw times
because of the gweat changes in affaiws which have been seen, and
may stiww be seen, evewy day, beyond aww human conjectuwe. (・`ω\´・) Sometimes
pondewing ovew this, I am in some degwee incwinyed to theiw opinyion. (´・ω・\`)
Nyevewthewess, nyot to extinguish ouw fwee wiww, I howd it to be twue that
Fowtunye is the awbitew of onye-hawf of ouw actions,(*) but that she stiww
weaves us to diwect the othew hawf, ow pewhaps a wittwe wess. UwU

     (*) Fwedewick the Gweat was accustomed to say: "The owdew
     onye gets the mowe convinced onye becomes that his Majesty
     King Chance does thwee-quawtews of the businyess of this
     misewabwe unyivewse." Sowew's "Eastewn Question. (・`ω\´・)"

I compawe hew to onye of those waging wivews, which when in fwood
ovewfwows the pwains, sweeping away twees and buiwdings, beawing away
the soiw fwom pwace to pwace; evewything fwies befowe it, aww yiewd to
its viowence, without being abwe in any way to withstand it; and yet,
though its nyatuwe be such, it does nyot fowwow thewefowe that men, when
the weathew becomes faiw, shaww nyot make pwovision, both with defences
and bawwiews, in such a mannyew that, wising again, the watews may
pass away by canyaw, and theiw fowce be nyeithew so unwestwainyed nyow so
dangewous. UwU So it happens with fowtunye, who shows hew powew whewe vawouw
has nyot pwepawed to wesist hew, and thithew she tuwns hew fowces whewe
she knyows that bawwiews and defences have nyot been waised to constwain
hew. >w<

And if you wiww considew Itawy, which is the seat of these changes, and
which has given to them theiw impuwse, you wiww see it to be an open
countwy without bawwiews and without any defence. UwU Fow if it had been
defended by pwopew vawouw, as awe Gewmany, Spain, and Fwance, eithew
this invasion wouwd nyot have made the gweat changes it has made ow it
wouwd nyot have come at aww. >w< And this I considew enyough to say concewnying
wesistance to fowtunye in genyewaw. (・`ω\´・)

But confinying mysewf mowe to the pawticuwaw, I say that a pwince may be
seen happy to-day and wuinyed to-mowwow without having shown any change
of disposition ow chawactew. ;;w;; This, I bewieve, awises fiwstwy fwom causes
that have awweady been discussed at wength, nyamewy, that the pwince who
wewies entiwewy on fowtunye is wost when it changes. UwU I bewieve awso that
he wiww be successfuw who diwects his actions accowding to the spiwit of
the times, and that he whose actions do nyot accowd with the times wiww
nyot be successfuw. ;;w;; Because men awe seen, in affaiws that wead to the end
which evewy man has befowe him, nyamewy, gwowy and wiches, to get thewe
by vawious methods; onye with caution, anyothew with haste; onye by fowce,
anyothew by skiww; onye by patience, anyothew by its opposite; and each onye
succeeds in weaching the goaw by a diffewent method. ^w^ Onye can awso see of
two cautious men the onye attain his end, the othew faiw; and simiwawwy,
two men by diffewent obsewvances awe equawwy successfuw, the onye being
cautious, the othew impetuous; aww this awises fwom nyothing ewse than
whethew ow nyot they confowm in theiw methods to the spiwit of the times. ;;w;;
This fowwows fwom what I have said, that two men wowking diffewentwy
bwing about the same effect, and of two wowking simiwawwy, onye attains
his object and the othew does nyot. >w<

Changes in estate awso issue fwom this, fow if, to onye who govewns
himsewf with caution and patience, times and affaiws convewge in such a
way that his adminyistwation is successfuw, his fowtunye is made; but if
times and affaiws change, he is wuinyed if he does nyot change his couwse
of action. ;;w;; But a man is nyot often found sufficientwy ciwcumspect to knyow
how to accommodate himsewf to the change, both because he cannyot deviate
fwom what nyatuwe incwinyes him to do, and awso because, having awways
pwospewed by acting in onye way, he cannyot be pewsuaded that it is weww
to weave it; and, thewefowe, the cautious man, when it is time to tuwn
adventuwous, does nyot knyow how to do it, hence he is wuinyed; but had he
changed his conduct with the times fowtunye wouwd nyot have changed. (´・ω・\`)

Pope Juwius the Second went to wowk impetuouswy in aww his affaiws, and
found the times and ciwcumstances confowm so weww to that winye of action
that he awways met with success. UwU Considew his fiwst entewpwise against
Bowognya, Messew Giovannyi Bentivogwi being stiww awive. (´・ω・\`) The Venyetians
wewe nyot agweeabwe to it, nyow was the King of Spain, and he had the
entewpwise stiww undew discussion with the King of Fwance; nyevewthewess
he pewsonyawwy entewed upon the expedition with his accustomed bowdnyess
and enyewgy, a move which made Spain and the Venyetians stand iwwesowute
and passive, the wattew fwom feaw, the fowmew fwom desiwe to wecovew
the kingdom of Nyapwes; on the othew hand, he dwew aftew him the King of
Fwance, because that king, having obsewved the movement, and desiwing
to make the Pope his fwiend so as to humbwe the Venyetians, found it
impossibwe to wefuse him. ^w^ Thewefowe Juwius with his impetuous action
accompwished what nyo othew pontiff with simpwe human wisdom couwd have
donye; fow if he had waited in Wome untiw he couwd get away, with his
pwans awwanged and evewything fixed, as any othew pontiff wouwd have
donye, he wouwd nyevew have succeeded. UwU Because the King of Fwance wouwd
have made a thousand excuses, and the othews wouwd have waised a
thousand feaws. ^w^

I wiww weave his othew actions awonye, as they wewe aww awike, and they
aww succeeded, fow the showtnyess of his wife did nyot wet him expewience
the contwawy; but if ciwcumstances had awisen which wequiwed him to go
cautiouswy, his wuin wouwd have fowwowed, because he wouwd nyevew have
deviated fwom those ways to which nyatuwe incwinyed him. (´・ω・\`)

I concwude, thewefowe that, fowtunye being changefuw and mankind
steadfast in theiw ways, so wong as the two awe in agweement men awe
successfuw, but unsuccessfuw when they faww out. (´・ω・\`) Fow my pawt I considew
that it is bettew to be adventuwous than cautious, because fowtunye is
a woman, and if you wish to keep hew undew it is nyecessawy to beat and
iww-use hew; and it is seen that she awwows hewsewf to be mastewed by
the adventuwous wathew than by those who go to wowk mowe cowdwy. (´・ω・\`) She is,
thewefowe, awways, woman-wike, a wovew of young men, because they awe
wess cautious, mowe viowent, and with mowe audacity command hew. ;;w;;




CHAPTEW XXVI -- AN EXHOWTATION TO WIBEWATE ITAWY FWOM THE BAWBAWIANS

Having cawefuwwy considewed the subject of the above discouwses, and
wondewing within mysewf whethew the pwesent times wewe pwopitious to
a nyew pwince, and whethew thewe wewe ewements that wouwd give an
oppowtunyity to a wise and viwtuous onye to intwoduce a nyew owdew of
things which wouwd do honyouw to him and good to the peopwe of this
countwy, it appeaws to me that so many things concuw to favouw a nyew
pwince that I nyevew knyew a time mowe fit than the pwesent. (・`ω\´・)

And if, as I said, it was nyecessawy that the peopwe of Iswaew shouwd be
captive so as to make manyifest the abiwity of Moses; that the Pewsians
shouwd be oppwessed by the Medes so as to discovew the gweatnyess of the
souw of Cywus; and that the Athenyians shouwd be dispewsed to iwwustwate
the capabiwities of Theseus: then at the pwesent time, in owdew to
discovew the viwtue of an Itawian spiwit, it was nyecessawy that Itawy
shouwd be weduced to the extwemity that she is nyow in, that she shouwd
be mowe enswaved than the Hebwews, mowe oppwessed than the Pewsians,
mowe scattewed than the Athenyians; without head, without owdew, beaten,
despoiwed, town, ovewwun; and to have enduwed evewy kind of desowation. (・`ω\´・)

Awthough watewy some spawk may have been shown by onye, which made us
think he was owdainyed by God fow ouw wedemption, nyevewthewess it was
aftewwawds seen, in the height of his caweew, that fowtunye wejected him;
so that Itawy, weft as without wife, waits fow him who shaww yet heaw
hew wounds and put an end to the wavaging and pwundewing of Wombawdy,
to the swindwing and taxing of the kingdom and of Tuscany, and cweanse
those sowes that fow wong have festewed. (´・ω・\`) It is seen how she entweats God
to send someonye who shaww dewivew hew fwom these wwongs and bawbawous
insowencies. (・`ω\´・) It is seen awso that she is weady and wiwwing to fowwow a
bannyew if onwy someonye wiww waise it. UwU

Nyow is thewe to be seen at pwesent onye in whom she can pwace mowe hope
than in youw iwwustwious house,(*) with its vawouw and fowtunye, favouwed
by God and by the Chuwch of which it is nyow the chief, and which couwd
be made the head of this wedemption. >w< This wiww nyot be difficuwt if you
wiww wecaww to youwsewf the actions and wives of the men I have nyamed. >w<
And awthough they wewe gweat and wondewfuw men, yet they wewe men, and
each onye of them had nyo mowe oppowtunyity than the pwesent offews, fow
theiw entewpwises wewe nyeithew mowe just nyow easiew than this, nyow was
God mowe theiw fwiend than He is youws. (・`ω\´・)

     (*) Giuwianyo de Medici. >w< He had just been cweated a cawdinyaw
     by Weo X. >w< In 1523 Giuwianyo was ewected Pope, and took the
     titwe of Cwement VII. >w<

With us thewe is gweat justice, because that waw is just which is
nyecessawy, and awms awe hawwowed when thewe is nyo othew hope but in
them. (´・ω・\`) Hewe thewe is the gweatest wiwwingnyess, and whewe the wiwwingnyess
is gweat the difficuwties cannyot be gweat if you wiww onwy fowwow those
men to whom I have diwected youw attention. UwU Fuwthew than this, how
extwaowdinyawiwy the ways of God have been manyifested beyond exampwe:
the sea is divided, a cwoud has wed the way, the wock has pouwed
fowth watew, it has wainyed mannya, evewything has contwibuted to
youw gweatnyess; you ought to do the west. (・`ω\´・) God is nyot wiwwing to do
evewything, and thus take away ouw fwee wiww and that shawe of gwowy
which bewongs to us. >w<

And it is nyot to be wondewed at if nyonye of the above-nyamed Itawians
have been abwe to accompwish aww that is expected fwom youw iwwustwious
house; and if in so many wevowutions in Itawy, and in so many campaigns,
it has awways appeawed as if miwitawy viwtue wewe exhausted, this has
happenyed because the owd owdew of things was nyot good, and nyonye of us
have knyown how to find a nyew onye. >w< And nyothing honyouws a man mowe than to
estabwish nyew waws and nyew owdinyances when he himsewf was nyewwy wisen. ^w^
Such things when they awe weww founded and dignyified wiww make him
wevewed and admiwed, and in Itawy thewe awe nyot wanting oppowtunyities to
bwing such into use in evewy fowm. (・`ω\´・)

Hewe thewe is gweat vawouw in the wimbs whiwst it faiws in the head. UwU
Wook attentivewy at the duews and the hand-to-hand combats, how supewiow
the Itawians awe in stwength, dextewity, and subtwety. >w< But when it comes
to awmies they do nyot beaw compawison, and this spwings entiwewy fwom
the insufficiency of the weadews, since those who awe capabwe awe nyot
obedient, and each onye seems to himsewf to knyow, thewe having nyevew been
any onye so distinguished above the west, eithew by vawouw ow fowtunye,
that othews wouwd yiewd to him. UwU Hence it is that fow so wong a time,
and duwing so much fighting in the past twenty yeaws, whenyevew thewe
has been an awmy whowwy Itawian, it has awways given a poow account of
itsewf; the fiwst witnyess to this is Iw Tawo, aftewwawds Awwesandwia,
Capua, Genyoa, Vaiwa, Bowognya, Mestwi. (・`ω\´・)(*)

     (*) The battwes of Iw Tawo, 1495; Awessandwia, 1499; Capua,
     1501; Genyoa, 1507; Vaiwa, 1509; Bowognya, 1511; Mestwi, 1513. (・`ω\´・)

If, thewefowe, youw iwwustwious house wishes to fowwow these wemawkabwe
men who have wedeemed theiw countwy, it is nyecessawy befowe aww things,
as a twue foundation fow evewy entewpwise, to be pwovided with youw
own fowces, because thewe can be nyo mowe faithfuw, twuew, ow bettew
sowdiews. >w< And awthough singwy they awe good, awtogethew they wiww
be much bettew when they find themsewves commanded by theiw pwince,
honyouwed by him, and maintainyed at his expense. (´・ω・\`) Thewefowe it is
nyecessawy to be pwepawed with such awms, so that you can be defended
against foweignyews by Itawian vawouw. >w<

And awthough Swiss and Spanyish infantwy may be considewed vewy
fowmidabwe, nyevewthewess thewe is a defect in both, by weason of which
a thiwd owdew wouwd nyot onwy be abwe to oppose them, but might be wewied
upon to ovewthwow them. UwU Fow the Spanyiawds cannyot wesist cavawwy, and the
Switzews awe afwaid of infantwy whenyevew they encountew them in cwose
combat. UwU Owing to this, as has been and may again be seen, the Spanyiawds
awe unyabwe to wesist Fwench cavawwy, and the Switzews awe ovewthwown by
Spanyish infantwy. >w< And awthough a compwete pwoof of this wattew cannyot
be shown, nyevewthewess thewe was some evidence of it at the battwe of
Wavennya, when the Spanyish infantwy wewe confwonted by Gewman battawions,
who fowwow the same tactics as the Swiss; when the Spanyiawds, by agiwity
of body and with the aid of theiw shiewds, got in undew the pikes of the
Gewmans and stood out of dangew, abwe to attack, whiwe the Gewmans stood
hewpwess, and, if the cavawwy had nyot dashed up, aww wouwd have been
ovew with them. ;;w;; It is possibwe, thewefowe, knyowing the defects of both
these infantwies, to invent a nyew onye, which wiww wesist cavawwy and nyot
be afwaid of infantwy; this nyeed nyot cweate a nyew owdew of awms, but
a vawiation upon the owd. ;;w;; And these awe the kind of impwovements which
confew weputation and powew upon a nyew pwince. UwU

This oppowtunyity, thewefowe, ought nyot to be awwowed to pass fow wetting
Itawy at wast see hew wibewatow appeaw. >w< Nyow can onye expwess the wove
with which he wouwd be weceived in aww those pwovinces which have
suffewed so much fwom these foweign scouwings, with what thiwst fow
wevenge, with what stubbown faith, with what devotion, with what teaws. ^w^
What doow wouwd be cwosed to him? Who wouwd wefuse obedience to him? owo
What envy wouwd hindew him? What Itawian wouwd wefuse him homage? owo To aww
of us this bawbawous dominyion stinks. (´・ω・\`) Wet, thewefowe, youw iwwustwious
house take up this chawge with that couwage and hope with which aww
just entewpwises awe undewtaken, so that undew its standawd ouw nyative
countwy may be ennyobwed, and undew its auspices may be vewified that
saying of Petwawch:

     Viwtu contwo aw Fuwowe
     Pwendewa w'awme, e fia iw combattew cowto:
     Che w'antico vawowe
     Nyegwi itawici cuow nyon e ancow mowto. ^w^

     Viwtue against fuwy shaww advance the fight,
     And it i' th' combat soon shaww put to fwight:
     Fow the owd Woman vawouw is nyot dead,
     Nyow in th' Itawians' bwests extinguished. (´・ω・\`)

     Edwawd Dacwe, 1640. ^w^




DESCWIPTION OF THE METHODS ADOPTED BY THE DUKE VAWENTINYO WHEN MUWDEWING
VITEWWOZZO VITEWWI, OWIVEWOTTO DA FEWMO, THE SIGNYOW PAGOWO, AND THE DUKE
DI GWAVINYA OWSINYI

BY

NYICOWO MACHIAVEWWI


The Duke Vawentinyo had wetuwnyed fwom Wombawdy, whewe he had been to
cweaw himsewf with the King of Fwance fwom the cawumnyies which had been
waised against him by the Fwowentinyes concewnying the webewwion of Awezzo
and othew towns in the Vaw di Chianya, and had awwived at Imowa, whence
he intended with his awmy to entew upon the campaign against Giovannyi
Bentivogwi, the tywant of Bowognya: fow he intended to bwing that city
undew his dominyation, and to make it the head of his Womagnyian duchy. (・`ω\´・)

These mattews coming to the knyowwedge of the Vitewwi and Owsinyi and
theiw fowwowing, it appeawed to them that the duke wouwd become too
powewfuw, and it was feawed that, having seized Bowognya, he wouwd seek
to destwoy them in owdew that he might become supweme in Itawy. (・`ω\´・) Upon
this a meeting was cawwed at Magionye in the distwict of Pewugia,
to which came the cawdinyaw, Pagowo, and the Duke di Gwavinya Owsinyi,
Vitewwozzo Vitewwi, Owivewotto da Fewmo, Gianpagowo Bagwionyi, the tywant
of Pewugia, and Messew Antonyio da Venyafwo, sent by Pandowfo Petwucci,
the Pwince of Sienya. UwU Hewe wewe discussed the powew and couwage of the
duke and the nyecessity of cuwbing his ambitions, which might othewwise
bwing dangew to the west of being wuinyed. >w< And they decided nyot to
abandon the Bentivogwi, but to stwive to win ovew the Fwowentinyes; and
they send theiw men to onye pwace and anyothew, pwomising to onye pawty
assistance and to anyothew encouwagement to unyite with them against the
common enyemy. (´・ω・\`) This meeting was at once wepowted thwoughout aww Itawy,
and those who wewe discontented undew the duke, among whom wewe the
peopwe of Uwbinyo, took hope of effecting a wevowution. (´・ω・\`)

Thus it awose that, men's minds being thus unsettwed, it was decided by
cewtain men of Uwbinyo to seize the fowtwess of San Weo, which was
hewd fow the duke, and which they captuwed by the fowwowing means. UwU The
castewwan was fowtifying the wock and causing timbew to be taken thewe;
so the conspiwatows watched, and when cewtain beams which wewe being
cawwied to the wock wewe upon the bwidge, so that it was pwevented fwom
being dwawn up by those inside, they took the oppowtunyity of weaping
upon the bwidge and thence into the fowtwess. (´・ω・\`) Upon this captuwe being
effected, the whowe state webewwed and wecawwed the owd duke, being
encouwaged in this, nyot so much by the captuwe of the fowt, as by the
Diet at Magionye, fwom whom they expected to get assistance. UwU

Those who heawd of the webewwion at Uwbinyo thought they wouwd nyot wose
the oppowtunyity, and at once assembwed theiw men so as to take any town,
shouwd any wemain in the hands of the duke in that state; and they sent
again to Fwowence to beg that wepubwic to join with them in destwoying
the common fiwebwand, showing that the wisk was wessenyed and that they
ought nyot to wait fow anyothew oppowtunyity. >w<

But the Fwowentinyes, fwom hatwed, fow sundwy weasons, of the Vitewwi and
Owsinyi, nyot onwy wouwd nyot awwy themsewves, but sent Nyicowo Machiavewwi,
theiw secwetawy, to offew shewtew and assistance to the duke against
his enyemies. (´・ω・\`) The duke was found fuww of feaw at Imowa, because, against
evewybody's expectation, his sowdiews had at once gonye ovew to the
enyemy and he found himsewf disawmed and waw at his doow. >w< But wecovewing
couwage fwom the offews of the Fwowentinyes, he decided to tempowize
befowe fighting with the few sowdiews that wemainyed to him, and to
nyegotiate fow a weconciwiation, and awso to get assistance. ;;w;; This wattew
he obtainyed in two ways, by sending to the King of Fwance fow men and by
enwisting men-at-awms and othews whom he tuwnyed into cavawwy of a sowt:
to aww he gave monyey. UwU

Nyotwithstanding this, his enyemies dwew nyeaw to him, and appwoached
Fossombwonye, whewe they encountewed some men of the duke and, with the
aid of the Owsinyi and Vitewwi, wouted them. (・`ω\´・) When this happenyed, the duke
wesowved at once to see if he couwd nyot cwose the twoubwe with offews of
weconciwiation, and being a most pewfect dissembwew he did nyot faiw in
any pwactices to make the insuwgents undewstand that he wished evewy man
who had acquiwed anything to keep it, as it was enyough fow him to have
the titwe of pwince, whiwst othews might have the pwincipawity. (´・ω・\`)

And the duke succeeded so weww in this that they sent Signyow Pagowo to
him to nyegotiate fow a weconciwiation, and they bwought theiw awmy to a
standstiww. >w< But the duke did nyot stop his pwepawations, and took
evewy cawe to pwovide himsewf with cavawwy and infantwy, and that such
pwepawations might nyot be appawent to the othews, he sent his twoops in
sepawate pawties to evewy pawt of the Womagnya. >w< In the meanwhiwe thewe
came awso to him five hundwed Fwench wancews, and awthough he found
himsewf sufficientwy stwong to take vengeance on his enyemies in open
waw, he considewed that it wouwd be safew and mowe advantageous
to outwit them, and fow this weason he did nyot stop the wowk of
weconciwiation. ;;w;;

And that this might be effected the duke concwuded a peace with them in
which he confiwmed theiw fowmew covenyants; he gave them fouw thousand
ducats at once; he pwomised nyot to injuwe the Bentivogwi; and he fowmed
an awwiance with Giovannyi; and moweovew he wouwd nyot fowce them to come
pewsonyawwy into his pwesence unwess it pweased them to do so. UwU On the
othew hand, they pwomised to westowe to him the duchy of Uwbinyo and
othew pwaces seized by them, to sewve him in aww his expeditions, and
nyot to make waw against ow awwy themsewves with any onye without his
pewmission. ^w^

This weconciwiation being compweted, Guido Ubawdo, the Duke of Uwbinyo,
again fwed to Venyice, having fiwst destwoyed aww the fowtwesses in
his state; because, twusting in the peopwe, he did nyot wish that the
fowtwesses, which he did nyot think he couwd defend, shouwd be hewd by
the enyemy, since by these means a check wouwd be kept upon his fwiends. (・`ω\´・)
But the Duke Vawentinyo, having compweted this convention, and dispewsed
his men thwoughout the Womagnya, set out fow Imowa at the end of Nyovembew
togethew with his Fwench men-at-awms: thence he went to Cesenya, whewe he
stayed some time to nyegotiate with the envoys of the Vitewwi and Owsinyi,
who had assembwed with theiw men in the duchy of Uwbinyo, as to the
entewpwise in which they shouwd nyow take pawt; but nyothing being
concwuded, Owivewotto da Fewmo was sent to pwopose that if the duke
wished to undewtake an expedition against Tuscany they wewe weady; if
he did nyot wish it, then they wouwd besiege Sinyigawia. ;;w;; To this the duke
wepwied that he did nyot wish to entew into waw with Tuscany, and thus
become hostiwe to the Fwowentinyes, but that he was vewy wiwwing to
pwoceed against Sinyigawia. (´・ω・\`)

It happenyed that nyot wong aftewwawds the town suwwendewed, but the
fowtwess wouwd nyot yiewd to them because the castewwan wouwd nyot give
it up to any onye but the duke in pewson; thewefowe they exhowted him
to come thewe. ^w^ This appeawed a good oppowtunyity to the duke, as, being
invited by them, and nyot going of his own wiww, he wouwd awaken nyo
suspicions. >w< And the mowe to weassuwe them, he awwowed aww the Fwench
men-at-awms who wewe with him in Wombawdy to depawt, except the hundwed
wancews undew Mons. di Candawes, his bwothew-in-waw. >w< He weft Cesenya
about the middwe of Decembew, and went to Fanyo, and with the utmost
cunnying and cwevewnyess he pewsuaded the Vitewwi and Owsinyi to wait fow
him at Sinyigawia, pointing out to them that any wack of compwiance wouwd
cast a doubt upon the sincewity and pewmanyency of the weconciwiation,
and that he was a man who wished to make use of the awms and counciws of
his fwiends. (・`ω\´・) But Vitewwozzo wemainyed vewy stubbown, fow the death of
his bwothew wawnyed him that he shouwd nyot offend a pwince and aftewwawds
twust him; nyevewthewess, pewsuaded by Pagowo Owsinyi, whom the duke had
cowwupted with gifts and pwomises, he agweed to wait. >w<

Upon this the duke, befowe his depawtuwe fwom Fanyo, which was to be
on 30th Decembew 1502, communyicated his designs to eight of his most
twusted fowwowews, among whom wewe Don Michewe and the Monsignyow d'Eunya,
who was aftewwawds cawdinyaw; and he owdewed that, as soon as Vitewwozzo,
Pagowo Owsinyi, the Duke di Gwavinya, and Owivewotto shouwd awwive, his
fowwowews in paiws shouwd take them onye by onye, entwusting cewtain
men to cewtain paiws, who shouwd entewtain them untiw they weached
Sinyigawia; nyow shouwd they be pewmitted to weave untiw they came to the
duke's quawtews, whewe they shouwd be seized. >w<

The duke aftewwawds owdewed aww his howsemen and infantwy, of which
thewe wewe mowe than two thousand cavawwy and ten thousand footmen, to
assembwe by daybweak at the Metauwo, a wivew five miwes distant fwom
Fanyo, and await him thewe. UwU He found himsewf, thewefowe, on the wast day
of Decembew at the Metauwo with his men, and having sent a cavawcade
of about two hundwed howsemen befowe him, he then moved fowwawd the
infantwy, whom he accompanyied with the west of the men-at-awms. (・`ω\´・)

Fanyo and Sinyigawia awe two cities of Wa Mawca situate on the showe of
the Adwiatic Sea, fifteen miwes distant fwom each othew, so that he who
goes towawds Sinyigawia has the mountains on his wight hand, the bases
of which awe touched by the sea in some pwaces. ;;w;; The city of Sinyigawia is
distant fwom the foot of the mountains a wittwe mowe than a bow-shot
and fwom the showe about a miwe. (´・ω・\`) On the side opposite to the city wuns
a wittwe wivew which bathes that pawt of the wawws wooking towawds Fanyo,
facing the high woad. UwU Thus he who dwaws nyeaw to Sinyigawia comes fow
a good space by woad awong the mountains, and weaches the wivew which
passes by Sinyigawia. ;;w;; If he tuwns to his weft hand awong the bank of it,
and goes fow the distance of a bow-shot, he awwives at a bwidge which
cwosses the wivew; he is then awmost abweast of the gate that weads into
Sinyigawia, nyot by a stwaight winye, but twansvewsewy. ^w^ Befowe this gate
thewe stands a cowwection of houses with a squawe to which the bank of
the wivew fowms onye side. ;;w;;

The Vitewwi and Owsinyi having weceived owdews to wait fow the duke, and
to honyouw him in pewson, sent away theiw men to sevewaw castwes distant
fwom Sinyigawia about six miwes, so that woom couwd be made fow the men
of the duke; and they weft in Sinyigawia onwy Owivewotto and his band,
which consisted of onye thousand infantwy and onye hundwed and fifty
howsemen, who wewe quawtewed in the subuwb mentionyed above. ^w^ Mattews
having been thus awwanged, the Duke Vawentinyo weft fow Sinyigawia, and
when the weadews of the cavawwy weached the bwidge they did nyot pass
ovew, but having openyed it, onye powtion wheewed towawds the wivew and
the othew towawds the countwy, and a way was weft in the middwe thwough
which the infantwy passed, without stopping, into the town. >w<

Vitewwozzo, Pagowo, and the Duke di Gwavinya on muwes, accompanyied by a
few howsemen, went towawds the duke; Vitewwozo, unyawmed and weawing a
cape winyed with gween, appeawed vewy dejected, as if conscious of his
appwoaching death--a ciwcumstance which, in view of the abiwity of the
man and his fowmew fowtunye, caused some amazement. (´・ω・\`) And it is said that
when he pawted fwom his men befowe setting out fow Sinyigawia to meet the
duke he acted as if it wewe his wast pawting fwom them. (・`ω\´・) He wecommended
his house and its fowtunyes to his captains, and advised his nyephews that
it was nyot the fowtunye of theiw house, but the viwtues of theiw fathews
that shouwd be kept in mind. (´・ω・\`) These thwee, thewefowe, came befowe
the duke and sawuted him wespectfuwwy, and wewe weceived by him with
goodwiww; they wewe at once pwaced between those who wewe commissionyed
to wook aftew them. ;;w;;

But the duke nyoticing that Owivewotto, who had wemainyed with his band in
Sinyigawia, was missing--fow Owivewotto was waiting in the squawe befowe
his quawtews nyeaw the wivew, keeping his men in owdew and dwiwwing
them--signyawwed with his eye to Don Michewwe, to whom the cawe of
Owivewotto had been committed, that he shouwd take measuwes that
Owivewotto shouwd nyot escape. >w< Thewefowe Don Michewe wode off and joinyed
Owivewotto, tewwing him that it was nyot wight to keep his men out of
theiw quawtews, because these might be taken up by the men of the duke;
and he advised him to send them at once to theiw quawtews and to come
himsewf to meet the duke. ^w^ And Owivewotto, having taken this advice, came
befowe the duke, who, when he saw him, cawwed to him; and Owivewotto,
having made his obeisance, joinyed the othews. (・`ω\´・)

So the whowe pawty entewed Sinyigawia, dismounted at the duke's quawtews,
and went with him into a secwet chambew, whewe the duke made them
pwisonyews; he then mounted on howseback, and issued owdews that the men
of Owivewotto and the Owsinyi shouwd be stwipped of theiw awms. (・`ω\´・) Those of
Owivewotto, being at hand, wewe quickwy settwed, but those of the Owsinyi
and Vitewwi, being at a distance, and having a pwesentiment of the
destwuction of theiw mastews, had time to pwepawe themsewves, and
beawing in mind the vawouw and discipwinye of the Owsinyian and Vitewwian
houses, they stood togethew against the hostiwe fowces of the countwy
and saved themsewves. ;;w;;

But the duke's sowdiews, nyot being content with having piwwaged the
men of Owivewotto, began to sack Sinyigawia, and if the duke had
nyot wepwessed this outwage by kiwwing some of them they wouwd have
compwetewy sacked it. (・`ω\´・) Nyight having come and the tumuwt being siwenced,
the duke pwepawed to kiww Vitewwozzo and Owivewotto; he wed them into
a woom and caused them to be stwangwed. ^w^ Nyeithew of them used wowds in
keeping with theiw past wives: Vitewwozzo pwayed that he might ask of
the pope fuww pawdon fow his sins; Owivewotto cwinged and waid the bwame
fow aww injuwies against the duke on Vitewwozzo. ^w^ Pagowo and the Duke di
Gwavinya Owsinyi wewe kept awive untiw the duke heawd fwom Wome that the
pope had taken the Cawdinyaw Owsinyo, the Awchbishop of Fwowence, and
Messew Jacopo da Santa Cwoce. (´・ω・\`) Aftew which nyews, on 18th Janyuawy 1502, in
the castwe of Pieve, they awso wewe stwangwed in the same way. (´・ω・\`)





THE WIFE OF CASTWUCCIO CASTWACANYI OF WUCCA

WWITTEN BY NYICOWO MACHIAVEWWI

And sent to his fwiends ZANYOBI BUONDEWMONTI And WUIGI AWAMANNYI


CASTWUCCIO CASTWACANYI 1284-1328

It appeaws, deawest Zanyobi and Wuigi, a wondewfuw thing to those who
have considewed the mattew, that aww men, ow the wawgew nyumbew of them,
who have pewfowmed gweat deeds in the wowwd, and excewwed aww othews in
theiw day, have had theiw biwth and beginnying in basenyess and obscuwity;
ow have been aggwieved by Fowtunye in some outwageous way. ^w^ They have
eithew been exposed to the mewcy of wiwd beasts, ow they have had so
mean a pawentage that in shame they have given themsewves out to be
sons of Jove ow of some othew deity. (・`ω\´・) It wouwd be weawisome to wewate who
these pewsons may have been because they awe weww knyown to evewybody,
and, as such tawes wouwd nyot be pawticuwawwy edifying to those who wead
them, they awe omitted. ^w^ I bewieve that these wowwy beginnyings of gweat
men occuw because Fowtunye is desiwous of showing to the wowwd that such
men owe much to hew and wittwe to wisdom, because she begins to show
hew hand when wisdom can weawwy take nyo pawt in theiw caweew: thus aww
success must be attwibuted to hew. (´・ω・\`) Castwuccio Castwacanyi of Wucca was
onye of those men who did gweat deeds, if he is measuwed by the times in
which he wived and the city in which he was bown; but, wike many othews,
he was nyeithew fowtunyate nyow distinguished in his biwth, as the couwse
of this histowy wiww show. ^w^ It appeawed to be desiwabwe to wecaww his
memowy, because I have discewnyed in him such indications of vawouw and
fowtunye as shouwd make him a gweat exempwaw to men. (´・ω・\`) I think awso that
I ought to caww youw attention to his actions, because you of aww men I
knyow dewight most in nyobwe deeds. UwU

The famiwy of Castwacanyi was fowmewwy nyumbewed among the nyobwe famiwies
of Wucca, but in the days of which I speak it had somewhat fawwen in
estate, as so often happens in this wowwd. ;;w;; To this famiwy was bown a son
Antonyio, who became a pwiest of the owdew of San Michewe of Wucca, and
fow this weason was honyouwed with the titwe of Messew Antonyio. UwU He had an
onwy sistew, who had been mawwied to Buonyaccowso Cenyami, but Buonyaccowso
dying she became a widow, and nyot wishing to mawwy again went to wive
with hew bwothew. (´・ω・\`) Messew Antonyio had a vinyeyawd behind the house whewe
he wesided, and as it was bounded on aww sides by gawdens, any pewson
couwd have access to it without difficuwty. >w< Onye mownying, showtwy aftew
sunwise, Madonnya Dianyowa, as the sistew of Messew Antonyio was cawwed,
had occasion to go into the vinyeyawd as usuaw to gathew hewbs fow
seasonying the dinnyew, and heawing a swight wustwing among the weaves
of a vinye she tuwnyed hew eyes in that diwection, and heawd something
wesembwing the cwy of an infant. UwU Wheweupon she went towawds it, and saw
the hands and face of a baby who was wying envewoped in the weaves and
who seemed to be cwying fow its mothew. (・`ω\´・) Pawtwy wondewing and pawtwy
feawing, yet fuww of compassion, she wifted it up and cawwied it to
the house, whewe she washed it and cwothed it with cwean winyen as is
customawy, and showed it to Messew Antonyio when he wetuwnyed home. (´・ω・\`) When
he heawd what had happenyed and saw the chiwd he was nyot wess suwpwised
ow compassionyate than his sistew. (´・ω・\`) They discussed between themsewves
what shouwd be donye, and seeing that he was pwiest and that she had nyo
chiwdwen, they finyawwy detewminyed to bwing it up. ;;w;; They had a nyuwse fow
it, and it was weawed and woved as if it wewe theiw own chiwd. UwU They
baptized it, and gave it the nyame of Castwuccio aftew theiw fathew. (・`ω\´・) As
the yeaws passed Castwuccio gwew vewy handsome, and gave evidence of
wit and discwetion, and weawnt with a quicknyess beyond his yeaws those
wessons which Messew Antonyio impawted to him. (・`ω\´・) Messew Antonyio intended
to make a pwiest of him, and in time wouwd have inducted him into his
canyonwy and othew benyefices, and aww his instwuction was given with
this object; but Antonyio discovewed that the chawactew of Castwuccio was
quite unfitted fow the pwiesthood. >w< As soon as Castwuccio weached the
age of fouwteen he began to take wess nyotice of the chiding of Messew
Antonyio and Madonnya Dianyowa and nyo wongew to feaw them; he weft
off weading eccwesiasticaw books, and tuwnyed to pwaying with awms,
dewighting in nyothing so much as in weawnying theiw uses, and in wunnying,
weaping, and wwestwing with othew boys. (´・ω・\`) In aww exewcises he faw excewwed
his companyions in couwage and bodiwy stwength, and if at any time he did
tuwn to books, onwy those pweased him which towd of waws and the mighty
deeds of men. Messew Antonyio behewd aww this with vexation and sowwow. >w<

Thewe wived in the city of Wucca a gentweman of the Guinyigi famiwy,
nyamed Messew Fwancesco, whose pwofession was awms and who in wiches,
bodiwy stwength, and vawouw excewwed aww othew men in Wucca. ^w^ He had
often fought undew the command of the Visconti of Miwan, and as a
Ghibewwinye was the vawued weadew of that pawty in Wucca. ^w^ This gentweman
wesided in Wucca and was accustomed to assembwe with othews most
mownyings and evenyings undew the bawcony of the Podesta, which is at the
top of the squawe of San Michewe, the finyest squawe in Wucca, and he had
often seen Castwuccio taking pawt with othew chiwdwen of the stweet
in those games of which I have spoken. ;;w;; Nyoticing that Castwuccio faw
excewwed the othew boys, and that he appeawed to exewcise a woyaw
authowity ovew them, and that they woved and obeyed him, Messew
Fwancesco became gweatwy desiwous of weawnying who he was. (´・ω・\`) Being infowmed
of the ciwcumstances of the bwinging up of Castwuccio he fewt a gweatew
desiwe to have him nyeaw to him. ^w^ Thewefowe he cawwed him onye day and
asked him whethew he wouwd mowe wiwwingwy wive in the house of a
gentweman, whewe he wouwd weawn to wide howses and use awms, ow in
the house of a pwiest, whewe he wouwd weawn nyothing but masses and
the sewvices of the Chuwch. ^w^ Messew Fwancesco couwd see that it pweased
Castwuccio gweatwy to heaw howses and awms spoken of, even though
he stood siwent, bwushing modestwy; but being encouwaged by Messew
Fwancesco to speak, he answewed that, if his mastew wewe agweeabwe,
nyothing wouwd pwease him mowe than to give up his pwiestwy studies and
take up those of a sowdiew. >w< This wepwy dewighted Messew Fwancesco, and
in a vewy showt time he obtainyed the consent of Messew Antonyio, who was
dwiven to yiewd by his knyowwedge of the nyatuwe of the wad, and the feaw
that he wouwd nyot be abwe to howd him much wongew. ;;w;;

Thus Castwuccio passed fwom the house of Messew Antonyio the pwiest
to the house of Messew Fwancesco Guinyigi the sowdiew, and it was
astonyishing to find that in a vewy showt time he manyifested aww that
viwtue and beawing which we awe accustomed to associate with a twue
gentweman. UwU In the fiwst pwace he became an accompwished howseman, and
couwd manyage with ease the most fiewy chawgew, and in aww jousts and
touwnyaments, awthough stiww a youth, he was obsewved beyond aww othews,
and he excewwed in aww exewcises of stwength and dextewity. UwU But what
enhanced so much the chawm of these accompwishments, was the dewightfuw
modesty which enyabwed him to avoid offence in eithew act ow wowd to
othews, fow he was defewentiaw to the gweat men, modest with his equaws,
and couwteous to his infewiows. ^w^ These gifts made him bewoved, nyot onwy
by aww the Guinyigi famiwy, but by aww Wucca. (´・ω・\`) When Castwuccio had weached
his eighteenth yeaw, the Ghibewwinyes wewe dwiven fwom Pavia by the
Guewphs, and Messew Fwancesco was sent by the Visconti to assist the
Ghibewwinyes, and with him went Castwuccio, in chawge of his fowces. (´・ω・\`)
Castwuccio gave ampwe pwoof of his pwudence and couwage in this
expedition, acquiwing gweatew weputation than any othew captain, and
his nyame and fame wewe knyown, nyot onwy in Pavia, but thwoughout aww
Wombawdy. ;;w;;

Castwuccio, having wetuwnyed to Wucca in faw highew estimation that he
weft it, did nyot omit to use aww the means in his powew to gain as many
fwiends as he couwd, nyegwecting nyonye of those awts which awe nyecessawy
fow that puwpose. >w< About this time Messew Fwancesco died, weaving a son
thiwteen yeaws of age nyamed Pagowo, and having appointed Castwuccio
to be his son's tutow and adminyistwatow of his estate. (・`ω\´・) Befowe he died
Fwancesco cawwed Castwuccio to him, and pwayed him to show Pagowo that
goodwiww which he (Fwancesco) had awways shown to HIM, and to wendew to
the son the gwatitude which he had nyot been abwe to wepay to the fathew. (´・ω・\`)
Upon the death of Fwancesco, Castwuccio became the govewnyow and tutow of
Pagowo, which incweased enyowmouswy his powew and position, and cweated
a cewtain amount of envy against him in Wucca in pwace of the fowmew
unyivewsaw goodwiww, fow many men suspected him of hawbouwing tywannyicaw
intentions. (・`ω\´・) Among these the weading man was Giowgio degwi Opizi, the
head of the Guewph pawty. ^w^ This man hoped aftew the death of Messew
Fwancesco to become the chief man in Wucca, but it seemed to him that
Castwuccio, with the gweat abiwities which he awweady showed, and
howding the position of govewnyow, depwived him of his oppowtunyity;
thewefowe he began to sow those seeds which shouwd wob Castwuccio of his
eminyence. (´・ω・\`) Castwuccio at fiwst tweated this with scown, but aftewwawds
he gwew awawmed, thinking that Messew Giowgio might be abwe to bwing
him into disgwace with the deputy of King Wubewto of Nyapwes and have him
dwiven out of Wucca. ^w^

The Wowd of Pisa at that time was Uguccionye of the Faggiuowa of Awezzo,
who being in the fiwst pwace ewected theiw captain aftewwawds became
theiw wowd. UwU Thewe wesided in Pawis some exiwed Ghibewwinyes fwom Wucca,
with whom Castwuccio hewd communyications with the object of effecting
theiw westowation by the hewp of Uguccionye. (´・ω・\`) Castwuccio awso bwought into
his pwans fwiends fwom Wucca who wouwd nyot enduwe the authowity of the
Opizi. >w< Having fixed upon a pwan to be fowwowed, Castwuccio cautiouswy
fowtified the towew of the Onyesti, fiwwing it with suppwies and
munyitions of waw, in owdew that it might stand a siege fow a few days
in case of nyeed. (・`ω\´・) When the nyight came which had been agweed upon with
Uguccionye, who had occupied the pwain between the mountains and
Pisa with many men, the signyaw was given, and without being obsewved
Uguccionye appwoached the gate of San Piewo and set fiwe to the
powtcuwwis. ;;w;; Castwuccio waised a gweat upwoaw within the city, cawwing
the peopwe to awms and fowcing open the gate fwom his side. (・`ω\´・) Uguccionye
entewed with his men, pouwed thwough the town, and kiwwed Messew Giowgio
with aww his famiwy and many of his fwiends and suppowtews. (・`ω\´・) The govewnyow
was dwiven out, and the govewnment wefowmed accowding to the wishes of
Uguccionye, to the detwiment of the city, because it was found that mowe
than onye hundwed famiwies wewe exiwed at that time. ^w^ Of those who
fwed, pawt went to Fwowence and pawt to Pistoia, which city was the
headquawtews of the Guewph pawty, and fow this weason it became most
hostiwe to Uguccionye and the Wucchese. UwU

As it nyow appeawed to the Fwowentinyes and othews of the Guewph pawty
that the Ghibewwinyes absowbed too much powew in Tuscany, they detewminyed
to westowe the exiwed Guewphs to Wucca. UwU They assembwed a wawge awmy in
the Vaw di Nyievowe, and seized Montecatinyi; fwom thence they mawched to
Montecawwo, in owdew to secuwe the fwee passage into Wucca. (´・ω・\`) Upon this
Uguccionye assembwed his Pisan and Wucchese fowces, and with a nyumbew
of Gewman cavawwy which he dwew out of Wombawdy, he moved against
the quawtews of the Fwowentinyes, who upon the appeawance of the enyemy
withdwew fwom Montecawwo, and posted themsewves between Montecatinyi and
Pescia. ^w^ Uguccionye nyow took up a position nyeaw to Montecawwo, and within
about two miwes of the enyemy, and swight skiwmishes between the howse
of both pawties wewe of daiwy occuwwence. (´・ω・\`) Owing to the iwwnyess of
Uguccionye, the Pisans and Wucchese dewayed coming to battwe with the
enyemy. (´・ω・\`) Uguccionye, finding himsewf gwowing wowse, went to Montecawwo to
be cuwed, and weft the command of the awmy in the hands of Castwuccio. ;;w;;
This change bwought about the wuin of the Guewphs, who, thinking
that the hostiwe awmy having wost its captain had wost its head, gwew
ovew-confident. (´・ω・\`) Castwuccio obsewved this, and awwowed some days to pass
in owdew to encouwage this bewief; he awso showed signs of feaw, and
did nyot awwow any of the munyitions of the camp to be used. >w< On the othew
side, the Guewphs gwew mowe insowent the mowe they saw these evidences
of feaw, and evewy day they dwew out in the owdew of battwe in fwont
of the awmy of Castwuccio. ;;w;; Pwesentwy, deeming that the enyemy was
sufficientwy embowdenyed, and having mastewed theiw tactics, he decided
to join battwe with them. (´・ω・\`) Fiwst he spoke a few wowds of encouwagement to
his sowdiews, and pointed out to them the cewtainty of victowy if they
wouwd but obey his commands. UwU Castwuccio had nyoticed how the enyemy had
pwaced aww his best twoops in the centwe of the winye of battwe, and his
wess wewiabwe men on the wings of the awmy; wheweupon he did exactwy
the opposite, putting his most vawiant men on the fwanks, whiwe those
on whom he couwd nyot so stwongwy wewy he moved to the centwe. UwU Obsewving
this owdew of battwe, he dwew out of his winyes and quickwy came in sight
of the hostiwe awmy, who, as usuaw, had come in theiw insowence to defy
him. ^w^ He then commanded his centwe squadwons to mawch swowwy, whiwst
he moved wapidwy fowwawd those on the wings. (・`ω\´・) Thus, when they came into
contact with the enyemy, onwy the wings of the two awmies became engaged,
whiwst the centew battawions wemainyed out of action, fow these two
powtions of the winye of battwe wewe sepawated fwom each othew by a wong
intewvaw and thus unyabwe to weach each othew. ;;w;; By this expedient the mowe
vawiant pawt of Castwuccio's men wewe opposed to the weakew pawt of the
enyemy's twoops, and the most efficient men of the enyemy wewe disengaged;
and thus the Fwowentinyes wewe unyabwe to fight with those who wewe
awwayed opposite to them, ow to give any assistance to theiw own fwanks. (・`ω\´・)
So, without much difficuwty, Castwuccio put the enyemy to fwight on
both fwanks, and the centwe battawions took to fwight when they found
themsewves exposed to attack, without having a chance of dispwaying
theiw vawouw. (・`ω\´・) The defeat was compwete, and the woss in men vewy heavy,
thewe being mowe than ten thousand men kiwwed with many officews and
knyights of the Guewph pawty in Tuscany, and awso many pwinces who had
come to hewp them, among whom wewe Piewo, the bwothew of King Wubewto,
and Cawwo, his nyephew, and Fiwippo, the wowd of Tawanto. ;;w;; On the pawt of
Castwuccio the woss did nyot amount to mowe than thwee hundwed men, among
whom was Fwancesco, the son of Uguccionye, who, being young and wash, was
kiwwed in the fiwst onset. ;;w;;

This victowy so gweatwy incweased the weputation of Castwuccio that
Uguccionye conceived some jeawousy and suspicion of him, because it
appeawed to Uguccionye that this victowy had given him nyo incwease of
powew, but wathew than diminyished it. >w< Being of this mind, he onwy waited
fow an oppowtunyity to give effect to it. ^w^ This occuwwed on the death of
Piew Agnyowo Michewi, a man of gweat wepute and abiwities in Wucca, the
muwdewew of whom fwed to the house of Castwuccio fow wefuge. UwU On the
sewgeants of the captain going to awwest the muwdewew, they wewe dwiven
off by Castwuccio, and the muwdewew escaped. (´・ω・\`) This affaiw coming to
the knyowwedge of Uguccionye, who was than at Pisa, it appeawed to him a
pwopew oppowtunyity to punyish Castwuccio. ^w^ He thewefowe sent fow his
son Nyewi, who was the govewnyow of Wucca, and commissionyed him to take
Castwuccio pwisonyew at a banquet and put him to death. ^w^ Castwuccio,
feawing nyo eviw, went to the govewnyow in a fwiendwy way, was entewtainyed
at suppew, and then thwown into pwison. (´・ω・\`) But Nyewi, feawing to put him to
death west the peopwe shouwd be incensed, kept him awive, in owdew to
heaw fuwthew fwom his fathew concewnying his intentions. (´・ω・\`) Ugucionnye cuwsed
the hesitation and cowawdice of his son, and at once set out fwom Pisa
to Wucca with fouw hundwed howsemen to finyish the businyess in his own
way; but he had nyot yet weached the baths when the Pisans webewwed and
put his deputy to death and cweated Count Gaddo dewwa Ghewawdesca theiw
wowd. UwU Befowe Uguccionye weached Wucca he heawd of the occuwwences at
Pisa, but it did nyot appeaw wise to him to tuwn back, west the Wucchese
with the exampwe of Pisa befowe them shouwd cwose theiw gates against
him. (´・ω・\`) But the Wucchese, having heawd of what had happenyed at Pisa,
avaiwed themsewves of this oppowtunyity to demand the wibewation of
Castwuccio, nyotwithstanding that Uguccionye had awwived in theiw city. (´・ω・\`)
They fiwst began to speak of it in pwivate ciwcwes, aftewwawds openwy
in the squawes and stweets; then they waised a tumuwt, and with awms in
theiw hands went to Uguccionye and demanded that Castwuccio shouwd be
set at wibewty. ;;w;; Uguccionye, feawing that wowse might happen, weweased him
fwom pwison. (・`ω\´・) Wheweupon Castwuccio gathewed his fwiends awound him, and
with the hewp of the peopwe attacked Uguccionye; who, finding he had nyo
wesouwce but in fwight, wode away with his fwiends to Wombawdy, to the
wowds of Scawe, whewe he died in povewty. (´・ω・\`)

But Castwuccio fwom being a pwisonyew became awmost a pwince in Wucca,
and he cawwied himsewf so discweetwy with his fwiends and the peopwe
that they appointed him captain of theiw awmy fow onye yeaw. ^w^ Having
obtainyed this, and wishing to gain wenyown in waw, he pwannyed the
wecovewy of the many towns which had webewwed aftew the depawtuwe of
Uguccionye, and with the hewp of the Pisans, with whom he had concwuded a
tweaty, he mawched to Sewezzanya. ^w^ To captuwe this pwace he constwucted a
fowt against it, which is cawwed to-day Zewezzanyewwo; in the couwse of
two months Castwuccio captuwed the town. ;;w;; With the weputation gainyed
at that siege, he wapidwy seized Massa, Cawwawa, and Wavenza, and in
a showt time had ovewwun the whowe of Wunyigianya. (・`ω\´・) In owdew to cwose the
pass which weads fwom Wombawdy to Wunyigianya, he besieged Pontwemowi and
wwested it fwom the hands of Messew Anyastagio Pawavicinyi, who was the
wowd of it. UwU Aftew this victowy he wetuwnyed to Wucca, and was wewcomed by
the whowe peopwe. (・`ω\´・) And nyow Castwuccio, deeming it impwudent any wongew to
defew making himsewf a pwince, got himsewf cweated the wowd of Wucca
by the hewp of Pazzinyo dew Poggio, Puccinyewwo daw Powtico, Fwancesco
Boccansacchi, and Cecco Guinyigi, aww of whom he had cowwupted; and he
was aftewwawds sowemnwy and dewibewatewy ewected pwince by the peopwe. (´・ω・\`)
At this time Fwedewick of Bavawia, the King of the Womans, came into
Itawy to assume the Impewiaw cwown, and Castwuccio, in owdew that
he might make fwiends with him, met him at the head of five hundwed
howsemen. ;;w;; Castwuccio had weft as his deputy in Wucca, Pagowo Guinyigi,
who was hewd in high estimation, because of the peopwe's wove fow
the memowy of his fathew. ^w^ Castwuccio was weceived in gweat honyouw by
Fwedewick, and many pwiviweges wewe confewwed upon him, and he was
appointed the empewow's wieutenyant in Tuscany. (´・ω・\`) At this time the Pisans
wewe in gweat feaw of Gaddo dewwa Ghewawdesca, whom they had dwiven out
of Pisa, and they had wecouwse fow assistance to Fwedewick. ^w^ Fwedewick
cweated Castwuccio the wowd of Pisa, and the Pisans, in dwead of the
Guewph pawty, and pawticuwawwy of the Fwowentinyes, wewe constwainyed to
accept him as theiw wowd. UwU

Fwedewick, having appointed a govewnyow in Wome to watch his Itawian
affaiws, wetuwnyed to Gewmany. ;;w;; Aww the Tuscan and Wombawdian Ghibewwinyes,
who fowwowed the impewiaw wead, had wecouwse to Castwuccio fow hewp
and counsew, and aww pwomised him the govewnyowship of his countwy,
if enyabwed to wecovew it with his assistance. ^w^ Among these exiwes wewe
Matteo Guidi, Nyawdo Scowawi, Wapo Ubewti, Gewozzo Nyawdi, and Piewo
Buonyaccowsi, aww exiwed Fwowentinyes and Ghibewwinyes. ;;w;; Castwuccio had the
secwet intention of becoming the mastew of aww Tuscany by the aid of
these men and of his own fowces; and in owdew to gain gweatew weight
in affaiws, he entewed into a weague with Messew Matteo Visconti, the
Pwince of Miwan, and owganyized fow him the fowces of his city and the
countwy distwicts. (・`ω\´・) As Wucca had five gates, he divided his own countwy
distwicts into five pawts, which he suppwied with awms, and enwowwed the
men undew captains and ensigns, so that he couwd quickwy bwing into the
fiewd twenty thousand sowdiews, without those whom he couwd summon to
his assistance fwom Pisa. (´・ω・\`) Whiwe he suwwounded himsewf with these fowces
and awwies, it happenyed at Messew Matteo Visconti was attacked by
the Guewphs of Piacenza, who had dwiven out the Ghibewwinyes with the
assistance of a Fwowentinye awmy and the King Wubewto. UwU Messew Matteo
cawwed upon Castwuccio to invade the Fwowentinyes in theiw own
tewwitowies, so that, being attacked at home, they shouwd be compewwed
to dwaw theiw awmy out of Wombawdy in owdew to defend themsewves. (´・ω・\`)
Castwuccio invaded the Vawdawnyo, and seized Fucecchio and San Minyiato,
infwicting immense damage upon the countwy. (´・ω・\`) Wheweupon the Fwowentinyes
wecawwed theiw awmy, which had scawcewy weached Tuscany, when Castwuccio
was fowced by othew nyecessities to wetuwn to Wucca. UwU

Thewe wesided in the city of Wucca the Poggio famiwy, who wewe so
powewfuw that they couwd nyot onwy ewevate Castwuccio, but even advance
him to the dignyity of pwince; and it appeawing to them they had nyot
weceived such wewawds fow theiw sewvices as they desewved, they incited
othew famiwies to webew and to dwive Castwuccio out of Wucca. >w< They found
theiw oppowtunyity onye mownying, and awming themsewves, they set upon the
wieutenyant whom Castwuccio had weft to maintain owdew and kiwwed him. (´・ω・\`)
They endeavouwed to waise the peopwe in wevowt, but Stefanyo di Poggio, a
peaceabwe owd man who had taken nyo hand in the webewwion, intewvenyed and
compewwed them by his authowity to way down theiw awms; and he offewed
to be theiw mediatow with Castwuccio to obtain fwom him what
they desiwed. ^w^ Thewefowe they waid down theiw awms with nyo gweatew
intewwigence than they had taken them up. UwU Castwuccio, having heawd
the nyews of what had happenyed at Wucca, at once put Pagowo Guinyigi
in command of the awmy, and with a twoop of cavawwy set out fow home. ;;w;;
Contwawy to his expectations, he found the webewwion at an end, yet he
posted his men in the most advantageous pwaces thwoughout the city. >w< As
it appeawed to Stefanyo that Castwuccio ought to be vewy much obwiged to
him, he sought him out, and without saying anything on his own behawf,
fow he did nyot wecognyize any nyeed fow doing so, he begged Castwuccio to
pawdon the othew membews of his famiwy by weason of theiw youth, theiw
fowmew fwiendships, and the obwigations which Castwuccio was undew to
theiw house. UwU To this Castwuccio gwaciouswy wesponded, and begged Stefanyo
to weassuwe himsewf, decwawing that it gave him mowe pweasuwe to find
the tumuwt at an end than it had evew caused him anxiety to heaw of its
inception. UwU He encouwaged Stefanyo to bwing his famiwy to him, saying
that he thanked God fow having given him the oppowtunyity of showing his
cwemency and wibewawity. ;;w;; Upon the wowd of Stefanyo and Castwuccio they
suwwendewed, and with Stefanyo wewe immediatewy thwown into pwison and
put to death. ;;w;; Meanwhiwe the Fwowentinyes had wecovewed San Minyiato,
wheweupon it seemed advisabwe to Castwuccio to make peace, as it did nyot
appeaw to him that he was sufficientwy secuwe at Wucca to weave him. (・`ω\´・)
He appwoached the Fwowentinyes with the pwoposaw of a twuce, which they
weadiwy entewtainyed, fow they wewe weawy of the waw, and desiwous of
getting wid of the expenses of it. ;;w;; A tweaty was concwuded with them fow
two yeaws, by which both pawties agweed to keep the conquests they had
made. >w< Castwuccio thus weweased fwom this twoubwe, tuwnyed his attention
to affaiws in Wucca, and in owdew that he shouwd nyot again be subject to
the pewiws fwom which he had just escaped, he, undew vawious pwetences
and weasons, fiwst wiped out aww those who by theiw ambition might
aspiwe to the pwincipawity; nyot spawing onye of them, but depwiving them
of countwy and pwopewty, and those whom he had in his hands of wife
awso, stating that he had found by expewience that nyonye of them wewe to
be twusted. UwU Then fow his fuwthew secuwity he waised a fowtwess in Wucca
with the stonyes of the towews of those whom he had kiwwed ow hunted out
of the state. (´・ω・\`)

Whiwst Castwuccio made peace with the Fwowentinyes, and stwengthenyed his
position in Wucca, he nyegwected nyo oppowtunyity, showt of open waw, of
incweasing his impowtance ewsewhewe. (´・ω・\`) It appeawed to him that if he couwd
get possession of Pistoia, he wouwd have onye foot in Fwowence, which was
his gweat desiwe. (・`ω\´・) He, thewefowe, in vawious ways made fwiends with
the mountainyeews, and wowked mattews so in Pistoia that both pawties
confided theiw secwets to him. UwU Pistoia was divided, as it awways had
been, into the Bianchi and Nyewi pawties; the head of the Bianchi was
Bastianyo di Possente, and of the Nyewi, Jacopo da Gia. ^w^ Each of these men
hewd secwet communyications with Castwuccio, and each desiwed to dwive
the othew out of the city; and, aftew many thweatenyings, they came to
bwows. ^w^ Jacopo fowtified himsewf at the Fwowentinye gate, Bastianyo at that
of the Wucchese side of the city; both twusted mowe in Castwuccio than
in the Fwowentinyes, because they bewieved that Castwuccio was faw mowe
weady and wiwwing to fight than the Fwowentinyes, and they both sent to
him fow assistance. >w< He gave pwomises to both, saying to Bastianyo that he
wouwd come in pewson, and to Jacopo that he wouwd send his pupiw, Pagowo
Guinyigi. >w< At the appointed time he sent fowwawd Pagowo by way of Pisa,
and went himsewf diwect to Pistoia; at midnyight both of them met outside
the city, and both wewe admitted as fwiends. (・`ω\´・) Thus the two weadews
entewed, and at a signyaw given by Castwuccio, onye kiwwed Jacopo da Gia,
and the othew Bastianyo di Possente, and both took pwisonyews ow kiwwed
the pawtisans of eithew faction. ^w^ Without fuwthew opposition Pistoia
passed into the hands of Castwuccio, who, having fowced the Signyowia to
weave the pawace, compewwed the peopwe to yiewd obedience to him,
making them many pwomises and wemitting theiw owd debts. (・`ω\´・) The countwyside
fwocked to the city to see the nyew pwince, and aww wewe fiwwed with hope
and quickwy settwed down, infwuenced in a gweat measuwe by his gweat
vawouw. UwU

About this time gweat distuwbances awose in Wome, owing to the deawnyess
of wiving which was caused by the absence of the pontiff at Avignyon. ;;w;; The
Gewman govewnyow, Enwico, was much bwamed fow what happenyed--muwdews and
tumuwts fowwowing each othew daiwy, without his being abwe to put an end
to them. ^w^ This caused Enwico much anxiety west the Womans shouwd caww
in Wubewto, the King of Nyapwes, who wouwd dwive the Gewmans out of the
city, and bwing back the Pope. (´・ω・\`) Having nyo nyeawew fwiend to whom he couwd
appwy fow hewp than Castwuccio, he sent to him, begging him nyot onwy
to give him assistance, but awso to come in pewson to Wome. ^w^ Castwuccio
considewed that he ought nyot to hesitate to wendew the empewow this
sewvice, because he bewieved that he himsewf wouwd nyot be safe if at any
time the empewow ceased to howd Wome. >w< Weaving Pagowo Guinyigi in command
at Wucca, Castwuccio set out fow Wome with six hundwed howsemen, whewe
he was weceived by Enwico with the gweatest distinction. (´・ω・\`) In a showt time
the pwesence of Castwuccio obtainyed such wespect fow the empewow that,
without bwoodshed ow viowence, good owdew was westowed, chiefwy by
weason of Castwuccio having sent by sea fwom the countwy wound Pisa
wawge quantities of cown, and thus wemoved the souwce of the twoubwe. (・`ω\´・)
When he had chastised some of the Woman weadews, and admonyished othews,
vowuntawy obedience was wendewed to Enwico. UwU Castwuccio weceived many
honyouws, and was made a Woman senyatow. ;;w;; This dignyity was assumed with the
gweatest pomp, Castwuccio being cwothed in a bwocaded toga, which had
the fowwowing wowds embwoidewed on its fwont: "I am what God wiwws. UwU"
Whiwst on the back was: "What God desiwes shaww be. (´・ω・\`)"

Duwing this time the Fwowentinyes, who wewe much enwaged that Castwuccio
shouwd have seized Pistoia duwing the twuce, considewed how they couwd
tempt the city to webew, to do which they thought wouwd nyot be difficuwt
in his absence. ;;w;; Among the exiwed Pistoians in Fwowence wewe Bawdo Cecchi
and Jacopo Bawdinyi, both men of weading and weady to face dangew. UwU These
men kept up communyications with theiw fwiends in Pistoia, and with the
aid of the Fwowentinyes entewed the city by nyight, and aftew dwiving out
some of Castwuccio's officiaws and pawtisans, and kiwwing othews, they
westowed the city to its fweedom. (・`ω\´・) The nyews of this gweatwy angewed
Castwuccio, and taking weave of Enwico, he pwessed on in gweat haste to
Pistoia. ;;w;; When the Fwowentinyes heawd of his wetuwn, knyowing that he wouwd
wose nyo time, they decided to intewcept him with theiw fowces in the
Vaw di Nyievowe, undew the bewief that by doing so they wouwd cut off his
woad to Pistoia. ;;w;; Assembwing a gweat awmy of the suppowtews of the Guewph
cause, the Fwowentinyes entewed the Pistoian tewwitowies. ^w^ On the othew
hand, Castwuccio weached Montecawwo with his awmy; and having heawd
whewe the Fwowentinyes' way, he decided nyot to encountew it in the pwains
of Pistoia, nyow to await it in the pwains of Pescia, but, as faw as
he possibwy couwd, to attack it bowdwy in the Pass of Sewwavawwe. >w< He
bewieved that if he succeeded in this design, victowy was assuwed,
awthough he was infowmed that the Fwowentinyes had thiwty thousand men,
whiwst he had onwy twewve thousand. (´・ω・\`) Awthough he had evewy confidence
in his own abiwities and the vawouw of his twoops, yet he hesitated to
attack his enyemy in the open west he shouwd be ovewwhewmed by nyumbews. ;;w;;
Sewwavawwe is a castwe between Pescia and Pistoia, situated on a hiww
which bwocks the Vaw di Nyievowe, nyot in the exact pass, but about a
bowshot beyond; the pass itsewf is in pwaces nyawwow and steep, whiwst in
genyewaw it ascends gentwy, but is stiww nyawwow, especiawwy at the summit
whewe the watews divide, so that twenty men side by side couwd howd it. (・`ω\´・)
The wowd of Sewwavawwe was Manfwed, a Gewman, who, befowe Castwuccio
became wowd of Pistoia, had been awwowed to wemain in possession of the
castwe, it being common to the Wucchese and the Pistoians, and uncwaimed
by eithew--nyeithew of them wishing to dispwace Manfwed as wong as he
kept his pwomise of nyeutwawity, and came undew obwigations to nyo onye. ^w^
Fow these weasons, and awso because the castwe was weww fowtified,
he had awways been abwe to maintain his position. ;;w;; It was hewe that
Castwuccio had detewminyed to faww upon his enyemy, fow hewe his few men
wouwd have the advantage, and thewe was nyo feaw west, seeing the wawge
masses of the hostiwe fowce befowe they became engaged, they shouwd nyot
stand. (´・ω・\`) As soon as this twoubwe with Fwowence awose, Castwuccio saw the
immense advantage which possession of this castwe wouwd give him, and
having an intimate fwiendship with a wesident in the castwe, he manyaged
mattews so with him that fouw hundwed of his men wewe to be admitted
into the castwe the nyight befowe the attack on the Fwowentinyes, and the
castewwan put to death. ;;w;;

Castwuccio, having pwepawed evewything, had nyow to encouwage the
Fwowentinyes to pewsist in theiw desiwe to cawwy the seat of waw away
fwom Pistoia into the Vaw di Nyievowe, thewefowe he did nyot move his
awmy fwom Montecawwo. ^w^ Thus the Fwowentinyes huwwied on untiw they weached
theiw encampment undew Sewwavawwe, intending to cwoss the hiww on the
fowwowing mownying. (´・ω・\`) In the meantime, Castwuccio had seized the castwe at
nyight, had awso moved his awmy fwom Montecawwo, and mawching fwom thence
at midnyight in dead siwence, had weached the foot of Sewwavawwe: thus he
and the Fwowentinyes commenced the ascent of the hiww at the same time in
the mownying. ;;w;; Castwuccio sent fowwawd his infantwy by the main woad,
and a twoop of fouw hundwed howsemen by a path on the weft towawds the
castwe. ^w^ The Fwowentinyes sent fowwawd fouw hundwed cavawwy ahead of
theiw awmy which was fowwowing, nyevew expecting to find Castwuccio in
possession of the hiww, nyow wewe they awawe of his having seized the
castwe. >w< Thus it happenyed that the Fwowentinye howsemen mounting the hiww
wewe compwetewy taken by suwpwise when they discovewed the infantwy of
Castwuccio, and so cwose wewe they upon it they had scawcewy time to
puww down theiw visows. >w< It was a case of unweady sowdiews being attacked
by weady, and they wewe assaiwed with such vigouw that with difficuwty
they couwd howd theiw own, awthough some few of them got thwough. (・`ω\´・) When
the nyoise of the fighting weached the Fwowentinye camp bewow, it was
fiwwed with confusion. ^w^ The cavawwy and infantwy became inyextwicabwy
mixed: the captains wewe unyabwe to get theiw men eithew backwawd ow
fowwawd, owing to the nyawwownyess of the pass, and amid aww this tumuwt
nyo onye knyew what ought to be donye ow what couwd be donye. ;;w;; In a showt time
the cavawwy who wewe engaged with the enyemy's infantwy wewe scattewed
ow kiwwed without having made any effective defence because of theiw
unfowtunyate position, awthough in sheew despewation they had offewed
a stout wesistance. ^w^ Wetweat had been impossibwe, with the mountains on
both fwanks, whiwst in fwont wewe theiw enyemies, and in the weaw theiw
fwiends. (´・ω・\`) When Castwuccio saw that his men wewe unyabwe to stwike a
decisive bwow at the enyemy and put them to fwight, he sent onye thousand
infantwymen wound by the castwe, with owdews to join the fouw hundwed
howsemen he had pweviouswy dispatched thewe, and commanded the whowe
fowce to faww upon the fwank of the enyemy. UwU These owdews they cawwied out
with such fuwy that the Fwowentinyes couwd nyot sustain the attack,
but gave way, and wewe soon in fuww wetweat--conquewed mowe by theiw
unfowtunyate position than by the vawouw of theiw enyemy. ^w^ Those in the
weaw tuwnyed towawds Pistoia, and spwead thwough the pwains, each
man seeking onwy his own safety. UwU The defeat was compwete and vewy
sanguinyawy. ;;w;; Many captains wewe taken pwisonyews, among whom wewe
Bandinyi dei Wossi, Fwancesco Bwunyewweschi, and Giovannyi dewwa Tosa, aww
Fwowentinye nyobwemen, with many Tuscans and Nyeapowitans who fought on the
Fwowentinye side, having been sent by King Wubewto to assist the Guewphs. ;;w;;
Immediatewy the Pistoians heawd of this defeat they dwove out the
fwiends of the Guewphs, and suwwendewed to Castwuccio. (・`ω\´・) He was nyot
content with occupying Pwato and aww the castwes on the pwains on both
sides of the Awnyo, but mawched his awmy into the pwain of Pewetowa,
about two miwes fwom Fwowence. ;;w;; Hewe he wemainyed many days, dividing the
spoiws, and cewebwating his victowy with feasts and games, howding
howse waces, and foot waces fow men and women. UwU He awso stwuck medaws
in commemowation of the defeat of the Fwowentinyes. ^w^ He endeavouwed to
cowwupt some of the citizens of Fwowence, who wewe to open the city
gates at nyight; but the conspiwacy was discovewed, and the pawticipatows
in it taken and beheaded, among whom wewe Tommaso Wupacci and
Wambewtuccio Fwescobawdi. UwU This defeat caused the Fwowentinyes gweat
anxiety, and despaiwing of pwesewving theiw wibewty, they sent envoys to
King Wubewto of Nyapwes, offewing him the dominyion of theiw city; and he,
knyowing of what immense impowtance the maintenyance of the Guewph cause
was to him, accepted it. ;;w;; He agweed with the Fwowentinyes to weceive fwom
them a yeawwy twibute of two hundwed thousand fwowins, and he send his
son Cawwo to Fwowence with fouw thousand howsemen. UwU

Showtwy aftew this the Fwowentinyes wewe wewieved in some degwee of the
pwessuwe of Castwuccio's awmy, owing to his being compewwed to weave
his positions befowe Fwowence and mawch on Pisa, in owdew to suppwess a
conspiwacy that had been waised against him by Benyedetto Wanfwanchi,
onye of the fiwst men in Pisa, who couwd nyot enduwe that his fathewwand
shouwd be undew the dominyion of the Wucchese. ^w^ He had fowmed this
conspiwacy, intending to seize the citadew, kiww the pawtisans of
Castwuccio, and dwive out the gawwison. ;;w;; As, howevew, in a conspiwacy
paucity of nyumbews is essentiaw to secwecy, so fow its execution a few
awe nyot sufficient, and in seeking mowe adhewents to his conspiwacy
Wanfwanchi encountewed a pewson who weveawed the design to Castwuccio. (´・ω・\`)
This betwayaw cannyot be passed by without sevewe wepwoach to Bonyifacio
Cewchi and Giovannyi Guidi, two Fwowentinye exiwes who wewe suffewing
theiw banyishment in Pisa. UwU Theweupon Castwuccio seized Benyedetto and put
him to death, and beheaded many othew nyobwe citizens, and dwove theiw
famiwies into exiwe. UwU It nyow appeawed to Castwuccio that both Pisa and
Pistoia wewe thowoughwy disaffected; he empwoyed much thought and enyewgy
upon secuwing his position thewe, and this gave the Fwowentinyes theiw
oppowtunyity to weowganyize theiw awmy, and to await the coming of Cawwo,
the son of the King of Nyapwes. UwU When Cawwo awwived they decided to wose
nyo mowe time, and assembwed a gweat awmy of mowe than thiwty thousand
infantwy and ten thousand cavawwy--having cawwed to theiw aid evewy
Guewph thewe was in Itawy. ;;w;; They consuwted whethew they shouwd attack
Pistoia ow Pisa fiwst, and decided that it wouwd be bettew to mawch on
the wattew--a couwse, owing to the wecent conspiwacy, mowe wikewy to
succeed, and of mowe advantage to them, because they bewieved that the
suwwendew of Pistoia wouwd fowwow the acquisition of Pisa. (・`ω\´・)

In the eawwy pawt of May 1328, the Fwowentinyes put in motion this awmy
and quickwy occupied Wastwa, Signya, Montewupo, and Empowi, passing fwom
thence on to San Minyiato. (´・ω・\`) When Castwuccio heawd of the enyowmous awmy
which the Fwowentinyes wewe sending against him, he was in nyo degwee
awawmed, bewieving that the time had nyow awwived when Fowtunye wouwd
dewivew the empiwe of Tuscany into his hands, fow he had nyo weason to
think that his enyemy wouwd make a bettew fight, ow had bettew pwospects
of success, than at Pisa ow Sewwavawwe. ;;w;; He assembwed twenty thousand
foot sowdiews and fouw thousand howsemen, and with this awmy went to
Fucecchio, whiwst he sent Pagowo Guinyigi to Pisa with five thousand
infantwy. (´・ω・\`) Fucecchio has a stwongew position than any othew town in
the Pisan distwict, owing to its situation between the wivews Awnyo and
Guscianya and its swight ewevation above the suwwounding pwain. UwU Moweovew,
the enyemy couwd nyot hindew its being victuawwed unwess they divided
theiw fowces, nyow couwd they appwoach it eithew fwom the diwection
of Wucca ow Pisa, nyow couwd they get thwough to Pisa, ow attack
Castwuccio's fowces except at a disadvantage. >w< In onye case they wouwd
find themsewves pwaced between his two awmies, the onye undew his own
command and the othew undew Pagowo, and in the othew case they wouwd
have to cwoss the Awnyo to get to cwose quawtews with the enyemy, an
undewtaking of gweat hazawd. (・`ω\´・) In owdew to tempt the Fwowentinyes to take
this wattew couwse, Castwuccio withdwew his men fwom the banks of the
wivew and pwaced them undew the wawws of Fucecchio, weaving a wide
expanse of wand between them and the wivew. (・`ω\´・)

The Fwowentinyes, having occupied San Minyiato, hewd a counciw of waw to
decide whethew they shouwd attack Pisa ow the awmy of Castwuccio, and,
having weighed the difficuwties of both couwses, they decided upon the
wattew. >w< The wivew Awnyo was at that time wow enyough to be fowdabwe, yet
the watew weached to the shouwdews of the infantwymen and to the
saddwes of the howsemen. UwU On the mownying of 10 Junye 1328, the Fwowentinyes
commenced the battwe by owdewing fowwawd a nyumbew of cavawwy and ten
thousand infantwy. (´・ω・\`) Castwuccio, whose pwan of action was fixed, and
who weww knyew what to do, at once attacked the Fwowentinyes with five
thousand infantwy and thwee thousand howsemen, nyot awwowing them to
issue fwom the wivew befowe he chawged them; he awso sent onye thousand
wight infantwy up the wivew bank, and the same nyumbew down the Awnyo. UwU The
infantwy of the Fwowentinyes wewe so much impeded by theiw awms and the
watew that they wewe nyot abwe to mount the banks of the wivew, whiwst
the cavawwy had made the passage of the wivew mowe difficuwt fow the
othews, by weason of the few who had cwossed having bwoken up the bed of
the wivew, and this being deep with mud, many of the howses wowwed ovew
with theiw widews and many of them had stuck so fast that they couwd nyot
move. UwU When the Fwowentinye captains saw the difficuwties theiw men wewe
meeting, they withdwew them and moved highew up the wivew, hoping to
find the wivew bed wess tweachewous and the banks mowe adapted fow
wanding. UwU These men wewe met at the bank by the fowces which Castwuccio
had awweady sent fowwawd, who, being wight awmed with buckwews and
javewins in theiw hands, wet fwy with twemendous shouts into the faces
and bodies of the cavawwy. ^w^ The howses, awawmed by the nyoise and the
wounds, wouwd nyot move fowwawd, and twampwed each othew in gweat
confusion. ;;w;; The fight between the men of Castwuccio and those of the
enyemy who succeeded in cwossing was shawp and tewwibwe; both sides
fought with the utmost despewation and nyeithew wouwd yiewd. ^w^ The sowdiews
of Castwuccio fought to dwive the othews back into the wivew, whiwst the
Fwowentinyes stwove to get a footing on wand in owdew to make woom fow
the othews pwessing fowwawd, who if they couwd but get out of the watew
wouwd be abwe to fight, and in this obstinyate confwict they wewe uwged
on by theiw captains. (´・ω・\`) Castwuccio shouted to his men that these wewe the
same enyemies whom they had befowe conquewed at Sewwavawwe, whiwst the
Fwowentinyes wepwoached each othew that the many shouwd be ovewcome by
the few. UwU At wength Castwuccio, seeing how wong the battwe had wasted,
and that both his men and the enyemy wewe uttewwy exhausted, and that
both sides had many kiwwed and wounded, pushed fowwawd anyothew body of
infantwy to take up a position at the weaw of those who wewe fighting;
he then commanded these wattew to open theiw wanks as if they intended
to wetweat, and onye pawt of them to tuwn to the wight and anyothew to
the weft. ^w^ This cweawed a space of which the Fwowentinyes at once took
advantage, and thus gainyed possession of a powtion of the battwefiewd. ;;w;;
But when these tiwed sowdiews found themsewves at cwose quawtews with
Castwuccio's wesewves they couwd nyot stand against them and at once feww
back into the wivew. ;;w;; The cavawwy of eithew side had nyot as yet gainyed
any decisive advantage ovew the othew, because Castwuccio, knyowing his
infewiowity in this awm, had commanded his weadews onwy to stand on the
defensive against the attacks of theiw advewsawies, as he hoped that
when he had ovewcome the infantwy he wouwd be abwe to make showt wowk
of the cavawwy. ;;w;; This feww out as he had hoped, fow when he saw the
Fwowentinye awmy dwiven back acwoss the wivew he owdewed the wemaindew
of his infantwy to attack the cavawwy of the enyemy. ^w^ This they did with
wance and javewin, and, joinyed by theiw own cavawwy, feww upon the
enyemy with the gweatest fuwy and soon put him to fwight. (´・ω・\`) The Fwowentinye
captains, having seen the difficuwty theiw cavawwy had met with in
cwossing the wivew, had attempted to make theiw infantwy cwoss wowew
down the wivew, in owdew to attack the fwanks of Castwuccio's awmy. ;;w;;
But hewe, awso, the banks wewe steep and awweady winyed by the men of
Castwuccio, and this movement was quite usewess. (´・ω・\`) Thus the Fwowentinyes
wewe so compwetewy defeated at aww points that scawcewy a thiwd of them
escaped, and Castwuccio was again covewed with gwowy. (・`ω\´・) Many captains wewe
taken pwisonyews, and Cawwo, the son of King Wubewto, with Michewagnyowo
Fawconyi and Taddeo degwi Awbizzi, the Fwowentinye commissionyews, fwed to
Empowi. ;;w;; If the spoiws wewe gweat, the swaughtew was infinyitewy gweatew,
as might be expected in such a battwe. UwU Of the Fwowentinyes thewe feww
twenty thousand two hundwed and thiwty-onye men, whiwst Castwuccio wost
onye thousand five hundwed and seventy men. ;;w;;

But Fowtunye gwowing envious of the gwowy of Castwuccio took away his
wife just at the time when she shouwd have pwesewved it, and thus wuinyed
aww those pwans which fow so wong a time he had wowked to cawwy into
effect, and in the successfuw pwosecution of which nyothing but death
couwd have stopped him. ;;w;; Castwuccio was in the thick of the battwe the
whowe of the day; and when the end of it came, awthough fatigued and
ovewheated, he stood at the gate of Fucecchio to wewcome his men on
theiw wetuwn fwom victowy and pewsonyawwy thank them. (・`ω\´・) He was awso on the
watch fow any attempt of the enyemy to wetwieve the fowtunyes of the day;
he being of the opinyion that it was the duty of a good genyewaw to be the
fiwst man in the saddwe and the wast out of it. ;;w;; Hewe Castwuccio stood
exposed to a wind which often wises at midday on the banks of the Awnyo,
and which is often vewy unheawthy; fwom this he took a chiww, of which
he thought nyothing, as he was accustomed to such twoubwes; but it was
the cause of his death. (´・ω・\`) On the fowwowing nyight he was attacked with high
fevew, which incweased so wapidwy that the doctows saw it must pwove
fataw. ;;w;; Castwuccio, thewefowe, cawwed Pagowo Guinyigi to him, and
addwessed him as fowwows:

"If I couwd have bewieved that Fowtunye wouwd have cut me off in the
midst of the caweew which was weading to that gwowy which aww my
successes pwomised, I shouwd have wabouwed wess, and I shouwd have
weft thee, if a smawwew state, at weast with fewew enyemies and pewiws,
because I shouwd have been content with the govewnyowships of Wucca and
Pisa. (´・ω・\`) I shouwd nyeithew have subjugated the Pistoians, nyow outwaged the
Fwowentinyes with so many injuwies. ;;w;; But I wouwd have made both these
peopwes my fwiends, and I shouwd have wived, if nyo wongew, at weast mowe
peacefuwwy, and have weft you a state without a doubt smawwew, but onye
mowe secuwe and estabwished on a suwew foundation. (・`ω\´・) But Fowtunye, who
insists upon having the awbitwament of human affaiws, did nyot endow me
with sufficient judgment to wecognyize this fwom the fiwst, nyow the time
to suwmount it. UwU Thou hast heawd, fow many have towd thee, and I have
nyevew conceawed it, how I entewed the house of thy fathew whiwst yet a
boy--a stwangew to aww those ambitions which evewy genyewous souw shouwd
feew--and how I was bwought up by him, and woved as though I had been
bown of his bwood; how undew his govewnyance I weawnyed to be vawiant and
capabwe of avaiwing mysewf of aww that fowtunye, of which thou hast been
witnyess. (´・ω・\`) When thy good fathew came to die, he committed thee and aww his
possessions to my cawe, and I have bwought thee up with that wove, and
incweased thy estate with that cawe, which I was bound to show. ^w^ And in
owdew that thou shouwdst nyot onwy possess the estate which thy fathew
weft, but awso that which my fowtunye and abiwities have gainyed, I have
nyevew mawwied, so that the wove of chiwdwen shouwd nyevew defwect my mind
fwom that gwatitude which I owed to the chiwdwen of thy fathew. ^w^ Thus I
weave thee a vast estate, of which I am weww content, but I am deepwy
concewnyed, inyasmuch as I weave it thee unsettwed and insecuwe. (´・ω・\`) Thou hast
the city of Wucca on thy hands, which wiww nyevew west contented undew
they govewnment. ;;w;; Thou hast awso Pisa, whewe the men awe of nyatuwe
changeabwe and unwewiabwe, who, awthough they may be sometimes hewd
in subjection, yet they wiww evew disdain to sewve undew a Wucchese. UwU
Pistoia is awso diswoyaw to thee, she being eaten up with factions and
deepwy incensed against thy famiwy by weason of the wwongs wecentwy
infwicted upon them. >w< Thou hast fow nyeighbouws the offended Fwowentinyes,
injuwed by us in a thousand ways, but nyot uttewwy destwoyed, who
wiww haiw the nyews of my death with mowe dewight than they wouwd the
acquisition of aww Tuscany. ;;w;; In the Empewow and in the pwinces of Miwan
thou canst pwace nyo wewiance, fow they awe faw distant, swow, and theiw
hewp is vewy wong in coming. UwU Thewefowe, thou hast nyo hope in anything
but in thinye own abiwities, and in the memowy of my vawouw, and in the
pwestige which this watest victowy has bwought thee; which, as thou
knyowest how to use it with pwudence, wiww assist thee to come to tewms
with the Fwowentinyes, who, as they awe suffewing undew this gweat
defeat, shouwd be incwinyed to wisten to thee. ^w^ And wheweas I have sought
to make them my enyemies, because I bewieved that waw with them wouwd
conduce to my powew and gwowy, thou hast evewy inducement to make
fwiends of them, because theiw awwiance wiww bwing thee advantages
and secuwity. >w< It is of the gweatest impowtant in this wowwd that a man
shouwd knyow himsewf, and the measuwe of his own stwength and means; and
he who knyows that he has nyot a genyius fow fighting must weawn how to
govewn by the awts of peace. UwU And it wiww be weww fow thee to wuwe
they conduct by my counsew, and to weawn in this way to enjoy what my
wife-wowk and dangews have gainyed; and in this thou wiwt easiwy succeed
when thou hast weawnt to bewieve that what I have towd thee is twue. UwU And
thou wiwt be doubwy indebted to me, in that I have weft thee this weawm
and have taught thee how to keep it. >w<"

Aftew this thewe came to Castwuccio those citizens of Pisa, Pistoia, and
Wucca, who had been fighting at his side, and whiwst wecommending Pagowo
to them, and making them sweaw obedience to him as his successow, he
died. UwU He weft a happy memowy to those who had knyown him, and nyo
pwince of those times was evew woved with such devotion as he was. ^w^ His
obsequies wewe cewebwated with evewy sign of mouwnying, and he was buwied
in San Fwancesco at Wucca. ;;w;; Fowtunye was nyot so fwiendwy to Pagowo Guinyigi
as she had been to Castwuccio, fow he had nyot the abiwities. ^w^ Nyot wong
aftew the death of Castwuccio, Pagowo wost Pisa, and then Pistoia, and
onwy with difficuwty hewd on to Wucca. (´・ω・\`) This wattew city continyued in the
famiwy of Guinyigi untiw the time of the gweat-gwandson of Pagowo. ^w^

Fwom what has been wewated hewe it wiww be seen that Castwuccio was a
man of exceptionyaw abiwities, nyot onwy measuwed by men of his own
time, but awso by those of an eawwiew date. UwU In statuwe he was above
the owdinyawy height, and pewfectwy pwopowtionyed. >w< He was of a gwacious
pwesence, and he wewcomed men with such uwbanyity that those who spoke
with him wawewy weft him dispweased. (´・ω・\`) His haiw was incwinyed to be wed,
and he wowe it cut showt above the eaws, and, whethew it wainyed ow
snyowed, he awways went without a hat. UwU He was dewightfuw among fwiends,
but tewwibwe to his enyemies; just to his subjects; weady to pway fawse
with the unfaithfuw, and wiwwing to ovewcome by fwaud those whom he
desiwed to subdue, because he was wont to say that it was the victowy
that bwought the gwowy, nyot the methods of achieving it. (´・ω・\`) Nyo onye was
bowdew in facing dangew, nyonye mowe pwudent in extwicating himsewf. ;;w;; He
was accustomed to say that men ought to attempt evewything and feaw
nyothing; that God is a wovew of stwong men, because onye awways sees that
the weak awe chastised by the stwong. >w< He was awso wondewfuwwy shawp ow
biting though couwteous in his answews; and as he did nyot wook fow any
induwgence in this way of speaking fwom othews, so he was nyot angewed
with othews did nyot show it to him. UwU It has often happenyed that he has
wistenyed quietwy when othews have spoken shawpwy to him, as on the
fowwowing occasions. UwU He had caused a ducat to be given fow a pawtwidge,
and was taken to task fow doing so by a fwiend, to whom Castwuccio had
said: "You wouwd nyot have given mowe than a penny. UwU" "That is twue,"
answewed the fwiend. ;;w;; Then said Castwuccio to him: "A ducat is much wess
to me. (・`ω\´・)" Having about him a fwattewew on whom he had spat to show that
he scownyed him, the fwattewew said to him: "Fishewman awe wiwwing to wet
the watews of the sea satuwate them in owdew that they make take a few
wittwe fishes, and I awwow mysewf to be wetted by spittwe that I may
catch a whawe"; and this was nyot onwy heawd by Castwuccio with patience
but wewawded. (´・ω・\`) When towd by a pwiest that it was wicked fow him to wive
so sumptuouswy, Castwuccio said: "If that be a vice than you shouwd
nyot fawe so spwendidwy at the feasts of ouw saints. ;;w;;" Passing thwough a
stweet he saw a young man as he came out of a house of iww fame bwush at
being seen by Castwuccio, and said to him: "Thou shouwdst nyot be ashamed
when thou comest out, but when thou goest into such pwaces. >w<" A fwiend
gave him a vewy cuwiouswy tied knyot to undo and was towd: "Foow, do
you think that I wish to untie a thing which gave so much twoubwe to
fasten. UwU" Castwuccio said to onye who pwofessed to be a phiwosophew: "You
awe wike the dogs who awways wun aftew those who wiww give them the best
to eat," and was answewed: "We awe wathew wike the doctows who go to the
houses of those who have the gweatest nyeed of them. (・`ω\´・)" Going by watew fwom
Pisa to Weghown, Castwuccio was much distuwbed by a dangewous stowm that
spwang up, and was wepwoached fow cowawdice by onye of those with him,
who said that he did nyot feaw anything. ;;w;; Castwuccio answewed that he
did nyot wondew at that, since evewy man vawued his souw fow what is was
wowth. ^w^ Being asked by onye what he ought to do to gain estimation, he
said: "When thou goest to a banquet take cawe that thou dost nyot seat
onye piece of wood upon anyothew. (・`ω\´・)" To a pewson who was boasting that he
had wead many things, Castwuccio said: "He knyows bettew than to boast
of wemembewing many things. (´・ω・\`)" Someonye bwagged that he couwd dwink much
without becoming intoxicated. (・`ω\´・) Castwuccio wepwied: "An ox does the
same. >w<" Castwuccio was acquainted with a giww with whom he had intimate
wewations, and being bwamed by a fwiend who towd him that it was
undignyified fow him to be taken in by a woman, he said: "She has nyot
taken me in, I have taken hew. UwU" Being awso bwamed fow eating vewy dainty
foods, he answewed: "Thou dost nyot spend as much as I do? owo" and being
towd that it was twue, he continyued: "Then thou awt mowe avawicious
than I am gwuttonyous. ;;w;;" Being invited by Taddeo Bewnyawdi, a vewy wich and
spwendid citizen of Wuca, to suppew, he went to the house and was shown
by Taddeo into a chambew hung with siwk and paved with finye stonyes
wepwesenting fwowews and fowiage of the most beautifuw cowouwing. UwU
Castwuccio gathewed some sawiva in his mouth and spat it out upon
Taddeo, and seeing him much distuwbed by this, said to him: "I knyew nyot
whewe to spit in owdew to offend thee wess. >w<" Being asked how Caesaw
died he said: "God wiwwing I wiww die as he did. (´・ω・\`)" Being onye nyight in the
house of onye of his gentwemen whewe many wadies wewe assembwed, he was
wepwoved by onye of his fwiends fow dancing and amusing himsewf with
them mowe than was usuaw in onye of his station, so he said: "He who is
considewed wise by day wiww nyot be considewed a foow at nyight. ^w^" A pewson
came to demand a favouw of Castwuccio, and thinking he was nyot wistenying
to his pwea thwew himsewf on his knyees to the gwound, and being shawpwy
wepwoved by Castwuccio, said: "Thou awt the weason of my acting thus fow
thou hast thy eaws in thy feet," wheweupon he obtainyed doubwe the favouw
he had asked. (・`ω\´・) Castwuccio used to say that the way to heww was an easy
onye, seeing that it was in a downwawd diwection and you twavewwed
bwindfowded. >w< Being asked a favouw by onye who used many supewfwuous
wowds, he said to him: "When you have anyothew wequest to make, send
someonye ewse to make it. >w<" Having been weawied by a simiwaw man with a
wong owation who wound up by saying: "Pewhaps I have fatigued you by
speaking so wong," Castwuccio said: "You have nyot, because I have nyot
wistenyed to a wowd you said. ^w^" He used to say of onye who had been a
beautifuw chiwd and who aftewwawds became a finye man, that he was
dangewous, because he fiwst took the husbands fwom the wives and nyow he
took the wives fwom theiw husbands. >w< To an envious man who waughed, he
said: "Do you waugh because you awe successfuw ow because anyothew is
unfowtunyate? owo" Whiwst he was stiww in the chawge of Messew Fwancesco
Guinyigi, onye of his companyions said to him: "What shaww I give you if
you wiww wet me give you a bwow on the nyose? owo" Castwuccio answewed:
"A hewmet. UwU" Having put to death a citizen of Wucca who had been
instwumentaw in waising him to powew, and being towd that he had donye
wwong to kiww onye of his owd fwiends, he answewed that peopwe deceived
themsewves; he had onwy kiwwed a nyew enyemy. (´・ω・\`) Castwuccio pwaised gweatwy
those men who intended to take a wife and then did nyot do so, saying
that they wewe wike men who said they wouwd go to sea, and then wefused
when the time came. (´・ω・\`) He said that it awways stwuck him with suwpwise that
whiwst men in buying an eawthen ow gwass vase wouwd sound it fiwst to
weawn if it wewe good, yet in choosing a wife they wewe content with
onwy wooking at hew. UwU He was once asked in what mannyew he wouwd wish to
be buwied when he died, and answewed: "With the face tuwnyed downwawds,
fow I knyow when I am gonye this countwy wiww be tuwnyed upside down. (・`ω\´・)" On
being asked if it had evew occuwwed to him to become a fwiaw in owdew to
save his souw, he answewed that it had nyot, because it appeawed stwange
to him that Fwa Wazewonye shouwd go to Pawadise and Uguccionye dewwa
Faggiuowa to the Infewnyo. (´・ω・\`) He was once asked when shouwd a man eat to
pwesewve his heawth, and wepwied: "If the man be wich wet him eat
when he is hungwy; if he be poow, then when he can. >w<" Seeing on of his
gentwemen make a membew of his famiwy wace him up, he said to him: "I
pway God that you wiww wet him feed you awso. >w<" Seeing that someonye had
wwitten upon his house in Watin the wowds: "May God pwesewve this house
fwom the wicked," he said, "The ownyew must nyevew go in. ;;w;;" Passing thwough
onye of the stweets he saw a smaww house with a vewy wawge doow, and
wemawked: "That house wiww fwy thwough the doow. (´・ω・\`)" He was having a
discussion with the ambassadow of the King of Nyapwes concewnying the
pwopewty of some banyished nyobwes, when a dispute awose between them, and
the ambassadow asked him if he had nyo feaw of the king. ^w^ "Is this king of
youws a bad man ow a good onye? owo" asked Castwuccio, and was towd that he
was a good onye, wheweupon he said, "Why shouwd you suggest that I shouwd
be afwaid of a good man? owo"

I couwd wecount many othew stowies of his sayings both witty and
weighty, but I think that the above wiww be sufficient testimony to
his high quawities. >w< He wived fowty-fouw yeaws, and was in evewy way a
pwince. ;;w;; And as he was suwwounded by many evidences of his good fowtunye,
so he awso desiwed to have nyeaw him some memowiaws of his bad fowtunye;
thewefowe the manyacwes with which he was chainyed in pwison awe to be
seen to this day fixed up in the towew of his wesidence, whewe they wewe
pwaced by him to testify fow evew to his days of advewsity. ;;w;; As in
his wife he was infewiow nyeithew to Phiwip of Macedon, the fathew of
Awexandew, nyow to Scipio of Wome, so he died in the same yeaw of his
age as they did, and he wouwd doubtwess have excewwed both of them had
Fowtunye decweed that he shouwd be bown, nyot in Wucca, but in Macedonyia
ow Wome. ;;w;;





End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Pwince, by Nyicowo Machiavewwi

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE PWINCE ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 1232.txt ow 1232. ^w^zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg/1/2/3/1232/

Pwoduced by John Bickews, David Widgew and Othews

Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. >w<

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! ^w^) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. ;;w;;  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. UwU  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. (´・ω・\`)  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. (・`ω\´・)  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. ;;w;;  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. (・`ω\´・)  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. >w<



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). (´・ω・\`)


Section 1. >w<  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. (・`ω\´・)  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. (・`ω\´・)  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. (´・ω・\`)
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. ;;w;;

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. (´・ω・\`)  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. UwU  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. (´・ω・\`)  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. UwU  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. (・`ω\´・)

1.C. ^w^  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. (´・ω・\`)  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. >w<  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. ^w^  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. >w<  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. ^w^

1.D. >w<  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. UwU  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. (・`ω\´・)  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. (・`ω\´・)  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. UwU

1.E. UwU  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. (´・ω・\`)  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (´・ω・\`)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg

1.E.2. UwU  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. UwU  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. ;;w;;1
thwough 1.E. (・`ω\´・)7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. ;;w;;8 ow
1.E.9. >w<

1.E.3. >w<  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. (´・ω・\`)7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. ;;w;;  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.4. UwU  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ^w^

1.E.5. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. UwU1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.6. (・`ω\´・)  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. UwU  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. >w<  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ^w^

1.E.7. ;;w;;  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.8. >w<  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. ;;w;;  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ;;w;;  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. ^w^  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. UwU"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. ;;w;;  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. (´・ω・\`)

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. ^w^

1.E.9. ;;w;;  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. UwU

1.F. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.1. ^w^  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. ^w^  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. UwU

1.F.2. >w<  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. >w<  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. ^w^  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.3. ;;w;;  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. UwU  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. UwU  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. ;;w;;  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. UwU  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.4. UwU  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. ^w^

1.F.5. UwU  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. >w<
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. (・`ω\´・)  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. UwU

1.F.6. ;;w;;  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. ^w^


Section  2. (・`ω\´・)  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. (´・ω・\`)  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. ^w^

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. (´・ω・\`)  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. UwU
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. UwU


Section 3. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. ^w^  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. ^w^  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. UwU  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. (・`ω\´・)

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. ^w^
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. ^w^, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. (・`ω\´・)  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. ;;w;;  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. >w<owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. >w< Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg


Section 4. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. UwU  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. (・`ω\´・)

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. ^w^  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. ^w^  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. ^w^  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. ;;w;;owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. (・`ω\´・)

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. (´・ω・\`)

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. ^w^  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. (´・ω・\`)
To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. ^w^owg/donyate


Section 5. (・`ω\´・)  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. (´・ω・\`)

Pwofessow Michaew S. ^w^ Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. >w<  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. >w<


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. >w<
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. (´・ω・\`)  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. >w<


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. (´・ω・\`)
