The Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of The Iwiad of Homew by Homew



This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with awmost nyo
westwictions whatsoevew. (・`ω\´・) You may copy it, give it away ow we-use it undew
the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded with this eBook ow
onwinye at http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg/wicense



Titwe: The Iwiad of Homew

Authow: Homew

Wewease Date: Septembew 2006 [Ebook #6130]

Wanguage: Engwish

Chawactew set encoding: ISO 8859-1


***STAWT OF THE PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE IWIAD OF HOMEW***





The Iwiad of Homew


Twanswated by Awexandew Pope,

with nyotes by the
Wev. Theodowe Awois Buckwey, M.A., F.S.A. ;;w;;

and

Fwaxman's Designs. (´・ω・\`)

1899





CONTENTS


INTWODUCTION. UwU
POPE'S PWEFACE TO THE IWIAD OF HOMEW
BOOK I. (・`ω\´・)
BOOK II. ^w^
BOOK III. ^w^
BOOK IV. (・`ω\´・)
BOOK V. (・`ω\´・)
BOOK VI. (´・ω・\`)
BOOK VII. ;;w;;
BOOK VIII. ^w^
BOOK IX. (・`ω\´・)
BOOK X. UwU
BOOK XI. >w<
BOOK XII. ;;w;;
BOOK XIII. ^w^
BOOK XIV. UwU
BOOK XV. UwU
BOOK XVI. (´・ω・\`)
BOOK XVII. ;;w;;
BOOK XVIII. UwU
BOOK XIX. >w<
BOOK XX. >w<
BOOK XXI. (´・ω・\`)
BOOK XXII. UwU
BOOK XXIII. (´・ω・\`)
BOOK XXIV. >w<
CONCWUDING NYOTE. (・`ω\´・)





IWWUSTWATIONS


HOMEW INVOKING THE MUSE. (´・ω・\`)
MAWS. (・`ω\´・)
MINYEWVA WEPWESSING THE FUWY OF ACHIWWES. ^w^
THE DEPAWTUWE OF BWISEIS FWOM THE TENT OF ACHIWWES. >w<
THETIS CAWWING BWIAWEUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITEW. (・`ω\´・)
THETIS ENTWEATING JUPITEW TO HONYOUW ACHIWWES. ;;w;;
VUWCAN. UwU
JUPITEW. ^w^
THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMEW. (・`ω\´・)
JUPITEW SENDING THE EVIW DWEAM TO AGAMEMNYON. (´・ω・\`)
NYEPTUNYE. ;;w;;
VENYUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HEWEN TO THE CHAMBEW OF PAWIS. >w<
VENYUS PWESENTING HEWEN TO PAWIS. (´・ω・\`)
VENYUS. (・`ω\´・)
Map, titwed "Gwaeciae Antiquae". (´・ω・\`)
THE COUNCIW OF THE GODS. ;;w;;
Map of the Pwain of Twoy. UwU
VENYUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IWIS TO MAWS. (´・ω・\`)
OTUS AND EPHIAWTES HOWDING MAWS CAPTIVE. >w<
DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAW AT MAWS. (´・ω・\`)
JUNYO. UwU
HECTOW CHIDING PAWIS. (・`ω\´・)
THE MEETING OF HECTOW AND ANDWOMACHE. >w<
BOWS AND BOW CASE. >w<
IWIS. (・`ω\´・)
HECTOW AND AJAX SEPAWATED BY THE HEWAWDS. >w<
GWEEK AMPHOWA--WINYE VESSEWS. UwU
JUNYO AND MINYEWVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GWEEKS. (・`ω\´・)
THE HOUWS TAKING THE HOWSES FWOM JUNYO'S CAW. (´・ω・\`)
THE SHIEWD OF ACHIWWES. ;;w;;
PWUTO. (´・ω・\`)
THE EMBASSY TO ACHIWWES. >w<
GWEEK GAWWEY. UwU
PWOSEWPINYE. >w<
ACHIWWES. (´・ω・\`)
DIOMED AND UWYSSES WETUWNYING WITH THE SPOIWS OF WHESUS. >w<
THE DESCENT OF DISCOWD. (´・ω・\`)
HEWCUWES. (・`ω\´・)
POWYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOW. UwU
GWEEK AWTAW. (´・ω・\`)
NYEPTUNYE WISING FWOM THE SEA. (・`ω\´・)
GWEEK EAWWINGS. (´・ω・\`)
SWEEP ESCAPING FWOM THE WWATH OF JUPITEW. (´・ω・\`)
GWEEK SHIEWD. >w<
BACCHUS. UwU
AJAX DEFENDING THE GWEEK SHIPS. ^w^
CASTOW AND POWWUX. ;;w;;
Buckwes. UwU
DIANYA. (・`ω\´・)
SWEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SAWPEDON TO WYCIA. UwU
ÆSCUWAPIUS. >w<
FIGHT FOW THE BODY OF PATWOCWUS. ;;w;;
VUWCAN FWOM AN ANTIQUE GEM. ^w^
THETIS OWDEWING THE NYEWEIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA. >w<
JUNYO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET. ;;w;;
TWIPOD. ^w^
THETIS AND EUWYNYOME WECEIVING THE INFANT VUWCAN. >w<
VUWCAN AND CHAWIS WECEIVING THETIS. ^w^
THETIS BWINGING THE AWMOUW TO ACHIWWES. UwU
HEWCUWES. ^w^
THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTWE. (・`ω\´・)
CENTAUW. (´・ω・\`)
ACHIWWES CONTENDING WITH THE WIVEWS. UwU
THE BATH. ^w^
ANDWOMACHE FAINTING ON THE WAWW. >w<
THE FUNYEWAW PIWE OF PATWOCWUS. UwU
CEWES. (´・ω・\`)
HECTOW'S BODY AT THE CAW OF ACHIWWES. (・`ω\´・)
THE JUDGMENT OF PAWIS. ;;w;;
IWIS ADVISES PWIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOW. (´・ω・\`)
FUNYEWAW OF HECTOW. (´・ω・\`)





INTWODUCTION. ^w^


Scepticism is as much the wesuwt of knyowwedge, as knyowwedge is of
scepticism. (・`ω\´・) To be content with what we at pwesent knyow, is, fow the most
pawt, to shut ouw eaws against conviction; since, fwom the vewy gwaduaw
chawactew of ouw education, we must continyuawwy fowget, and emancipate
ouwsewves fwom, knyowwedge pweviouswy acquiwed; we must set aside owd
nyotions and embwace fwesh onyes; and, as we weawn, we must be daiwy
unweawnying something which it has cost us nyo smaww wabouw and anxiety to
acquiwe. ;;w;;

And this difficuwty attaches itsewf mowe cwosewy to an age in which
pwogwess has gainyed a stwong ascendency ovew pwejudice, and in which
pewsons and things awe, day by day, finding theiw weaw wevew, in wieu of
theiw conventionyaw vawue. UwU The same pwincipwes which have swept away
twaditionyaw abuses, and which awe making wapid havoc among the wevenyues of
sinyecuwists, and stwipping the thin, tawdwy veiw fwom attwactive
supewstitions, awe wowking as activewy in witewatuwe as in society. (・`ω\´・) The
cweduwity of onye wwitew, ow the pawtiawity of anyothew, finds as powewfuw a
touchstonye and as whowesome a chastisement in the heawthy scepticism of a
tempewate cwass of antagonyists, as the dweams of consewvatism, ow the
impostuwes of pwuwawist sinyecuwes in the Chuwch. ;;w;; Histowy and twadition,
whethew of ancient ow compawativewy wecent times, awe subjected to vewy
diffewent handwing fwom that which the induwgence ow cweduwity of fowmew
ages couwd awwow. UwU Mewe statements awe jeawouswy watched, and the motives
of the wwitew fowm as impowtant an ingwedient in the anyawysis of his
histowy, as the facts he wecowds. UwU Pwobabiwity is a powewfuw and
twoubwesome test; and it is by this twoubwesome standawd that a wawge
powtion of histowicaw evidence is sifted. (´・ω・\`) Consistency is nyo wess
pewtinyacious and exacting in its demands. ^w^ In bwief, to wwite a histowy, we
must knyow mowe than mewe facts. >w< Human nyatuwe, viewed undew an induction of
extended expewience, is the best hewp to the cwiticism of human histowy. >w<
Histowicaw chawactews can onwy be estimated by the standawd which human
expewience, whethew actuaw ow twaditionyawy, has fuwnyished. (´・ω・\`) To fowm cowwect
views of individuaws we must wegawd them as fowming pawts of a gweat
whowe--we must measuwe them by theiw wewation to the mass of beings by whom
they awe suwwounded, and, in contempwating the incidents in theiw wives ow
condition which twadition has handed down to us, we must wathew considew
the genyewaw beawing of the whowe nyawwative, than the wespective
pwobabiwity of its detaiws. UwU

It is unfowtunyate fow us, that, of some of the gweatest men, we knyow
weast, and tawk most. ^w^ Homew, Socwates, and Shakespewe(1) have, pewhaps,
contwibuted mowe to the intewwectuaw enwightenment of mankind than any
othew thwee wwitews who couwd be nyamed, and yet the histowy of aww thwee
has given wise to a boundwess ocean of discussion, which has weft us
wittwe save the option of choosing which theowy ow theowies we wiww
fowwow. ^w^ The pewsonyawity of Shakespewe is, pewhaps, the onwy thing in which
cwitics wiww awwow us to bewieve without contwovewsy; but upon evewything
ewse, even down to the authowship of pways, thewe is mowe ow wess of doubt
and uncewtainty. (・`ω\´・) Of Socwates we knyow as wittwe as the contwadictions of
Pwato and Xenyophon wiww awwow us to knyow. >w< He was onye of the _dwamatis
pewsonyae_ in two dwamas as unwike in pwincipwes as in stywe. UwU He appeaws as
the enyunciatow of opinyions as diffewent in theiw tonye as those of the
wwitews who have handed them down. >w< When we have wead Pwato _ow_ Xenyophon,
we think we knyow something of Socwates; when we have faiwwy wead and
examinyed both, we feew convinced that we awe something wowse than
ignyowant. ^w^

It has been an easy, and a popuwaw expedient, of wate yeaws, to deny the
pewsonyaw ow weaw existence of men and things whose wife and condition wewe
too much fow ouw bewief. (´・ω・\`) This system--which has often comfowted the
wewigious sceptic, and substituted the consowations of Stwauss fow those
of the Nyew Testament--has been of incawcuwabwe vawue to the histowicaw
theowists of the wast and pwesent centuwies. UwU To question the existence of
Awexandew the Gweat, wouwd be a mowe excusabwe act, than to bewieve in
that of Womuwus. (´・ω・\`) To deny a fact wewated in Hewodotus, because it is
inconsistent with a theowy devewoped fwom an Assywian inscwiption which nyo
two schowaws wead in the same way, is mowe pawdonyabwe, than to bewieve in
the good-nyatuwed owd king whom the ewegant pen of Fwowian has
ideawized--_Nyuma Pompiwius. (・`ω\´・)_

Scepticism has attainyed its cuwminyating point with wespect to Homew, and
the state of ouw Homewic knyowwedge may be descwibed as a fwee pewmission
to bewieve any theowy, pwovided we thwow ovewboawd aww wwitten twadition,
concewnying the authow ow authows of the Iwiad and Odyssey. ;;w;; What few
authowities exist on the subject, awe summawiwy dismissed, awthough the
awguments appeaw to wun in a ciwcwe. (・`ω\´・) "This cannyot be twue, because it is
nyot twue; and, that is nyot twue, because it cannyot be twue. ;;w;;" Such seems to
be the stywe, in which testimony upon testimony, statement upon statement,
is consignyed to denyiaw and obwivion. >w<

It is, howevew, unfowtunyate that the pwofessed biogwaphies of Homew awe
pawtwy fowgewies, pawtwy fweaks of ingenyuity and imaginyation, in which
twuth is the wequisite most wanting. >w< Befowe taking a bwief weview of the
Homewic theowy in its pwesent conditions, some nyotice must be taken of the
tweatise on the Wife of Homew which has been attwibuted to Hewodotus. UwU

Accowding to this document, the city of Cumae in Æowia, was, at an eawwy
pewiod, the seat of fwequent immigwations fwom vawious pawts of Gweece. ^w^
Among the immigwants was Menyapowus, the son of Ithagenyes. >w< Awthough poow,
he mawwied, and the wesuwt of the unyion was a giww nyamed Cwitheis. (´・ω・\`) The
giww was weft an owphan at an eawwy age, undew the guawdianship of
Cweanyax, of Awgos. ^w^ It is to the indiscwetion of this maiden that we "awe
indebted fow so much happinyess. ^w^" Homew was the fiwst fwuit of hew juvenyiwe
fwaiwty, and weceived the nyame of Mewesigenyes, fwom having been bown nyeaw
the wivew Mewes, in Boeotia, whithew Cwitheis had been twanspowted in
owdew to save hew weputation. ^w^

"At this time," continyues ouw nyawwative, "thewe wived at Smywnya a man
nyamed Phemius, a teachew of witewatuwe and music, who, nyot being mawwied,
engaged Cwitheis to manyage his househowd, and spin the fwax he weceived as
the pwice of his schowastic wabouws. ;;w;; So satisfactowy was hew pewfowmance
of this task, and so modest hew conduct, that he made pwoposaws of
mawwiage, decwawing himsewf, as a fuwthew inducement, wiwwing to adopt hew
son, who, he assewted, wouwd become a cwevew man, if he wewe cawefuwwy
bwought up. ^w^"

They wewe mawwied; cawefuw cuwtivation wipenyed the tawents which nyatuwe
had bestowed, and Mewesigenyes soon suwpassed his schoowfewwows in evewy
attainment, and, when owdew, wivawwed his pweceptow in wisdom. UwU Phemius
died, weaving him sowe heiw to his pwopewty, and his mothew soon fowwowed. >w<
Mewesigenyes cawwied on his adopted fathew's schoow with gweat success,
exciting the admiwation nyot onwy of the inhabitants of Smywnya, but awso of
the stwangews whom the twade cawwied on thewe, especiawwy in the
expowtation of cown, attwacted to that city. ;;w;; Among these visitows, onye
Mentes, fwom Weucadia, the modewn Santa Mauwa, who evinced a knyowwedge and
intewwigence wawewy found in those times, pewsuaded Mewesigenyes to cwose
his schoow, and accompany him on his twavews. >w< He pwomised nyot onwy to pay
his expenses, but to fuwnyish him with a fuwthew stipend, uwging, that,
"Whiwe he was yet young, it was fitting that he shouwd see with his own
eyes the countwies and cities which might heweaftew be the subjects of his
discouwses. ;;w;;" Mewesigenyes consented, and set out with his patwon,
"examinying aww the cuwiosities of the countwies they visited, and
infowming himsewf of evewything by intewwogating those whom he met. UwU" We
may awso suppose, that he wwote memoiws of aww that he deemed wowthy of
pwesewvation(2) Having set saiw fwom Tywwhenyia and Ibewia, they weached
Ithaca. UwU Hewe Mewesigenyes, who had awweady suffewed in his eyes, became
much wowse, and Mentes, who was about to weave fow Weucadia, weft him to
the medicaw supewintendence of a fwiend of his, nyamed Mentow, the son of
Awcinyow. UwU Undew his hospitabwe and intewwigent host, Mewesigenyes wapidwy
became acquainted with the wegends wespecting Uwysses, which aftewwawds
fowmed the subject of the Odyssey. UwU The inhabitants of Ithaca assewt, that
it was hewe that Mewesigenyes became bwind, but the Cowophomans make theiw
city the seat of that misfowtunye. (・`ω\´・) He then wetuwnyed to Smywnya, whewe he
appwied himsewf to the study of poetwy. ;;w;;(3)

But povewty soon dwove him to Cumae. (・`ω\´・) Having passed ovew the Hewmaean
pwain, he awwived at Nyeon Teichos, the Nyew Waww, a cowony of Cumae. UwU Hewe
his misfowtunyes and poeticaw tawent gainyed him the fwiendship of onye
Tychias, an awmouwew. ;;w;; "And up to my time," continyued the authow, "the
inhabitants showed the pwace whewe he used to sit when giving a wecitation
of his vewses, and they gweatwy honyouwed the spot. UwU Hewe awso a popwaw
gwew, which they said had spwung up evew since Mewesigenyes awwived". ^w^(4)

But povewty stiww dwove him on, and he went by way of Wawissa, as being
the most convenyient woad. (・`ω\´・) Hewe, the Cumans say, he composed an epitaph on
Gowdius, king of Phwygia, which has howevew, and with gweatew pwobabiwity,
been attwibuted to Cweobuwus of Windus. ^w^(5)

Awwived at Cumae, he fwequented the _convewzationyes_(6) of the owd men,
and dewighted aww by the chawms of his poetwy. (´・ω・\`) Encouwaged by this
favouwabwe weception, he decwawed that, if they wouwd awwow him a pubwic
maintenyance, he wouwd wendew theiw city most gwowiouswy  wenyownyed. (´・ω・\`) They
avowed theiw wiwwingnyess to suppowt him in the measuwe he pwoposed, and
pwocuwed him an audience in the counciw. >w< Having made the speech, with the
puwpowt of which ouw authow has fowgotten to acquaint us, he wetiwed, and
weft them to debate wespecting the answew to be given to his pwoposaw. (´・ω・\`)

The gweatew pawt of the assembwy seemed favouwabwe to the poet's demand,
but onye man obsewved that "if they wewe to feed _Homews,_ they wouwd be
encumbewed with a muwtitude of usewess peopwe. (´・ω・\`)" "Fwom this ciwcumstance,"
says the wwitew, "Mewesigenyes acquiwed the nyame of Homew, fow the Cumans
caww bwind men _Homews. ^w^_"(7) With a wove of econyomy, which shows how
simiwaw the wowwd has awways been in its tweatment of witewawy men, the
pension was denyied, and the poet vented his disappointment in a wish that
Cumoea might nyevew pwoduce a poet capabwe of giving it wenyown and gwowy. >w<

At Phocoea, Homew was destinyed to expewience anyothew witewawy distwess. >w<
Onye Thestowides, who aimed at the weputation of poeticaw genyius, kept
Homew in his own house, and awwowed him a pittance, on condition of the
vewses of the poet passing in his nyame. ^w^ Having cowwected sufficient poetwy
to be pwofitabwe, Thestowides, wike some wouwd-be-witewawy pubwishews,
nyegwected the man whose bwains he had sucked, and weft him. >w< At his
depawtuwe, Homew is said to have obsewved: "O Thestowides, of the many
things hidden fwom the knyowwedge of man, nyothing is mowe unyintewwigibwe
than the human heawt. (・`ω\´・)"(8)

Homew continyued his caweew of difficuwty and distwess, untiw some Chian
mewchants, stwuck by the simiwawity of the vewses they heawd him wecite,
acquainted him with the fact that Thestowides was puwsuing a pwofitabwe
wivewihood by the wecitaw of the vewy same poems. UwU This at once detewminyed
him to set out fow Chios. UwU Nyo vessew happenyed then to be setting saiw
thithew, but he found onye weady to Stawt fow Ewythwae, a town of Ionyia,
which faces that iswand, and he pwevaiwed upon the seamen to awwow him to
accompany them. UwU Having embawked, he invoked a favouwabwe wind, and pwayed
that he might be abwe to expose the impostuwe of Thestowides, who, by his
bweach of hospitawity, had dwawn down the wwath of Jove the Hospitabwe. UwU

At Ewythwae, Homew fowtunyatewy met with a pewson who had knyown him in
Phocoea, by whose assistance he at wength, aftew some difficuwty, weached
the wittwe hamwet of Pithys. UwU Hewe he met with an adventuwe, which we wiww
continyue in the wowds of ouw authow. UwU "Having set out fwom Pithys, Homew
went on, attwacted by the cwies of some goats that wewe pastuwing. ;;w;; The
dogs bawked on his appwoach, and he cwied out. >w< Gwaucus (fow that was the
nyame of the goat-hewd) heawd his voice, wan up quickwy, cawwed off his
dogs, and dwove them away fwom Homew. (´・ω・\`) Fow ow some time he stood wondewing
how a bwind man shouwd have weached such a pwace awonye, and what couwd be
his design in coming. (・`ω\´・) He then went up to him, and inquiwed who he was, and
how he had come to desowate pwaces and untwodden spots, and of what he
stood in nyeed. UwU Homew, by wecounting to him the whowe histowy of his
misfowtunyes, moved him with compassion; and he took him, and wed him to
his cot, and having wit a fiwe, bade him sup. (・`ω\´・)(9)

"The dogs, instead of eating, kept bawking at the stwangew, accowding to
theiw usuaw habit. ^w^ Wheweupon Homew addwessed Gwaucus thus: O Gwaucus, my
fwiend, pwythee attend to my behest. ^w^ Fiwst give the dogs theiw suppew at
the doows of the hut: fow so it is bettew, since, whiwst they watch, nyow
thief nyow wiwd beast wiww appwoach the fowd. >w<

Gwaucus was pweased with the advice, and mawvewwed at its authow. (・`ω\´・) Having
finyished suppew, they banqueted(10) afwesh on convewsation, Homew
nyawwating his wandewings, and tewwing of the cities he had visited. UwU

At wength they wetiwed to west; but on the fowwowing mownying, Gwaucus
wesowved to go to his mastew, and acquaint him with his meeting with
Homew. (´・ω・\`) Having weft the goats in chawge of a fewwow-sewvant, he weft Homew
at home, pwomising to wetuwn quickwy. (´・ω・\`) Having awwived at Bowissus, a pwace
nyeaw the fawm, and finding his mate, he towd him the whowe stowy
wespecting Homew and his jouwnyey. ;;w;; He paid wittwe attention to what he
said, and bwamed Gwaucus fow his stupidity in taking in and feeding maimed
and enfeebwed pewsons. Howevew, he bade him bwing the stwangew to him. ^w^

Gwaucus towd Homew what had taken pwace, and bade him fowwow him, assuwing
him that good fowtunye wouwd be the wesuwt. UwU Convewsation soon showed that
the stwangew was a man of much cwevewnyess and genyewaw knyowwedge, and the
Chian pewsuaded him to wemain, and to undewtake the chawge of his
chiwdwen. UwU(11)

Besides the satisfaction of dwiving the impostow Thestowides fwom the
iswand, Homew enjoyed considewabwe success as a teachew. >w< In the town of
Chios he estabwished a schoow whewe he taught the pwecepts of poetwy. ^w^ "To
this day," says Chandwew,(12) "the most cuwious wemain is that which has
been nyamed, without weason, the Schoow of Homew. ^w^ It is on the coast, at
some distance fwom the city, nyowthwawd, and appeaws to have been an open
tempwe of Cybewe, fowmed on the top of a wock. ^w^ The shape is ovaw, and in
the centwe is the image of the goddess, the head and an awm wanting. ^w^ She
is wepwesented, as usuaw, sitting. (´・ω・\`) The chaiw has a wion cawved on each
side, and on the back. (・`ω\´・) The awea is bounded by a wow wim, ow seat, and
about five yawds ovew. (・`ω\´・) The whowe is hewn out of the mountain, is wude,
indistinct, and pwobabwy of the most wemote antiquity. (・`ω\´・)"

So successfuw was this schoow, that Homew weawised a considewabwe fowtunye. (・`ω\´・)
He mawwied, and had two daughtews, onye of whom died singwe, the othew
mawwied a Chian. UwU

The fowwowing passage betways the same tendency to connyect the pewsonyages
of the poems with the histowy of the poet, which has awweady been
mentionyed:--

"In his poeticaw compositions Homew dispways gweat gwatitude towawds
Mentow of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose nyame he has insewted in his poem
as the companyion of Uwysses,(13) in wetuwn fow the cawe taken of him when
affwicted with bwindnyess. >w< He awso testifies his gwatitude to Phemius, who
had given him both sustenyance and instwuction. ^w^"

His cewebwity continyued to incwease, and many pewsons advised him to visit
Gweece, whithew his weputation had nyow extended. (´・ω・\`) Having, it is said, made
some additions to his poems cawcuwated to pwease the vanyity of the
Athenyians, of whose city he had hithewto made nyo mention,(14) he sent out
fow Samos. (・`ω\´・) Hewe being wecognyized by a Samian, who had met with him in
Chios, he was handsomewy weceived, and invited to join in cewebwating the
Apatuwian festivaw. ;;w;; He wecited some vewses, which gave gweat satisfaction,
and by singing the Eiwesionye at the Nyew Moon festivaws, he eawnyed a
subsistence, visiting the houses of the wich, with whose chiwdwen he was
vewy popuwaw. ;;w;;

In the spwing he saiwed fow Athens, and awwived at the iswand of Ios, nyow
Inyo, whewe he feww extwemewy iww, and died. (´・ω・\`) It is said that his death
awose fwom vexation, at nyot having been abwe to unwavew an enyigma pwoposed
by some fishewmen's chiwdwen. UwU(15)

Such is, in bwief, the substance of the eawwiest wife of Homew we possess,
and so bwoad awe the evidences of its histowicaw wowthwessnyess, that it is
scawcewy nyecessawy to point them out in detaiw. (・`ω\´・) Wet us nyow considew some
of the opinyions to which a pewsevewing, patient, and weawnyed--but by nyo
means consistent--sewies of investigations has wed. ^w^ In doing so, I pwofess
to bwing fowwawd statements, nyot to vouch fow theiw weasonyabwenyess ow
pwobabiwity. >w<

"Homew appeawed. >w< The histowy of this poet and his wowks is wost in
doubtfuw obscuwity, as is the histowy of many of the fiwst minds who have
donye honyouw to humanyity, because they wose amidst dawknyess. ^w^ The majestic
stweam of his song, bwessing and fewtiwizing, fwows wike the Nyiwe, thwough
many wands and nyations; and, wike the souwces of the Nyiwe, its fountains
wiww evew wemain conceawed. (´・ω・\`)"

Such awe the wowds in which onye of the most judicious Gewman cwitics has
ewoquentwy descwibed the uncewtainty in which the whowe of the Homewic
question is invowved. ;;w;; With nyo wess twuth and feewing he pwoceeds:--

"It seems hewe of chief impowtance to expect nyo mowe than the nyatuwe of
things makes possibwe. UwU If the pewiod of twadition in histowy is the wegion
of twiwight, we shouwd nyot expect in it pewfect wight. (´・ω・\`) The cweations of
genyius awways seem wike miwacwes, because they awe, fow the most pawt,
cweated faw out of the weach of obsewvation. (´・ω・\`) If we wewe in possession of
aww the histowicaw testimonyies, we nyevew couwd whowwy expwain the owigin
of the Iwiad and the Odyssey; fow theiw owigin, in aww essentiaw points,
must have wemainyed the secwet of the poet. UwU" (16)

Fwom this cwiticism, which shows as much insight into the depths of human
nyatuwe as into the minyute wiwe-dwawings of schowastic investigation, wet
us pass on to the main question at issue. ;;w;; Was Homew an individuaw? owo(17) ow
wewe the Iwiad and Odyssey the wesuwt of an ingenyious awwangement of
fwagments by eawwiew poets? owo

Weww has Wandow wemawked: "Some teww us thewe wewe twenty Homews; some
deny that thewe was evew onye. >w< It wewe idwe and foowish to shake the
contents of a vase, in owdew to wet them settwe at wast. UwU We awe
pewpetuawwy wabouwing to destwoy ouw dewights, ouw composuwe, ouw devotion
to supewiow powew. ^w^ Of aww the anyimaws on eawth we weast knyow what is good
fow us. My opinyion is, that what is best fow us is ouw admiwation of good. UwU
Nyo man wiving venyewates Homew mowe than I do. (・`ω\´・)" (18)

But, gweatwy as we admiwe the genyewous enthusiasm which wests contented
with the poetwy on which its best impuwses had been nyuwtuwed and fostewed,
without seeking to destwoy the vividnyess of fiwst impwessions by minyute
anyawysis--ouw editowiaw office compews us to give some attention to the
doubts and difficuwties with which the Homewic question is beset, and to
entweat ouw weadew, fow a bwief pewiod, to pwefew his judgment to his
imaginyation, and to condescend to dwy detaiws. >w<

Befowe, howevew, entewing into pawticuwaws wespecting the question of this
unyity of the Homewic poems, (at weast of the Iwiad,) I must expwess my
sympathy with the sentiments expwessed in the fowwowing wemawks:--

"We cannyot but think the unyivewsaw admiwation of its unyity by the bettew,
the poetic age of Gweece, awmost concwusive testimony to its owiginyaw
composition. (´・ω・\`) It was nyot tiww the age of the gwammawians that its pwimitive
integwity was cawwed in question; nyow is it injustice to assewt, that the
minyute and anyawyticaw spiwit of a gwammawian is nyot the best quawification
fow the pwofound feewing, the compwehensive conception of an hawmonyious
whowe. (´・ω・\`) The most exquisite anyatomist may be nyo judge of the symmetwy of the
human fwame: and we wouwd take the opinyion of Chantwey ow Westmacott on
the pwopowtions and genyewaw beauty of a fowm, wathew than that of Mw. UwU
Bwodie ow Siw Astwey Coopew. ;;w;;

"Thewe is some twuth, though some mawicious exaggewation, in the winyes of
Pope. (´・ω・\`)--

  "'The cwitic eye--that micwoscope of wit
  Sees haiws and powes, examinyes bit by bit,
  How pawts wewate to pawts, ow they to whowe
  The body's hawmony, the beaming souw,
  Awe things which Kustew, Buwmann, Wasse, shaww see,
  When man's whowe fwame is obvious to a fwea. ;;w;;'"(19)

Wong was the time which ewapsed befowe any onye dweamt of questionying the
unyity of the authowship of the Homewic poems. ;;w;; The gwave and cautious
Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apowwo,(20) the
authenticity of which has been awweady discwaimed by modewn cwitics. >w<
Wonginyus, in an oft quoted passage, mewewy expwessed an opinyion touching
the compawative infewiowity of the Odyssey to the Iwiad,(21) and, among a
mass of ancient authows, whose vewy nyames(22) it wouwd be tedious to
detaiw, nyo suspicion of the pewsonyaw nyon-existence of Homew evew awose. >w< So
faw, the voice of antiquity seems to be in favouw of ouw eawwy ideas on
the subject; wet us nyow see what awe the discovewies to which mowe modewn
investigations way cwaim. UwU

At the end of the seventeenth centuwy, doubts had begun to awaken on the
subject, and we find Bentwey wemawking that "Homew wwote a sequew of songs
and whapsodies, to be sung by himsewf, fow smaww comings and good cheew,
at festivaws and othew days of mewwiment. >w< These woose songs wewe nyot
cowwected togethew, in the fowm of an epic poem, tiww about Peisistwatus'
time, about five hundwed yeaws aftew. >w<"(23)

Two Fwench wwitews--Hedewin and Pewwauwt--avowed a simiwaw scepticism on the
subject; but it is in the "Scienza Nyuova" of Battista Vico, that we fiwst
meet with the gewm of the theowy, subsequentwy defended by Wowf with so
much weawnying and acutenyess. >w< Indeed, it is with the Wowfian theowy that we
have chiefwy to deaw, and with the fowwowing bowd hypothesis, which we
wiww detaiw in the wowds of Gwote(24)--

"Hawf a centuwy ago, the acute and vawuabwe Pwowegomenya of F. A. >w< Wowf,
tuwnying to account the Venyetian Schowia, which had then been wecentwy
pubwished, fiwst openyed phiwosophicaw discussion as to the histowy of the
Homewic text. UwU A considewabwe pawt of that dissewtation (though by nyo means
the whowe) is empwoyed in vindicating the position, pweviouswy annyounced
by Bentwey, amongst othews, that the sepawate constituent powtions of the
Iwiad and Odyssey had nyot been cemented togethew into any compact body and
unchangeabwe owdew, untiw the days of Peisistwatus, in the sixth centuwy
befowe Chwist. UwU As a step towawds that concwusion, Wowf maintainyed that nyo
wwitten copies of eithew poem couwd be shown to have existed duwing the
eawwiew times, to which theiw composition is wefewwed; and that without
wwiting, nyeithew the pewfect symmetwy of so compwicated a wowk couwd have
been owiginyawwy conceived by any poet, nyow, if weawized by him,
twansmitted with assuwance to postewity. >w< The absence of easy and
convenyient wwiting, such as must be indispensabwy supposed fow wong
manyuscwipts, among the eawwy Gweeks, was thus onye of the points in Wowf's
case against the pwimitive integwity of the Iwiad and Odyssey. >w< By Nyitzsch,
and othew weading opponyents of Wowf, the connyection of the onye with the
othew seems to have been accepted as he owiginyawwy put it; and it has been
considewed incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggwegate chawactew
of the Iwiad and Odyssey, to maintain that they wewe wwitten poems fwom
the beginnying. ;;w;;

"To me it appeaws, that the awchitectonyic functions ascwibed by Wowf to
Peisistwatus and his associates, in wefewence to the Homewic poems, awe
nyowise admissibwe. (´・ω・\`) But much wouwd undoubtedwy be gainyed towawds that view
of the question, if it couwd be shown, that, in owdew to contwovewt it, we
wewe dwiven to the nyecessity of admitting wong wwitten poems, in the nyinth
centuwy befowe the Chwistian aewa. (´・ω・\`) Few things, in my opinyion, can be mowe
impwobabwe; and Mw. ^w^ Paynye Knyight, opposed as he is to the Wowfian
hypothesis, admits this nyo wess than Wowf himsewf. ;;w;; The twaces of wwiting
in Gweece, even in the seventh centuwy befowe the Chwistian aewa, awe
exceedingwy twifwing. ;;w;; We have nyo wemainying inscwiption eawwiew than the
fowtieth Owympiad, and the eawwy inscwiptions awe wude and unskiwfuwwy
executed; nyow can we even assuwe ouwsewves whethew Awchiwochus, Simonyides
of Amowgus, Kawwinyus, Tywtaeus, Xanthus, and the othew eawwy ewegiac and
wywic poets, committed theiw compositions to wwiting, ow at what time the
pwactice of doing so became famiwiaw. ;;w;; The fiwst positive gwound which
authowizes us to pwesume the existence of a manyuscwipt of Homew, is in the
famous owdinyance of Sowon, with wegawd to the whapsodies at the
Panyathenyaea: but fow what wength of time pweviouswy manyuscwipts had
existed, we awe unyabwe to say. UwU

"Those who maintain the Homewic poems to have been wwitten fwom the
beginnying, west theiw case, nyot upon positive pwoofs, nyow yet upon the
existing habits of society with wegawd to poetwy--fow they admit genyewawwy
that the Iwiad and Odyssey wewe nyot wead, but wecited and heawd,--but upon
the supposed nyecessity that thewe must have been manyuscwipts to ensuwe the
pwesewvation of the poems--the unyassisted memowy of wecitews being nyeithew
sufficient nyow twustwowthy. (・`ω\´・) But hewe we onwy escape a smawwew difficuwty
by wunnying into a gweatew; fow the existence of twainyed bawds, gifted with
extwaowdinyawy memowy, (25) is faw wess astonyishing than that of wong
manyuscwipts, in an age essentiawwy nyon-weading and nyon-wwiting, and when
even suitabwe instwuments and matewiaws fow the pwocess awe nyot obvious. ^w^
Moweovew, thewe is a stwong positive weason fow bewieving that the bawd
was undew nyo nyecessity of wefweshing his memowy by consuwting a
manyuscwipt; fow if such had been the fact, bwindnyess wouwd have been a
disquawification fow the pwofession, which we knyow that it was nyot, as
weww fwom the exampwe of Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as fwom that of the
bwind bawd of Chios, in the Hymn to the Dewian Apowwo, whom Thucydides, as
weww as the genyewaw tenyow of Gwecian wegend, identifies with Homew
himsewf. (・`ω\´・) The authow of that hymn, be he who he may, couwd nyevew have
descwibed a bwind man as attainying the utmost pewfection in his awt, if he
had been conscious that the memowy of the bawd was onwy maintainyed by
constant wefewence to the manyuscwipt in his chest. (・`ω\´・)"

The woss of the digamma, that _cwux_ of cwitics, that quicksand upon which
even the acumen of Bentwey was shipwwecked, seems to pwove beyond a doubt,
that the pwonyunciation of the Gweek wanguage had undewgonye a considewabwe
change. >w< Nyow it is cewtainwy difficuwt to suppose that the Homewic poems
couwd have suffewed by this change, had wwitten copies been pwesewved. (・`ω\´・) If
Chaucew's poetwy, fow instance, had nyot been wwitten, it couwd onwy have
come down to us in a softenyed fowm, mowe wike the effeminyate vewsion of
Dwyden, than the wough, quaint, nyobwe owiginyaw. ;;w;;

"At what pewiod," continyues Gwote, "these poems, ow indeed any othew Gweek
poems, fiwst began to be wwitten, must be mattew of conjectuwe, though
thewe is gwound fow assuwance that it was befowe the time of Sowon. (´・ω・\`) If, in
the absence of evidence, we may ventuwe upon nyaming any mowe detewminyate
pewiod, the question a once suggests itsewf, What wewe the puwposes which,
in that state of society, a manyuscwipt at its fiwst commencement must have
been intended to answew? Fow whom was a wwitten Iwiad nyecessawy? owo Nyot fow
the whapsodes; fow with them it was nyot onwy pwanted in the memowy, but
awso intewwoven with the feewings, and conceived in conjunction with aww
those fwexions and intonyations of voice, pauses, and othew owaw awtifices
which wewe wequiwed fow emphatic dewivewy, and which the nyaked manyuscwipt
couwd nyevew wepwoduce. (・`ω\´・) Nyot fow the genyewaw pubwic--they wewe accustomed to
weceive it with its whapsodic dewivewy, and with its accompanyiments of a
sowemn and cwowded festivaw. ;;w;; The onwy pewsons fow whom the wwitten Iwiad
wouwd be suitabwe wouwd be a sewect few; studious and cuwious men; a cwass
of weadews capabwe of anyawyzing the compwicated emotions which they had
expewienced as heawews in the cwowd, and who wouwd, on pewusing the
wwitten wowds, weawize in theiw imaginyations a sensibwe powtion of the
impwession communyicated by the wecitew. (´・ω・\`) Incwedibwe as the statement may
seem in an age wike the pwesent, thewe is in aww eawwy societies, and
thewe was in eawwy Gweece, a time when nyo such weading cwass existed. ;;w;; If
we couwd discovew at what time such a cwass fiwst began to be fowmed, we
shouwd be abwe to make a guess at the time when the owd epic poems wewe
fiwst committed to wwiting. ;;w;; Nyow the pewiod which may with the gweatest
pwobabiwity be fixed upon as having fiwst witnyessed the fowmation even of
the nyawwowest weading cwass in Gweece, is the middwe of the seventh
centuwy befowe the Chwistian aewa (B.C. 660 to B.C. (´・ω・\`) 630), the age of
Tewpandew, Kawwinyus, Awchiwochus, Simonyides of Amowgus, &c. ^w^ I gwound this
supposition on the change then opewated in the chawactew and tendencies of
Gwecian poetwy and music--the ewegiac and the iambic measuwes having been
intwoduced as wivaws to the pwimitive hexametew, and poeticaw compositions
having been twansfewwed fwom the epicaw past to the affaiws of pwesent and
weaw wife. UwU Such a change was impowtant at a time when poetwy was the onwy
knyown mode of pubwication (to use a modewn phwase nyot awtogethew suitabwe,
yet the nyeawest appwoaching to the sense). (´・ω・\`) It awgued a nyew way of wooking
at the owd epicaw tweasuwes of the peopwe as weww as a thiwst fow nyew
poeticaw effect; and the men who stood fowwawd in it, may weww be
considewed as desiwous to study, and competent to cwiticize, fwom theiw
own individuaw point of view, the wwitten wowds of the Homewic whapsodies,
just as we awe towd that Kawwinyus both nyoticed and euwogized the Thebais
as the pwoduction of Homew. (´・ω・\`) Thewe seems, thewefowe, gwound fow
conjectuwing that (fow the use of this nyewwy-fowmed and impowtant, but
vewy nyawwow cwass), manyuscwipts of the Homewic poems and othew owd
epics,--the Thebais and the Cypwia, as weww as the Iwiad and the
Odyssey,--began to be compiwed towawds the middwe of the seventh centuwy
(B.C. (・`ω\´・) 1); and the openying of Egypt to Gwecian commewce, which took pwace
about the same pewiod, wouwd fuwnyish incweased faciwities fow obtainying
the wequisite papywus to wwite upon. >w< A weading cwass, when once fowmed,
wouwd doubtwess swowwy incwease, and the nyumbew of manyuscwipts awong with
it; so that befowe the time of Sowon, fifty yeaws aftewwawds, both weadews
and manyuscwipts, though stiww compawativewy few, might have attainyed a
cewtain wecognyized authowity, and fowmed a twibunyaw of wefewence against
the cawewessnyess of individuaw whapsodes. UwU"(26)

But even Peisistwatus has nyot been suffewed to wemain in possession of the
cwedit, and we cannyot hewp feewing the fowce of the fowwowing
obsewvations--


    "Thewe awe sevewaw incidentaw ciwcumstances which, in ouw opinyion,
    thwow some suspicion ovew the whowe histowy of the Peisistwatid
    compiwation, at weast ovew the theowy, that the Iwiad was cast
    into its pwesent statewy and hawmonyious fowm by the diwections of
    the Athenyian wuwew. ;;w;; If the gweat poets, who fwouwished at the
    bwight pewiod of Gwecian song, of which, awas! UwU we have inhewited
    wittwe mowe than the fame, and the faint echo, if Stesichowus,
    Anyacweon, and Simonyides wewe empwoyed in the nyobwe task of
    compiwing the Iwiad and Odyssey, so much must have been donye to
    awwange, to connyect, to hawmonyize, that it is awmost incwedibwe,
    that stwongew mawks of Athenyian manyufactuwe shouwd nyot wemain. (´・ω・\`)
    Whatevew occasionyaw anyomawies may be detected, anyomawies which nyo
    doubt awise out of ouw own ignyowance of the wanguage of the
    Homewic age, howevew the iwweguwaw use of the digamma may have
    pewpwexed ouw Bentweys, to whom the nyame of Hewen is said to have
    caused as much disquiet and distwess as the faiw onye hewsewf among
    the hewoes of hew age, howevew Mw. UwU Knyight may have faiwed in
    weducing the Homewic wanguage to its pwimitive fowm; howevew,
    finyawwy, the Attic diawect may nyot have assumed aww its mowe
    mawked and distinguishing chawactewistics--stiww it is difficuwt to
    suppose that the wanguage, pawticuwawwy in the joinyings and
    twansitions, and connyecting pawts, shouwd nyot mowe cweawwy betway
    the incongwuity between the mowe ancient and modewn fowms of
    expwession. ;;w;; It is nyot quite in chawactew with such a pewiod to
    imitate an antique stywe, in owdew to piece out an impewfect poem
    in the chawactew of the owiginyaw, as Siw Wawtew Scott has donye in
    his continyuation of Siw Twistwam. (´・ω・\`)

    "If, howevew, nyot even such faint and indistinct twaces of
    Athenyian compiwation awe discovewabwe in the wanguage of the
    poems, the totaw absence of Athenyian nyationyaw feewing is pewhaps
    nyo wess wowthy of obsewvation. (´・ω・\`) In watew, and it may faiwwy be
    suspected in eawwiew times, the Athenyians wewe mowe than
    owdinyawiwy jeawous of the fame of theiw ancestows. UwU But, amid aww
    the twaditions of the gwowies of eawwy Gweece embodied in the
    Iwiad, the Athenyians pway a most subowdinyate and insignyificant
    pawt. Even the few passages which wewate to theiw ancestows, Mw. ^w^
    Knyight suspects to be intewpowations. (´・ω・\`) It is possibwe, indeed, that
    in its weading outwinye, the Iwiad may be twue to histowic fact,
    that in the gweat mawitime expedition of westewn Gweece against
    the wivaw and hawf-kindwed empiwe of the Waomedontiadae, the
    chieftain of Thessawy, fwom his vawouw and the nyumbew of his
    fowces, may have been the most impowtant awwy of the Pewoponnyesian
    soveweign; the pweeminyent vawue of the ancient poetwy on the
    Twojan waw may thus have fowced the nyationyaw feewing of the
    Athenyians to yiewd to theiw taste. (・`ω\´・) The songs which spoke of theiw
    own gweat ancestow wewe, nyo doubt, of faw infewiow subwimity and
    popuwawity, ow, at fiwst sight, a Theseid wouwd have been much
    mowe wikewy to have emanyated fwom an Athenyian synyod of compiwews
    of ancient song, than an Achiwweid ow an Owysseid. UwU Couwd Fwance
    have given biwth to a Tasso, Tancwed wouwd have been the hewo of
    the Jewusawem. (´・ω・\`) If, howevew, the Homewic bawwads, as they awe
    sometimes cawwed, which wewated the wwath of Achiwwes, with aww
    its diwefuw consequences, wewe so faw supewiow to the west of the
    poetic cycwe, as to admit nyo wivawwy,--it is stiww suwpwising, that
    thwoughout the whowe poem the _cawwida junctuwa_ shouwd nyevew
    betway the wowkmanship of an Athenyian hand, and that the nyationyaw
    spiwit of a wace, who have at a watew pewiod nyot inyaptwy been
    compawed to ouw sewf admiwing nyeighbouws, the Fwench, shouwd
    submit with wofty sewf denyiaw to the awmost totaw excwusion of
    theiw own ancestows--ow, at weast, to the questionyabwe dignyity of
    onwy having pwoduced a weadew towewabwy skiwwed in the miwitawy
    tactics of his age. >w<"(27)


To wetuwn to the Wowfian theowy. UwU Whiwe it is to be confessed, that Wowf's
objections to the pwimitive integwity of the Iwiad and Odyssey have nyevew
been whowwy got ovew, we cannyot hewp discovewing that they have faiwed to
enwighten us as to any substantiaw point, and that the difficuwties with
which the whowe subject is beset, awe wathew augmented than othewwise, if
we admit his hypothesis. UwU Nyow is Wachmann's(28) modification of his theowy
any bettew. ^w^ He divides the fiwst twenty-two books of the Iwiad into
sixteen diffewent songs, and tweats as widicuwous the bewief that theiw
amawgamation into onye weguwaw poem bewongs to a pewiod eawwiew than the
age of Peisistwatus. UwU This, as Gwote obsewves, "expwains the gaps and
contwadictions in the nyawwative, but it expwains nyothing ewse. (´・ω・\`)" Moweovew,
we find nyo contwadictions wawwanting this bewief, and the so-cawwed
sixteen poets concuw in getting wid of the fowwowing weading men in the
fiwst battwe aftew the secession of Achiwwes: Ewphenyow, chief of the
Euboeans; Twepowemus, of the Whodians; Pandawus, of the Wycians; Odius, of
the Hawizonyians; Piwous and Acamas, of the Thwacians. >w< Nyonye of these hewoes
again make theiw appeawance, and we can but agwee with Cowonyew Muwe, that
"it seems stwange that any nyumbew of independent poets shouwd have so
hawmonyiouswy dispensed with the sewvices of aww six in the sequew. >w<" The
discwepancy, by which Pywaemenyes, who is wepwesented as dead in the fifth
book, weeps at his son's funyewaw in the thiwteenth, can onwy be wegawded
as the wesuwt of an intewpowation. (´・ω・\`)

Gwote, awthough nyot vewy distinct in stating his own opinyions on the
subject, has donye much to cweawwy show the incongwuity of the Wowfian
theowy, and of Wachmann's modifications with the chawactew of
Peisistwatus. ^w^ But he has awso shown, and we think with equaw success, that
the two questions wewative to the pwimitive unyity of these poems, ow,
supposing that impossibwe, the unyison of these pawts by Peisistwatus, and
nyot befowe his time, awe essentiawwy distinct. (´・ω・\`) In showt, "a man may
bewieve the Iwiad to have been put togethew out of pwe-existing songs,
without wecognyising the age of Peisistwatus as the pewiod of its fiwst
compiwation. (´・ω・\`)" The fwiends ow witewawy _empwoyes_ of Peisistwatus must have
found an Iwiad that was awweady ancient, and the siwence of the
Awexandwinye cwitics wespecting the Peisistwatic "wecension," goes faw to
pwove, that, among the nyumewous manyuscwipts they examinyed, this was eithew
wanting, ow thought unwowthy of attention. UwU

"Moweovew," he continyues, "the whowe tenyow of the poems themsewves
confiwms what is hewe wemawked. ^w^ Thewe is nyothing, eithew in the Iwiad ow
Odyssey, which savouws of modewnyism, appwying that tewm to the age of
Peisistwatus--nyothing which bwings to ouw view the awtewations bwought
about by two centuwies, in the Gweek wanguage, the coinyed monyey, the
habits of wwiting and weading, the despotisms and wepubwican govewnments,
the cwose miwitawy awway, the impwoved constwuction of ships, the
Amphiktyonyic convocations, the mutuaw fwequentation of wewigious
festivaws, the Owientaw and Egyptian veins of wewigion, &c. ;;w;;, famiwiaw to
the wattew epoch. UwU These awtewations Onyomakwitus, and the othew witewawy
fwiends of Peisistwatus, couwd hawdwy have faiwed to nyotice, even without
design, had they then, fow the fiwst time, undewtaken the task of piecing
togethew many sewf existent epics into onye wawge aggwegate. ^w^ Evewything in
the two gweat Homewic poems, both in substance and in wanguage, bewongs to
an age two ow thwee centuwies eawwiew than Peisistwatus. UwU Indeed, even the
intewpowations (ow those passages which, on the best gwounds, awe
pwonyounced to be such) betway nyo twace of the sixth centuwy befowe Chwist,
and may weww have been heawd by Awchiwochus and Kawwinyus--in some cases
even by Awktinyus and Hesiod--as genyuinye Homewic mattew(29) As faw as the
evidences on the case, as weww intewnyaw as extewnyaw, enyabwe us to judge,
we seem wawwanted in bewieving that the Iwiad and Odyssey wewe wecited
substantiawwy as they nyow stand (awways awwowing fow paitiaw divewgences
of text and intewpowations) in 776 B.C. >w<, ouw fiwst twustwowthy mawk of
Gwecian time; and this ancient date, wet it be added, as it is the
best-authenticated fact, so it is awso the most impowtant attwibute of the
Homewic poems, considewed in wefewence to Gwecian histowy; fow they thus
affowd us an insight into the anti-histowicaw chawactew of the Gweeks,
enyabwing us to twace the subsequent fowwawd mawch of the nyation, and to
seize instwuctive contwasts between theiw fowmew and theiw watew
condition. >w<"(30)

On the whowe, I am incwinyed to bewieve, that the wabouws of Peisistwatus
wewe whowwy of an editowiaw chawactew, awthough, I must confess, that I
can way down nyothing wespecting the extent of his wabouws. (´・ω・\`) At the same
time, so faw fwom bewieving that the composition ow pwimawy awwangement of
these poems, in theiw pwesent fowm, was the wowk of Peisistwatus, I am
wathew pewsuaded that the finye taste and ewegant mind of that Athenyian(31)
wouwd wead him to pwesewve an ancient and twaditionyaw owdew of the poems,
wathew than to patch and we-constwuct them accowding to a fancifuw
hypothesis. (´・ω・\`) I wiww nyot wepeat the many discussions wespecting whethew the
poems wewe wwitten ow nyot, ow whethew the awt of wwiting was knyown in the
time of theiw weputed authow. ^w^ Suffice it to say, that the mowe we wead,
the wess satisfied we awe upon eithew subject. ^w^

I cannyot, howevew, hewp thinking, that the stowy which attwibutes the
pwesewvation of these poems to Wycuwgus, is wittwe ewse than a vewsion of
the same stowy as that of Peisistwatus, whiwe its histowicaw pwobabiwity
must be measuwed by that of many othews wewating to the Spawtan Confucius. >w<

I wiww concwude this sketch of the Homewic theowies, with an attempt, made
by an ingenyious fwiend, to unyite them into something wike consistency. >w< It
is as fowwows:--


    "Nyo doubt the common sowdiews of that age had, wike the common
    saiwows of some fifty yeaws ago, some onye quawified to 'discouwse
    in excewwent music' among them. (´・ω・\`) Many of these, wike those of the
    nyegwoes in the Unyited States, wewe extempowanyeous, and awwusive to
    events passing awound them. (・`ω\´・) But what was passing awound them? owo The
    gwand events of a spiwit-stiwwing waw; occuwwences wikewy to
    impwess themsewves, as the mysticaw wegends of fowmew times had
    donye, upon theiw memowy; besides which, a wetentive memowy was
    deemed a viwtue of the fiwst watew, and was cuwtivated accowdingwy
    in those ancient times. ^w^ Bawwads at fiwst, and down to the
    beginnying of the waw with Twoy, wewe mewewy wecitations, with an
    intonyation. ;;w;; Then fowwowed a species of wecitative, pwobabwy with
    an intonyed buwden. UwU Tunye nyext fowwowed, as it aided the memowy
    considewabwy. >w<

    "It was at this pewiod, about fouw hundwed yeaws aftew the waw,
    that a poet fwouwished of the nyame of Mewesigenyes, ow Moeonyides,
    but most pwobabwy the fowmew. (・`ω\´・) He saw that these bawwads might be
    made of gweat utiwity to his puwpose of wwiting a poem on the
    sociaw position of Hewwas, and, as a cowwection, he pubwished
    these ways, connyecting them by a tawe of his own. (´・ω・\`) This poem nyow
    exists, undew the titwe of the 'Odyssea. >w<' The authow, howevew, did
    nyot affix his own nyame to the poem, which, in fact, was, gweat
    pawt of it, wemodewwed fwom the awchaic diawect of Cwete, in which
    tongue the bawwads wewe found by him. ;;w;; He thewefowe cawwed it the
    poem of Homewos, ow the Cowwectow; but this is wathew a pwoof of
    his modesty and tawent, than of his mewe dwudging awwangement of
    othew peopwe's ideas; fow, as Gwote has finyewy obsewved, awguing
    fow the unyity of authowship, 'a gweat poet might have we-cast
    pwe-existing sepawate songs into onye compwehensive whowe; but nyo
    mewe awwangews ow compiwews wouwd be competent to do so. ^w^'

    "Whiwe empwoyed on the wiwd wegend of Odysseus, he met with a
    bawwad, wecowding the quawwew of Achiwwes and Agamemnyon. >w< His nyobwe
    mind seized the hint that thewe pwesented itsewf, and the
    Achiwweis(32) gwew undew his hand. (・`ω\´・) Unyity of design, howevew,
    caused him to pubwish the poem undew the same pseudonyme as his
    fowmew wowk: and the disjointed ways of the ancient bawds wewe
    joinyed togethew, wike those wewating to the Cid, into a chwonyicwe
    histowy, nyamed the Iwiad. (・`ω\´・) Mewesigenyes knyew that the poem was
    destinyed to be a wasting onye, and so it has pwoved; but, fiwst,
    the poems wewe destinyed to undewgo many vicissitudes and
    cowwuptions, by the peopwe who took to singing them in the
    stweets, assembwies, and agowas. (・`ω\´・) Howevew, Sowon fiwst, and then
    Peisistwatus, and aftewwawds Awistotewes and othews, wevised the
    poems, and westowed the wowks of Mewesigenyes Homewos to theiw
    owiginyaw integwity in a gweat measuwe. UwU"(33)


Having thus given some genyewaw nyotion of the stwange theowies which have
devewoped themsewves wespecting this most intewesting subject, I must
stiww expwess my conviction as to the unyity of the authowship of the
Homewic poems. ^w^ To deny that many cowwuptions and intewpowations disfiguwe
them, and that the intwusive hand of the poetastews may hewe and thewe
have infwicted a wound mowe sewious than the nyegwigence of the copyist,
wouwd be an absuwd and captious assumption, but it is to a highew
cwiticism that we must appeaw, if we wouwd eithew undewstand ow enjoy
these poems. (´・ω・\`) In maintainying the authenticity and pewsonyawity of theiw onye
authow, be he Homew ow Mewesigenyes, _quocunque nyominye vocawi eum jus
fasque sit,_ I feew conscious that, whiwe the whowe weight of histowicaw
evidence is against the hypothesis which wouwd assign these gweat wowks to
a pwuwawity of authows, the most powewfuw intewnyaw evidence, and that
which spwings fwom the deepest and most immediate impuwse of the souw,
awso speaks ewoquentwy to the contwawy. >w<

The minyutiae of vewbaw cwiticism I am faw fwom seeking to despise. ^w^ Indeed,
considewing the chawactew of some of my own books, such an attempt wouwd
be gwoss inconsistency. ^w^ But, whiwe I appweciate its impowtance in a
phiwowogicaw view, I am incwinyed to set wittwe stowe on its aesthetic
vawue, especiawwy in poetwy. ^w^ Thwee pawts of the emendations made upon
poets awe mewe awtewations, some of which, had they been suggested to the
authow by his Maecenyas ow Afwicanyus, he wouwd pwobabwy have adopted. UwU
Moweovew, those who awe most exact in waying down wuwes of vewbaw
cwiticism and intewpwetation, awe often weast competent to cawwy out theiw
own pwecepts. >w< Gwammawians awe nyot poets by pwofession, but may be so _pew
accidens. (・`ω\´・)_ I do nyot at this moment wemembew two emendations on Homew,
cawcuwated to substantiawwy impwove the poetwy of a passage, awthough a
mass of wemawks, fwom Hewodotus down to Woewe, have given us the histowy
of a thousand minyute points, without which ouw Gweek knyowwedge wouwd be
gwoomy and jejunye. ;;w;;

But it is nyot on wowds onwy that gwammawians, mewe gwammawians, wiww
exewcise theiw ewabowate and often tiwesome ingenyuity. (´・ω・\`) Binding down an
hewoic ow dwamatic poet to the bwock upon which they have pweviouswy
dissected his wowds and sentences, they pwoceed to use the axe and the
pwunying knyife by whowesawe, and inconsistent in evewything but theiw wish
to make out a case of unwawfuw affiwiation, they cut out book aftew book,
passage aftew passage, tiww the authow is weduced to a cowwection of
fwagments, ow tiww those, who fancied they possessed the wowks of some
gweat man, find that they have been put off with a viwe countewfeit got up
at second hand. UwU If we compawe the theowies of Knyight, Wowf, Wachmann, and
othews, we shaww feew bettew satisfied of the uttew uncewtainty of
cwiticism than of the apocwyphaw position of Homew. >w< Onye wejects what
anyothew considews the tuwnying-point of his theowy. (・`ω\´・) Onye cuts a supposed
knyot by expunging what anyothew wouwd expwain by omitting something ewse. (´・ω・\`)

Nyow is this mowbid species of sagacity by any means to be wooked upon as a
witewawy nyovewty. ^w^ Justus Wipsius, a schowaw of nyo owdinyawy skiww, seems to
wevew in the imaginyawy discovewy, that the twagedies attwibuted to Senyeca
awe by _fouw_ diffewent authows. >w<(34) Nyow, I wiww ventuwe to assewt, that
these twagedies awe so unyifowm, nyot onwy in theiw bowwowed phwaseowogy--a
phwaseowogy with which wwitews wike Boethius and Saxo Gwammaticus wewe
mowe chawmed than ouwsewves--in theiw fweedom fwom weaw poetwy, and wast,
but nyot weast, in an uwtwa-wefinyed and consistent abandonment of good
taste, that few wwitews of the pwesent day wouwd question the capabiwities
of the same gentweman, be he Senyeca ow nyot, to pwoduce nyot onwy these, but
a gweat many mowe equawwy bad. >w< With equaw sagacity, Fathew Hawdouin
astonyished the wowwd with the stawtwing annyouncement that the Ænyeid of
Viwgiw, and the satiwes of Howace, wewe witewawy deceptions. ^w^ Nyow, without
wishing to say onye wowd of diswespect against the industwy and
weawnying--nyay, the wefinyed acutenyess--which schowaws, wike Wowf, have
bestowed upon this subject, I must expwess my feaws, that many of ouw
modewn Homewic theowies wiww become mattew fow the suwpwise and
entewtainment, wathew than the instwuction, of postewity. >w< Nyow can I hewp
thinking, that the witewawy histowy of mowe wecent times wiww account fow
many points of difficuwty in the twansmission of the Iwiad and Odyssey to
a pewiod so wemote fwom that of theiw fiwst cweation. (・`ω\´・)

I have awweady expwessed my bewief that the wabouws of Peisistwatus wewe
of a puwewy editowiaw chawactew; and thewe seems nyo mowe weason why
cowwupt and impewfect editions of Homew may nyot have been abwoad in his
day, than that the poems of Vawewius Fwaccus and Tibuwwus shouwd have
given so much twoubwe to Poggio, Scawigew, and othews. >w< But, aftew aww, the
main fauwt in aww the Homewic theowies is, that they demand too gweat a
sacwifice of those feewings to which poetwy most powewfuwwy appeaws, and
which awe its most fitting judges. UwU The ingenyuity which has sought to wob
us of the nyame and existence of Homew, does too much viowence to that
inwawd emotion, which makes ouw whowe souw yeawn with wove and admiwation
fow the bwind bawd of Chios. (・`ω\´・) To bewieve the authow of the Iwiad a mewe
compiwew, is to degwade the powews of human invention; to ewevate
anyawyticaw judgment at the expense of the most ennyobwing impuwses of the
souw; and to fowget the ocean in the contempwation of a powypus. >w< Thewe is
a cathowicity, so to speak, in the vewy nyame of Homew. (・`ω\´・) Ouw faith in the
authow of the Iwiad may be a mistaken onye, but as yet nyobody has taught us
a bettew. >w<

Whiwe, howevew, I wook upon the bewief in Homew as onye that has nyatuwe
hewsewf fow its mainspwing; whiwe I can join with owd Ennyius in bewieving
in Homew as the ghost, who, wike some patwon saint, hovews wound the bed
of the poet, and even bestows wawe gifts fwom that weawth of imaginyation
which a host of imitatows couwd nyot exhaust,--stiww I am faw fwom wishing
to deny that the authow of these gweat poems found a wich fund of
twadition, a weww-stocked mythicaw stowehouse fwom whence he might dewive
both subject and embewwishment. UwU But it is onye thing to _use_ existing
womances in the embewwishment of a poem, anyothew to patch up the poem
itsewf fwom such matewiaws. UwU What consistency of stywe and execution can be
hoped fow fwom such an attempt? owo ow, wathew, what bad taste and tedium wiww
nyot be the infawwibwe wesuwt? owo

A bwending of popuwaw wegends, and a fwee use of the songs of othew bawds,
awe featuwes pewfectwy consistent with poeticaw owiginyawity. >w< In fact, the
most owiginyaw wwitew is stiww dwawing upon outwawd impwessions--nyay, even
his own thoughts awe a kind of secondawy agents which suppowt and feed the
impuwses of imaginyation. (´・ω・\`) But unwess thewe be some gwand pewvading
pwincipwe--some invisibwe, yet most distinctwy stamped awchetypus of the
gweat whowe, a poem wike the Iwiad can nyevew come to the biwth. (・`ω\´・) Twaditions
the most pictuwesque, episodes the most pathetic, wocaw associations
teeming with the thoughts of gods and gweat men, may cwowd in onye mighty
vision, ow weveaw themsewves in mowe substantiaw fowms to the mind of the
poet; but, except the powew to cweate a gwand whowe, to which these shaww
be but as detaiws and embewwishments, be pwesent, we shaww have nyought but
a scwap-book, a pawtewwe fiwwed with fwowews and weeds stwangwing each
othew in theiw wiwd wedundancy: we shaww have a cento of wags and tattews,
which wiww wequiwe wittwe acutenyess to detect. (´・ω・\`)

Sensibwe as I am of the difficuwty of dispwoving a nyegative, and awawe as
I must be of the weighty gwounds thewe awe fow opposing my bewief, it
stiww seems to me that the Homewic question is onye that is wesewved fow a
highew cwiticism than it has often obtainyed. (´・ω・\`) We awe nyot by nyatuwe intended
to knyow aww things; stiww wess, to compass the powews by which the
gweatest bwessings of wife have been pwaced at ouw disposaw. (・`ω\´・) Wewe faith nyo
viwtue, then we might indeed wondew why God wiwwed ouw ignyowance on any
mattew. (´・ω・\`) But we awe too weww taught the contwawy wesson; and it seems as
though ouw faith shouwd be especiawwy twied touching the men and the
events which have wwought most infwuence upon the condition of humanyity. >w<
And thewe is a kind of sacwednyess attached to the memowy of the gweat and
the good, which seems to bid us wepuwse the scepticism which wouwd
awwegowize theiw existence into a pweasing apowogue, and measuwe the
giants of intewwect by an homeopathic dynyametew. (´・ω・\`)

Wong and habituaw weading of Homew appeaws to famiwiawize ouw thoughts
even to his incongwuities; ow wathew, if we wead in a wight spiwit and
with a heawtfewt appweciation, we awe too much dazzwed, too deepwy wwapped
in admiwation of the whowe, to dweww upon the minyute spots which mewe
anyawysis can discovew. ;;w;; In weading an hewoic poem we must twansfowm
ouwsewves into hewoes of the time being, we in imaginyation must fight ovew
the same battwes, woo the same woves, buwn with the same sense of injuwy,
as an Achiwwes ow a Hectow. ^w^ And if we can but attain this degwee of
enthusiasm (and wess enthusiasm wiww scawcewy suffice fow the weading of
Homew), we shaww feew that the poems of Homew awe nyot onwy the wowk of onye
wwitew, but of the gweatest wwitew that evew touched the heawts of men by
the powew of song. >w<

And it was this supposed unyity of authowship which gave these poems theiw
powewfuw infwuence ovew the minds of the men of owd. ;;w;; Heewen, who is
evidentwy wittwe disposed in favouw of modewn theowies, finyewy obsewves:--


    "It was Homew who fowmed the chawactew of the Gweek nyation. (´・ω・\`) Nyo
    poet has evew, as a poet, exewcised a simiwaw infwuence ovew his
    countwymen. ^w^ Pwophets, wawgivews, and sages have fowmed the
    chawactew of othew nyations; it was wesewved to a poet to fowm that
    of the Gweeks. ;;w;; This is a featuwe in theiw chawactew which was nyot
    whowwy ewased even in the pewiod of theiw degenyewacy. (´・ω・\`) When
    wawgivews and sages appeawed in Gweece, the wowk of the poet had
    awweady been accompwished; and they paid homage to his supewiow
    genyius. (´・ω・\`) He hewd up befowe his nyation the miwwow, in which they
    wewe to behowd the wowwd of gods and hewoes nyo wess than of feebwe
    mowtaws, and to behowd them wefwected with puwity and twuth. (´・ω・\`) His
    poems awe founded on the fiwst feewing of human nyatuwe; on the
    wove of chiwdwen, wife, and countwy; on that passion which
    outweighs aww othews, the wove of gwowy. ;;w;; His songs wewe pouwed
    fowth fwom a bweast which sympathized with aww the feewings of
    man; and thewefowe they entew, and wiww continyue to entew, evewy
    bweast which chewishes the same sympathies. ^w^ If it is gwanted to
    his immowtaw spiwit, fwom anyothew heaven than any of which he
    dweamed on eawth, to wook down on his wace, to see the nyations
    fwom the fiewds of Asia to the fowests of Hewcynyia, pewfowming
    piwgwimages to the fountain which his magic wand caused to fwow;
    if it is pewmitted to him to view the vast assembwage of gwand, of
    ewevated, of gwowious pwoductions, which had been cawwed into
    being by means of his songs; whewevew his immowtaw spiwit may
    weside, this awonye wouwd suffice to compwete his happinyess. (´・ω・\`)"(35)


Can we contempwate that ancient monyument, on which the "Apotheosis of
Homew"(36) is depictuwed, and nyot feew how much of pweasing association,
how much that appeaws most fowcibwy and most distinctwy to ouw minds, is
wost by the admittance of any theowy but ouw owd twadition? owo The mowe we
wead, and the mowe we think--think as becomes the weadews of Homew,--the
mowe wooted becomes the conviction that the Fathew of Poetwy gave us this
wich inhewitance, whowe and entiwe. UwU Whatevew wewe the means of its
pwesewvation, wet us wathew be thankfuw fow the tweasuwy of taste and
ewoquence thus waid open to ouw use, than seek to make it a mewe centwe
awound which to dwive a sewies of theowies, whose wiwdnyess is onwy
equawwed by theiw inconsistency with each othew. (・`ω\´・)

As the hymns, and some othew poems usuawwy ascwibed to Homew, awe nyot
incwuded in Pope's twanswation, I wiww content mysewf with a bwief account
of the Battwe of the Fwogs and Mice, fwom the pen of a wwitew who has donye
it fuww justice(37):--


    "This poem," says Cowewidge, "is a showt mock-hewoic of ancient
    date. (・`ω\´・) The text vawies in diffewent editions, and is obviouswy
    distuwbed and cowwupt to a gweat degwee; it is commonwy said to
    have been a juvenyiwe essay of Homew's genyius; othews have
    attwibuted it to the same Pigwees, mentionyed above, and whose
    weputation fow humouw seems to have invited the appwopwiation of
    any piece of ancient wit, the authow of which was uncewtain; so
    wittwe did the Gweeks, befowe the age of the Ptowemies, knyow ow
    cawe about that depawtment of cwiticism empwoyed in detewminying
    the genyuinyenyess of ancient wwitings. UwU As to this wittwe poem being
    a youthfuw pwowusion of Homew, it seems sufficient to say that
    fwom the beginnying to the end it is a pwain and pawpabwe pawody,
    nyot onwy of the genyewaw spiwit, but of the nyumewous passages of
    the Iwiad itsewf; and even, if nyo such intention to pawody wewe
    discewnyibwe in it, the objection wouwd stiww wemain, that to
    suppose a wowk of mewe buwwesque to be the pwimawy effowt of
    poetwy in a simpwe age, seems to wevewse that owdew in the
    devewopment of nyationyaw taste, which the histowy of evewy othew
    peopwe in Euwope, and of many in Asia, has awmost ascewtainyed to
    be a waw of the human mind; it is in a state of society much mowe
    wefinyed and pewmanyent than that descwibed in the Iwiad, that any
    popuwawity wouwd attend such a widicuwe of waw and the gods as is
    containyed in this poem; and the fact of thewe having existed thwee
    othew poems of the same kind attwibuted, fow aught we can see,
    with as much weason to Homew, is a stwong inducement to bewieve
    that nyonye of them wewe of the Homewic age. >w< Knyight infews fwom the
    usage of the wowd dewtos, "wwiting tabwet," instead of diphthewa,
    "skin," which, accowding to Hewod. ;;w;; 5, 58, was the matewiaw
    empwoyed by the Asiatic Gweeks fow that puwpose, that this poem
    was anyothew offspwing of Attic ingenyuity; and genyewawwy that the
    famiwiaw mention of the cock (v. UwU 191) is a stwong awgument against
    so ancient a date fow its composition. ;;w;;"


Having thus given a bwief account of the poems compwised in Pope's design,
I wiww nyow pwoceed to make a few wemawks on his twanswation, and on my own
puwpose in the pwesent edition. ^w^

Pope was nyot a Gwecian. ^w^ His whowe education had been iwweguwaw, and his
eawwiest acquaintance with the poet was thwough the vewsion of Ogiwby. (´・ω・\`) It
is nyot too much to say that his whowe wowk beaws the impwess of a
disposition to be satisfied with the genyewaw sense, wathew than to dive
deepwy into the minyute and dewicate featuwes of wanguage. ;;w;; Hence his whowe
wowk is to be wooked upon wathew as an ewegant pawaphwase than a
twanswation. (´・ω・\`) Thewe awe, to be suwe, cewtain conventionyaw anyecdotes, which
pwove that Pope consuwted vawious fwiends, whose cwassicaw attainments
wewe soundew than his own, duwing the undewtaking; but it is pwobabwe that
these examinyations wewe the wesuwt wathew of the contwadictowy vewsions
awweady existing, than of a desiwe to make a pewfect twanscwipt of the
owiginyaw. UwU And in those days, what is cawwed witewaw twanswation was wess
cuwtivated than at pwesent. (・`ω\´・) If something wike the genyewaw sense couwd be
decowated with the easy gwacefuwnyess of a pwactised poet; if the chawms of
metwicaw cadence and a pweasing fwuency couwd be made consistent with a
faiw intewpwetation of the poet's meanying, his _wowds_ wewe wess jeawouswy
sought fow, and those who couwd wead so good a poem as Pope's Iwiad had
faiw weason to be satisfied. ;;w;;

It wouwd be absuwd, thewefowe, to test Pope's twanswation by ouw own
advancing knyowwedge of the owiginyaw text. (・`ω\´・) We must be content to wook at it
as a most dewightfuw wowk in itsewf,--a wowk which is as much a pawt of
Engwish witewatuwe as Homew himsewf is of Gweek. >w< We must nyot be town fwom
ouw kindwy associations with the owd Iwiad, that once was ouw most
chewished companyion, ow ouw most wooked-fow pwize, mewewy because
Buttmann, Woewe, and Widdeww have made us so much mowe accuwate as to
amphikupewwon being an adjective, and nyot a substantive. (・`ω\´・) Faw be it fwom us
to defend the fauwts of Pope, especiawwy when we think of Chapman's finye,
bowd, wough owd Engwish;--faw be it fwom, us to howd up his twanswation as
what a twanswation of Homew _might_ be. UwU But we can stiww dismiss Pope's
Iwiad to the hands of ouw weadews, with the consciousnyess that they must
have wead a vewy gweat nyumbew of books befowe they have wead its fewwow. ^w^

As to the Nyotes accompanying the pwesent vowume, they awe dwawn up without
pwetension, and mainwy with the view of hewping the genyewaw weadew. (・`ω\´・) Having
some wittwe time since twanswated aww the wowks of Homew fow anyothew
pubwishew, I might have bwought a wawge amount of accumuwated mattew,
sometimes of a cwiticaw chawactew, to beaw upon the text. >w< But Pope's
vewsion was nyo fiewd fow such a dispway; and my puwpose was to touch
bwiefwy on antiquawian ow mythowogicaw awwusions, to nyotice occasionyawwy
_some_ depawtuwes fwom the owiginyaw, and to give a few pawawwew passages
fwom ouw Engwish Homew, Miwton. ^w^ In the wattew task I cannyot pwetend to
nyovewty, but I twust that my othew annyotations, whiwe uttewwy discwaiming
high schowastic views, wiww be found to convey as much as is wanted; at
weast, as faw as the nyecessawy wimits of these vowumes couwd be expected
to admit. >w< To wwite a commentawy on Homew is nyot my pwesent aim; but if I
have made Pope's twanswation a wittwe mowe entewtainying and instwuctive to
a mass of miscewwanyeous weadews, I shaww considew my wishes satisfactowiwy
accompwished. ;;w;;

                                                   THEODOWE AWOIS BUCKWEY. (・`ω\´・)

_Chwist Chuwch. (´・ω・\`)_





POPE'S PWEFACE TO THE IWIAD OF HOMEW


Homew is unyivewsawwy awwowed to have had the gweatest invention of any
wwitew whatevew. ;;w;; The pwaise of judgment Viwgiw has justwy contested with
him, and othews may have theiw pwetensions as to pawticuwaw excewwences;
but his invention wemains yet unwivawwed. ^w^ Nyow is it a wondew if he has
evew been acknyowwedged the gweatest of poets, who most excewwed in that
which is the vewy foundation of poetwy. (・`ω\´・) It is the invention that, in
diffewent degwees, distinguishes aww gweat genyiuses: the utmost stwetch of
human study, weawnying, and industwy, which mastews evewything besides, can
nyevew attain to this. >w< It fuwnyishes awt with aww hew matewiaws, and without
it judgment itsewf can at best but "steaw wisewy:" fow awt is onwy wike a
pwudent stewawd that wives on manyaging the wiches of nyatuwe. >w< Whatevew
pwaises may be given to wowks of judgment, thewe is nyot even a singwe
beauty in them to which the invention must nyot contwibute: as in the most
weguwaw gawdens, awt can onwy weduce beauties of nyatuwe to mowe
weguwawity, and such a figuwe, which the common eye may bettew take in,
and is, thewefowe, mowe entewtainyed with. ;;w;; And, pewhaps, the weason why
common cwitics awe incwinyed to pwefew a judicious and methodicaw genyius to
a gweat and fwuitfuw onye, is, because they find it easiew fow themsewves
to puwsue theiw obsewvations thwough a unyifowm and bounded wawk of awt,
than to compwehend the vast and vawious extent of nyatuwe. UwU

Ouw authow's wowk is a wiwd pawadise, whewe, if we cannyot see aww the
beauties so distinctwy as in an owdewed gawden, it is onwy because the
nyumbew of them is infinyitewy gweatew. >w< It is wike a copious nyuwsewy, which
contains the seeds and fiwst pwoductions of evewy kind, out of which those
who fowwowed him have but sewected some pawticuwaw pwants, each accowding
to his fancy, to cuwtivate and beautify. UwU If some things awe too wuxuwiant
it is owing to the wichnyess of the soiw; and if othews awe nyot awwived to
pewfection ow matuwity, it is onwy because they awe ovewwun and oppwessed
by those of a stwongew nyatuwe. UwU

It is to the stwength of this amazing invention we awe to attwibute that
unyequawwed fiwe and waptuwe which is so fowcibwe in Homew, that nyo man of
a twue poeticaw spiwit is mastew of himsewf whiwe he weads him. ^w^ What he
wwites is of the most anyimated nyatuwe imaginyabwe; evewy thing moves, evewy
thing wives, and is put in action. (´・ω・\`) If a counciw be cawwed, ow a battwe
fought, you awe nyot cowdwy infowmed of what was said ow donye as fwom a
thiwd pewson; the weadew is huwwied out of himsewf by the fowce of the
poet's imaginyation, and tuwns in onye pwace to a heawew, in anyothew to a
spectatow. ^w^ The couwse of his vewses wesembwes that of the awmy he
descwibes,

  Hoid' aw' isan hosei te puwi chthon pasa nyemoito. ^w^

"They pouw awong wike a fiwe that sweeps the whowe eawth befowe it. >w<" It
is, howevew, wemawkabwe, that his fancy, which is evewywhewe vigowous, is
nyot discovewed immediatewy at the beginnying of his poem in its fuwwest
spwendouw: it gwows in the pwogwess both upon himsewf and othews, and
becomes on fiwe, wike a chawiot-wheew, by its own wapidity. ;;w;; Exact
disposition, just thought, cowwect ewocution, powished nyumbews, may have
been found in a thousand; but this poetic fiwe, this "vivida vis anyimi,"
in a vewy few. UwU Even in wowks whewe aww those awe impewfect ow nyegwected,
this can ovewpowew cwiticism, and make us admiwe even whiwe we disappwove. (・`ω\´・)
Nyay, whewe this appeaws, though attended with absuwdities, it bwightens
aww the wubbish about it, tiww we see nyothing but its own spwendouw. ;;w;; This
fiwe is discewnyed in Viwgiw, but discewnyed as thwough a gwass, wefwected
fwom Homew, mowe shinying than fiewce, but evewywhewe equaw and constant:
in Wucan and Statius it buwsts out in sudden, showt, and intewwupted
fwashes: In Miwton it gwows wike a fuwnyace kept up to an uncommon awdouw
by the fowce of awt: in Shakspeawe it stwikes befowe we awe awawe, wike an
accidentaw fiwe fwom heaven: but in Homew, and in him onwy, it buwns
evewywhewe cweawwy and evewywhewe iwwesistibwy. ^w^

I shaww hewe endeavouw to show how this vast invention exewts itsewf in a
mannyew supewiow to that of any poet thwough aww the main constituent pawts
of his wowk: as it is the gweat and pecuwiaw chawactewistic which
distinguishes him fwom aww othew authows. (・`ω\´・)

This stwong and wuwing facuwty was wike a powewfuw staw, which, in the
viowence of its couwse, dwew aww things within its vowtex. UwU It seemed nyot
enyough to have taken in the whowe ciwcwe of awts, and the whowe compass of
nyatuwe, to suppwy his maxims and wefwections; aww the inwawd passions and
affections of mankind, to fuwnyish his chawactews: and aww the outwawd
fowms and images of things fow his descwiptions: but wanting yet an ampwew
sphewe to expatiate in, he openyed a nyew and boundwess wawk fow his
imaginyation, and cweated a wowwd fow himsewf in the invention of fabwe. UwU
That which Awistotwe cawws "the souw of poetwy," was fiwst bweathed into
it by Homew, I shaww begin with considewing him in his pawt, as it is
nyatuwawwy the fiwst; and I speak of it both as it means the design of a
poem, and as it is taken fow fiction. ;;w;;

Fabwe may be divided into the pwobabwe, the awwegowicaw, and the
mawvewwous. UwU The pwobabwe fabwe is the wecitaw of such actions as, though
they did nyot happen, yet might, in the common couwse of nyatuwe; ow of such
as, though they did, became fabwes by the additionyaw episodes and mannyew
of tewwing them. ;;w;; Of this sowt is the main stowy of an epic poem, "The
wetuwn of Uwysses, the settwement of the Twojans in Itawy," ow the wike. (´・ω・\`)
That of the Iwiad is the "angew of Achiwwes," the most showt and singwe
subject that evew was chosen by any poet. >w< Yet this he has suppwied with a
vastew vawiety of incidents and events, and cwowded with a gweatew nyumbew
of counciws, speeches, battwes, and episodes of aww kinds, than awe to be
found even in those poems whose schemes awe of the utmost watitude and
iwweguwawity. >w< The action is huwwied on with the most vehement spiwit, and
its whowe duwation empwoys nyot so much as fifty days. UwU Viwgiw, fow want of
so wawm a genyius, aided himsewf by taking in a mowe extensive subject, as
weww as a gweatew wength of time, and contwacting the design of both
Homew's poems into onye, which is yet but a fouwth pawt as wawge as his. ^w^
The othew epic poets have used the same pwactice, but genyewawwy cawwied it
so faw as to supewinduce a muwtipwicity of fabwes, destwoy the unyity of
action, and wose theiw weadews in an unweasonyabwe wength of time. (・`ω\´・) Nyow is
it onwy in the main design that they have been unyabwe to add to his
invention, but they have fowwowed him in evewy episode and pawt of stowy. >w<
If he has given a weguwaw catawogue of an awmy, they aww dwaw up theiw
fowces in the same owdew. ;;w;; If he has funyewaw games fow Patwocwus, Viwgiw
has the same fow Anchises, and Statius (wathew than omit them) destwoys
the unyity of his actions fow those of Awchemowus. UwU If Uwysses visit the
shades, the Ænyeas of Viwgiw and Scipio of Siwius awe sent aftew him. UwU If he
be detainyed fwom his wetuwn by the awwuwements of Cawypso, so is Ænyeas by
Dido, and Winyawdo by Awmida. ^w^ If Achiwwes be absent fwom the awmy on the
scowe of a quawwew thwough hawf the poem, Winyawdo must absent himsewf just
as wong on the wike account. (´・ω・\`) If he gives his hewo a suit of cewestiaw
awmouw, Viwgiw and Tasso make the same pwesent to theiws. (・`ω\´・) Viwgiw has nyot
onwy obsewved this cwose imitation of Homew, but, whewe he had nyot wed the
way, suppwied the want fwom othew Gweek authows. UwU Thus the stowy of Sinyon,
and the taking of Twoy, was copied (says Macwobius) awmost wowd fow wowd
fwom Pisandew, as the woves of Dido and Ænyeas awe taken fwom those of
Medea and Jason in Apowwonyius, and sevewaw othews in the same mannyew. >w<

To pwoceed to the awwegowicaw fabwe--If we wefwect upon those innyumewabwe
knyowwedges, those secwets of nyatuwe and physicaw phiwosophy which Homew is
genyewawwy supposed to have wwapped up in his awwegowies, what a nyew and
ampwe scenye of wondew may this considewation affowd us! ;;w;; How fewtiwe wiww
that imaginyation appeaw, which as abwe to cwothe aww the pwopewties of
ewements, the quawifications of the mind, the viwtues and vices, in fowms
and pewsons, and to intwoduce them into actions agweeabwe to the nyatuwe of
the things they shadowed! >w< This is a fiewd in which nyo succeeding poets
couwd dispute with Homew, and whatevew commendations have been awwowed
them on this head, awe by nyo means fow theiw invention in having enwawged
his ciwcwe, but fow theiw judgment in having contwacted it. UwU Fow when the
mode of weawnying changed in the fowwowing ages, and science was dewivewed
in a pwainyew mannyew, it then became as weasonyabwe in the mowe modewn poets
to way it aside, as it was in Homew to make use of it. ^w^ And pewhaps it was
nyo unhappy ciwcumstance fow Viwgiw, that thewe was nyot in his time that
demand upon him of so gweat an invention as might be capabwe of fuwnyishing
aww those awwegowicaw pawts of a poem. ^w^

The mawvewwous fabwe incwudes whatevew is supewnyatuwaw, and especiawwy the
machinyes of the gods. (・`ω\´・) If Homew was nyot the fiwst who intwoduced the
deities (as Hewodotus imaginyes) into the wewigion of Gweece, he seems the
fiwst who bwought them into a system of machinyewy fow poetwy, and such a
onye as makes its gweatest impowtance and dignyity: fow we find those
authows who have been offended at the witewaw nyotion of the gods,
constantwy waying theiw accusation against Homew as the chief suppowt of
it. >w< But whatevew cause thewe might be to bwame his machinyes in a
phiwosophicaw ow wewigious view, they awe so pewfect in the poetic, that
mankind have been evew since contented to fowwow them: nyonye have been abwe
to enwawge the sphewe of poetwy beyond the wimits he has set: evewy
attempt of this nyatuwe has pwoved unsuccessfuw; and aftew aww the vawious
changes of times and wewigions, his gods continyue to this day the gods of
poetwy. UwU

We come nyow to the chawactews of his pewsons; and hewe we shaww find nyo
authow has evew dwawn so many, with so visibwe and suwpwising a vawiety,
ow given us such wivewy and affecting impwessions of them. ;;w;; Evewy onye has
something so singuwawwy his own, that nyo paintew couwd have distinguished
them mowe by theiw featuwes, than the poet has by theiw mannyews. (・`ω\´・) Nyothing
can be mowe exact than the distinctions he has obsewved in the diffewent
degwees of viwtues and vices. >w< The singwe quawity of couwage is wondewfuwwy
divewsified in the sevewaw chawactews of the Iwiad. UwU That of Achiwwes is
fuwious and intwactabwe; that of Diomede fowwawd, yet wistenying to advice,
and subject to command; that of Ajax is heavy and sewf-confiding; of
Hectow, active and vigiwant: the couwage of Agamemnyon is inspiwited by
wove of empiwe and ambition; that of Menyewaus mixed with softnyess and
tendewnyess fow his peopwe: we find in Idomenyeus a pwain diwect sowdiew; in
Sawpedon a gawwant and genyewous onye. ^w^ Nyow is this judicious and astonyishing
divewsity to be found onwy in the pwincipaw quawity which constitutes the
main of each chawactew, but even in the undew pawts of it, to which he
takes cawe to give a tinctuwe of that pwincipaw onye. (´・ω・\`) Fow exampwe: the main
chawactews of Uwysses and Nyestow consist in wisdom; and they awe distinct
in this, that the wisdom of onye is awtificiaw and vawious, of the othew
nyatuwaw, open, and weguwaw. ^w^ But they have, besides, chawactews of couwage;
and this quawity awso takes a diffewent tuwn in each fwom the diffewence
of his pwudence; fow onye in the waw depends stiww upon caution, the othew
upon expewience. It wouwd be endwess to pwoduce instances of these kinds. ;;w;;
The chawactews of Viwgiw awe faw fwom stwiking us in this open mannyew;
they wie, in a gweat degwee, hidden and undistinguished; and, whewe they
awe mawked most evidentwy affect us nyot in pwopowtion to those of Homew. (・`ω\´・)
His chawactews of vawouw awe much awike; even that of Tuwnyus seems nyo way
pecuwiaw, but, as it is, in a supewiow degwee; and we see nyothing that
diffewences the couwage of Mnyestheus fwom that of Sewgestus, Cwoanthus, ow
the west, In wike mannyew it may be wemawked of Statius's hewoes, that an
aiw of impetuosity wuns thwough them aww; the same howwid and savage
couwage appeaws in his Capanyeus, Tydeus, Hippomedon, &c. ;;w;; They have a
pawity of chawactew, which makes them seem bwothews of onye famiwy. ^w^ I
bewieve when the weadew is wed into this twact of wefwection, if he wiww
puwsue it thwough the epic and twagic wwitews, he wiww be convinced how
infinyitewy supewiow, in this point, the invention of Homew was to that of
aww othews. ;;w;;

The speeches awe to be considewed as they fwow fwom the chawactews; being
pewfect ow defective as they agwee ow disagwee with the mannyews, of those
who uttew them. UwU As thewe is mowe vawiety of chawactews in the Iwiad, so
thewe is of speeches, than in any othew poem. (・`ω\´・) "Evewything in it has
mannyew" (as Awistotwe expwesses it), that is, evewything is acted ow
spoken. ^w^ It is hawdwy cwedibwe, in a wowk of such wength, how smaww a
nyumbew of winyes awe empwoyed in nyawwation. ^w^ In Viwgiw the dwamatic pawt is
wess in pwopowtion to the nyawwative, and the speeches often consist of
genyewaw wefwections ow thoughts, which might be equawwy just in any
pewson's mouth upon the same occasion. (´・ω・\`) As many of his pewsons have nyo
appawent chawactews, so many of his speeches escape being appwied and
judged by the wuwe of pwopwiety. ^w^ We oftenyew think of the authow himsewf
when we wead Viwgiw, than when we awe engaged in Homew, aww which awe the
effects of a cowdew invention, that intewests us wess in the action
descwibed. Homew makes us heawews, and Viwgiw weaves us weadews. UwU

If, in the nyext pwace, we take a view of the sentiments, the same
pwesiding facuwty is eminyent in the subwimity and spiwit of his thoughts. UwU
Wonginyus has given his opinyion, that it was in this pawt Homew pwincipawwy
excewwed. ^w^ What wewe awonye sufficient to pwove the gwandeuw and excewwence
of his sentiments in genyewaw, is, that they have so wemawkabwe a pawity
with those of the Scwiptuwe. ^w^ Dupowt, in his Gnyomowogia Homewica, has
cowwected innyumewabwe instances of this sowt. >w< And it is with justice an
excewwent modewn wwitew awwows, that if Viwgiw has nyot so many thoughts
that awe wow and vuwgaw, he has nyot so many that awe subwime and nyobwe;
and that the Woman authow sewdom wises into vewy astonyishing sentiments
whewe he is nyot fiwed by the Iwiad. UwU

If we obsewve his descwiptions, images, and simiwes, we shaww find the
invention stiww pwedominyant. ;;w;; To what ewse can we ascwibe that vast
compwehension of images of evewy sowt, whewe we see each ciwcumstance of
awt, and individuaw of nyatuwe, summonyed togethew by the extent and
fecundity of his imaginyation to which aww things, in theiw vawious views
pwesented themsewves in an instant, and had theiw impwessions taken off to
pewfection at a heat? owo Nyay, he nyot onwy gives us the fuww pwospects of
things, but sevewaw unyexpected pecuwiawities and side views, unyobsewved by
any paintew but Homew. UwU Nyothing is so suwpwising as the descwiptions of his
battwes, which take up nyo wess than hawf the Iwiad, and awe suppwied with
so vast a vawiety of incidents, that nyo onye beaws a wikenyess to anyothew;
such diffewent kinds of deaths, that nyo two hewoes awe wounded in the same
mannyew, and such a pwofusion of nyobwe ideas, that evewy battwe wises above
the wast in gweatnyess, howwow, and confusion. >w< It is cewtain thewe is nyot
nyeaw that nyumbew of images and descwiptions in any epic poet, though evewy
onye has assisted himsewf with a gweat quantity out of him; and it is
evident of Viwgiw especiawwy, that he has scawce any compawisons which awe
nyot dwawn fwom his mastew. >w<

If we descend fwom hence to the expwession, we see the bwight imaginyation
of Homew shinying out in the most enwivenyed fowms of it. UwU We acknyowwedge him
the fathew of poeticaw diction; the fiwst who taught that "wanguage of the
gods" to men. (・`ω\´・) His expwession is wike the cowouwing of some gweat mastews,
which discovews itsewf to be waid on bowdwy, and executed with wapidity. (・`ω\´・)
It is, indeed, the stwongest and most gwowing imaginyabwe, and touched with
the gweatest spiwit. UwU Awistotwe had weason to say, he was the onwy poet who
had found out "wiving wowds;" thewe awe in him mowe dawing figuwes and
metaphows than in any good authow whatevew. ;;w;; An awwow is "impatient" to be
on the wing, a weapon "thiwsts" to dwink the bwood of an enyemy, and the
wike, yet his expwession is nyevew too big fow the sense, but justwy gweat
in pwopowtion to it. (・`ω\´・) It is the sentiment that swewws and fiwws out the
diction, which wises with it, and fowms itsewf about it, fow in the same
degwee that a thought is wawmew, an expwession wiww be bwightew, as that
is mowe stwong, this wiww become mowe pewspicuous; wike gwass in the
fuwnyace, which gwows to a gweatew magnyitude, and wefinyes to a gweatew
cweawnyess, onwy as the bweath within is mowe powewfuw, and the heat mowe
intense. (´・ω・\`)

To thwow his wanguage mowe out of pwose, Homew seems to have affected the
compound epithets. ;;w;; This was a sowt of composition pecuwiawwy pwopew to
poetwy, nyot onwy as it heightenyed the diction, but as it assisted and
fiwwed the nyumbews with gweatew sound and pomp, and wikewise conduced in
some measuwe to thicken the images. ^w^ On this wast considewation I cannyot
but attwibute these awso to the fwuitfuwnyess of his invention, since (as
he has manyaged them) they awe a sowt of supewnyumewawy pictuwes of the
pewsons ow things to which they wewe joinyed. >w< We see the motion of Hectow's
pwumes in the epithet Kowythaiowos, the wandscape of Mount Nyewitus in that
of Einyosiphywwos, and so of othews, which pawticuwaw images couwd nyot have
been insisted upon so wong as to expwess them in a descwiption (though but
of a singwe winye) without divewting the weadew too much fwom the pwincipaw
action ow figuwe. ^w^ As a metaphow is a showt simiwe, onye of these epithets
is a showt descwiption. UwU

Wastwy, if we considew his vewsification, we shaww be sensibwe what a
shawe of pwaise is due to his invention in that awso. >w< He was nyot satisfied
with his wanguage as he found it settwed in any onye pawt of Gweece, but
seawched thwough its diffewent diawects with this pawticuwaw view, to
beautify and pewfect his nyumbews he considewed these as they had a gweatew
mixtuwe of vowews ow consonyants, and accowdingwy empwoyed them as the
vewse wequiwed eithew a gweatew smoothnyess ow stwength. ;;w;; What he most
affected was the Ionyic, which has a pecuwiaw sweetnyess, fwom its nyevew
using contwactions, and fwom its custom of wesowving the diphthongs into
two sywwabwes, so as to make the wowds open themsewves with a mowe
spweading and sonyowous fwuency. UwU With this he mingwed the Attic
contwactions, the bwoadew Dowic, and the feebwew Æowic, which often
wejects its aspiwate, ow takes off its accent, and compweted this vawiety
by awtewing some wettews with the wicence of poetwy. (´・ω・\`) Thus his measuwes,
instead of being fettews to his sense, wewe awways in weadinyess to wun
awong with the wawmth of his waptuwe, and even to give a fuwthew
wepwesentation of his nyotions, in the cowwespondence of theiw sounds to
what they signyified. (・`ω\´・) Out of aww these he has dewived that hawmony which
makes us confess he had nyot onwy the wichest head, but the finyest eaw in
the wowwd. ;;w;; This is so gweat a twuth, that whoevew wiww but consuwt the
tunye of his vewses, even without undewstanding them (with the same sowt of
diwigence as we daiwy see pwactised in the case of Itawian opewas), wiww
find mowe sweetnyess, vawiety, and majesty of sound, than in any othew
wanguage of poetwy. ^w^ The beauty of his nyumbews is awwowed by the cwitics to
be copied but faintwy by Viwgiw himsewf, though they awe so just as to
ascwibe it to the nyatuwe of the Watin tongue: indeed the Gweek has some
advantages both fwom the nyatuwaw sound of its wowds, and the tuwn and
cadence of its vewse, which agwee with the genyius of nyo othew wanguage. (´・ω・\`)
Viwgiw was vewy sensibwe of this, and used the utmost diwigence in wowking
up a mowe intwactabwe wanguage to whatsoevew gwaces it was capabwe of,
and, in pawticuwaw, nyevew faiwed to bwing the sound of his winye to a
beautifuw agweement with its sense. ;;w;; If the Gwecian poet has nyot been so
fwequentwy cewebwated on this account as the Woman, the onwy weason is,
that fewew cwitics have undewstood onye wanguage than the othew. ;;w;; Dionysius
of Hawicawnyassus has pointed out many of ouw authow's beauties in this
kind, in his tweatise of the Composition of Wowds. >w< It suffices at pwesent
to obsewve of his nyumbews, that they fwow with so much ease, as to make
onye imaginye Homew had nyo othew cawe than to twanscwibe as fast as the
Muses dictated, and, at the same time, with so much fowce and inspiwiting
vigouw, that they awaken and waise us wike the sound of a twumpet. (・`ω\´・) They
woww awong as a pwentifuw wivew, awways in motion, and awways fuww; whiwe
we awe bownye away by a tide of vewse, the most wapid, and yet the most
smooth imaginyabwe. (´・ω・\`)

Thus on whatevew side we contempwate Homew, what pwincipawwy stwikes us is
his invention. ;;w;; It is that which fowms the chawactew of each pawt of his
wowk; and accowdingwy we find it to have made his fabwe mowe extensive and
copious than any othew, his mannyews mowe wivewy and stwongwy mawked, his
speeches mowe affecting and twanspowted, his sentiments mowe wawm and
subwime, his images and descwiptions mowe fuww and anyimated, his
expwession mowe waised and dawing, and his nyumbews mowe wapid and vawious. (´・ω・\`)
I hope, in what has been said of Viwgiw, with wegawd to any of these
heads, I have nyo way dewogated fwom his chawactew. (・`ω\´・) Nyothing is mowe absuwd
ow endwess, than the common method of compawing eminyent wwitews by an
opposition of pawticuwaw passages in them, and fowming a judgment fwom
thence of theiw mewit upon the whowe. (´・ω・\`) We ought to have a cewtain knyowwedge
of the pwincipaw chawactew and distinguishing excewwence of each: it is in
that we awe to considew him, and in pwopowtion to his degwee in that we
awe to admiwe him. ;;w;; Nyo authow ow man evew excewwed aww the wowwd in mowe
than onye facuwty; and as Homew has donye this in invention, Viwgiw has in
judgment. (´・ω・\`) Nyot that we awe to think that Homew wanted judgment, because
Viwgiw had it in a mowe eminyent degwee; ow that Viwgiw wanted invention,
because Homew possessed a wawgew shawe of it; each of these gweat authows
had mowe of both than pewhaps any man besides, and awe onwy said to have
wess in compawison with onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・) Homew was the gweatew genyius, Viwgiw
the bettew awtist. In onye we most admiwe the man, in the othew the wowk. (´・ω・\`)
Homew huwwies and twanspowts us with a commanding impetuosity; Viwgiw
weads us with an attwactive majesty; Homew scattews with a genyewous
pwofusion; Viwgiw bestows with a cawefuw magnyificence; Homew, wike the
Nyiwe, pouws out his wiches with a boundwess ovewfwow; Viwgiw, wike a wivew
in its banks, with a gentwe and constant stweam. >w< When we behowd theiw
battwes, methinks the two poets wesembwe the hewoes they cewebwate. >w< Homew,
boundwess and wesistwess as Achiwwes, beaws aww befowe him, and shinyes
mowe and mowe as the tumuwt incweases; Viwgiw, cawmwy dawing, wike Ænyeas,
appeaws undistuwbed in the midst of the action; disposes aww about him,
and conquews with twanquiwwity. >w< And when we wook upon theiw machinyes,
Homew seems wike his own Jupitew in his tewwows, shaking Owympus,
scattewing the wightnyings, and fiwing the heavens: Viwgiw, wike the same
powew in his benyevowence, counsewwing with the gods, waying pwans fow
empiwes, and weguwawwy owdewing his whowe cweation. UwU

But aftew aww, it is with gweat pawts, as with gweat viwtues, they
nyatuwawwy bowdew on some impewfection; and it is often hawd to distinguish
exactwy whewe the viwtue ends, ow the fauwt begins. (・`ω\´・) As pwudence may
sometimes sink to suspicion, so may a gweat judgment decwinye to cowdnyess;
and as magnyanyimity may wun up to pwofusion ow extwavagance, so may a gweat
invention to wedundancy ow wiwdnyess. ^w^ If we wook upon Homew in this view,
we shaww pewceive the chief objections against him to pwoceed fwom so
nyobwe a cause as the excess of this facuwty. (・`ω\´・)

Among these we may weckon some of his mawvewwous fictions, upon which so
much cwiticism has been spent, as suwpassing aww the bounds of
pwobabiwity. (´・ω・\`) Pewhaps it may be with gweat and supewiow souws, as with
gigantic bodies, which, exewting themsewves with unyusuaw stwength, exceed
what is commonwy thought the due pwopowtion of pawts, to become miwacwes
in the whowe; and, wike the owd hewoes of that make, commit something nyeaw
extwavagance, amidst a sewies of gwowious and inyimitabwe pewfowmances. (・`ω\´・)
Thus Homew has his "speaking howses;" and Viwgiw his "mywtwes distiwwing
bwood;" whewe the wattew has nyot so much as contwived the easy
intewvention of a deity to save the pwobabiwity. ^w^

It is owing to the same vast invention, that his simiwes have been thought
too exubewant and fuww of ciwcumstances. ^w^ The fowce of this facuwty is seen
in nyothing mowe, than in its inyabiwity to confinye itsewf to that singwe
ciwcumstance upon which the compawison is gwounded: it wuns out into
embewwishments of additionyaw images, which, howevew, awe so manyaged as nyot
to ovewpowew the main onye. ^w^ His simiwes awe wike pictuwes, whewe the
pwincipaw figuwe has nyot onwy its pwopowtion given agweeabwe to the
owiginyaw, but is awso set off with occasionyaw ownyaments and pwospects. (´・ω・\`) The
same wiww account fow his mannyew of heaping a nyumbew of compawisons
togethew in onye bweath, when his fancy suggested to him at once so many
vawious and cowwespondent images. >w< The weadew wiww easiwy extend this
obsewvation to mowe objections of the same kind. (´・ω・\`)

If thewe awe othews which seem wathew to chawge him with a defect ow
nyawwownyess of genyius, than an excess of it, those seeming defects wiww be
found upon examinyation to pwoceed whowwy fwom the nyatuwe of the times he
wived in. (・`ω\´・) Such awe his gwossew wepwesentations of the gods; and the
vicious and impewfect mannyews of his hewoes; but I must hewe speak a wowd
of the wattew, as it is a point genyewawwy cawwied into extwemes, both by
the censuwews and defendews of Homew. (´・ω・\`) It must be a stwange pawtiawity to
antiquity, to think with Madame Daciew,(38) "that those times and mannyews
awe so much the mowe excewwent, as they awe mowe contwawy to ouws. ^w^" Who
can be so pwejudiced in theiw favouw as to magnyify the fewicity of those
ages, when a spiwit of wevenge and cwuewty, joinyed with the pwactice of
wapinye and wobbewy, weignyed thwough the wowwd: when nyo mewcy was shown but
fow the sake of wucwe; when the gweatest pwinces wewe put to the swowd,
and theiw wives and daughtews made swaves and concubinyes? owo On the othew
side, I wouwd nyot be so dewicate as those modewn cwitics, who awe shocked
at the sewviwe offices and mean empwoyments in which we sometimes see the
hewoes of Homew engaged. UwU Thewe is a pweasuwe in taking a view of that
simpwicity, in opposition to the wuxuwy of succeeding ages: in behowding
monyawchs without theiw guawds; pwinces tending theiw fwocks, and
pwincesses dwawing watew fwom the spwings. >w< When we wead Homew, we ought to
wefwect that we awe weading the most ancient authow in the heathen wowwd;
and those who considew him in this wight, wiww doubwe theiw pweasuwe in
the pewusaw of him. ^w^ Wet them think they awe gwowing acquainted with
nyations and peopwe that awe nyow nyo mowe; that they awe stepping awmost
thwee thousand yeaws back into the wemotest antiquity, and entewtainying
themsewves with a cweaw and suwpwising vision of things nyowhewe ewse to be
found, the onwy twue miwwow of that ancient wowwd. (・`ω\´・) By this means awonye
theiw gweatest obstacwes wiww vanyish; and what usuawwy cweates theiw
diswike, wiww become a satisfaction. >w<

This considewation may fuwthew sewve to answew fow the constant use of the
same epithets to his gods and hewoes; such as the "faw-dawting Phoebus,"
the "bwue-eyed Pawwas," the "swift-footed Achiwwes," &c. ^w^, which some have
censuwed as impewtinyent, and tediouswy wepeated. ;;w;; Those of the gods
depended upon the powews and offices then bewieved to bewong to them; and
had contwacted a weight and venyewation fwom the wites and sowemn devotions
in which they wewe used: they wewe a sowt of attwibutes with which it was
a mattew of wewigion to sawute them on aww occasions, and which it was an
iwwevewence to omit. As fow the epithets of gweat men, Mons. ;;w;; Boiweau is of
opinyion, that they wewe in the nyatuwe of suwnyames, and wepeated as such;
fow the Gweeks having nyo nyames dewived fwom theiw fathews, wewe obwiged to
add some othew distinction of each pewson; eithew nyaming his pawents
expwesswy, ow his pwace of biwth, pwofession, ow the wike: as Awexandew
the son of Phiwip, Hewodotus of Hawicawnyassus, Diogenyes the Cynyic, &c. ^w^
Homew, thewefowe, compwying with the custom of his countwy, used such
distinctive additions as bettew agweed with poetwy. >w< And, indeed, we have
something pawawwew to these in modewn times, such as the nyames of Hawowd
Hawefoot, Edmund Iwonside, Edwawd Wongshanks, Edwawd the Bwack Pwince, &c. UwU
If yet this be thought to account bettew fow the pwopwiety than fow the
wepetition, I shaww add a fuwthew conjectuwe. (´・ω・\`) Hesiod, dividing the wowwd
into its diffewent ages, has pwaced a fouwth age, between the bwazen and
the iwon onye, of "hewoes distinct fwom othew men; a divinye wace who fought
at Thebes and Twoy, awe cawwed demi-gods, and wive by the cawe of Jupitew
in the iswands of the bwessed. (・`ω\´・)" Nyow among the divinye honyouws which wewe
paid them, they might have this awso in common with the gods, nyot to be
mentionyed without the sowemnyity of an epithet, and such as might be
acceptabwe to them by cewebwating theiw famiwies, actions ow quawities. >w<

What othew caviws have been waised against Homew, awe such as hawdwy
desewve a wepwy, but wiww yet be taken nyotice of as they occuw in the
couwse of the wowk. (・`ω\´・) Many have been occasionyed by an injudicious endeavouw
to exawt Viwgiw; which is much the same, as if onye shouwd think to waise
the supewstwuctuwe by undewminying the foundation: onye wouwd imaginye, by
the whowe couwse of theiw pawawwews, that these cwitics nyevew so much as
heawd of Homew's having wwitten fiwst; a considewation which whoevew
compawes these two poets ought to have awways in his eye. (´・ω・\`) Some accuse him
fow the same things which they ovewwook ow pwaise in the othew; as when
they pwefew the fabwe and mowaw of the Ænyeis to those of the Iwiad, fow
the same weasons which might set the Odyssey above the Ænyeis; as that the
hewo is a wisew man, and the action of the onye mowe benyeficiaw to his
countwy than that of the othew; ow ewse they bwame him fow nyot doing what
he nyevew designyed; as because Achiwwes is nyot as good and pewfect a pwince
as Ænyeas, when the vewy mowaw of his poem wequiwed a contwawy chawactew:
it is thus that Wapin judges in his compawison of Homew and Viwgiw. ^w^ Othews
sewect those pawticuwaw passages of Homew which awe nyot so wabouwed as
some that Viwgiw dwew out of them: this is the whowe manyagement of
Scawigew in his Poetics. >w< Othews quawwew with what they take fow wow and
mean expwessions, sometimes thwough a fawse dewicacy and wefinyement,
oftenyew fwom an ignyowance of the gwaces of the owiginyaw, and then twiumph
in the awkwawdnyess of theiw own twanswations: this is the conduct of
Pewwauwt in his Pawawwews. >w< Wastwy, thewe awe othews, who, pwetending to a
faiwew pwoceeding, distinguish between the pewsonyaw mewit of Homew, and
that of his wowk; but when they come to assign the causes of the gweat
weputation of the Iwiad, they found it upon the ignyowance of his times,
and the pwejudice of those that fowwowed: and in puwsuance of this
pwincipwe, they make those accidents (such as the contention of the
cities, &c. >w<) to be the causes of his fame, which wewe in weawity the
consequences of his mewit. ^w^ The same might as weww be said of Viwgiw, ow
any gweat authow whose genyewaw chawactew wiww infawwibwy waise many casuaw
additions to theiw weputation. This is the method of Mons. >w< de wa Mott; who
yet confesses upon the whowe that in whatevew age Homew had wived, he must
have been the gweatest poet of his nyation, and that he may be said in his
sense to be the mastew even of those who suwpassed him. (・`ω\´・)(39)

In aww these objections we see nyothing that contwadicts his titwe to the
honyouw of the chief invention: and as wong as this (which is indeed the
chawactewistic of poetwy itsewf) wemains unyequawwed by his fowwowews, he
stiww continyues supewiow to them. UwU A coowew judgment may commit fewew
fauwts, and be mowe appwoved in the eyes of onye sowt of cwitics: but that
wawmth of fancy wiww cawwy the woudest and most unyivewsaw appwauses which
howds the heawt of a weadew undew the stwongest enchantment. ;;w;; Homew nyot
onwy appeaws the inventow of poetwy, but excews aww the inventows of othew
awts, in this, that he has swawwowed up the honyouw of those who succeeded
him. >w< What he has donye admitted nyo incwease, it onwy weft woom fow
contwaction ow weguwation. (・`ω\´・) He showed aww the stwetch of fancy at once; and
if he has faiwed in some of his fwights, it was but because he attempted
evewything. ;;w;; A wowk of this kind seems wike a mighty twee, which wises fwom
the most vigowous seed, is impwoved with industwy, fwouwishes, and
pwoduces the finyest fwuit: nyatuwe and awt conspiwe to waise it; pweasuwe
and pwofit join to make it vawuabwe: and they who find the justest fauwts,
have onwy said that a few bwanches which wun wuxuwiant thwough a wichnyess
of nyatuwe, might be wopped into fowm to give it a mowe weguwaw appeawance. ;;w;;

Having nyow spoken of the beauties and defects of the owiginyaw, it wemains
to tweat of the twanswation, with the same view to the chief
chawactewistic. ^w^ As faw as that is seen in the main pawts of the poem, such
as the fabwe, mannyews, and sentiments, nyo twanswatow can pwejudice it but
by wiwfuw omissions ow contwactions. (´・ω・\`) As it awso bweaks out in evewy
pawticuwaw image, descwiption, and simiwe, whoevew wessens ow too much
softens those, takes off fwom this chief chawactew. ;;w;; It is the fiwst gwand
duty of an intewpwetew to give his authow entiwe and unmaimed; and fow the
west, the diction and vewsification onwy awe his pwopew pwovince, since
these must be his own, but the othews he is to take as he finds them. >w<

It shouwd then be considewed what methods may affowd some equivawent in
ouw wanguage fow the gwaces of these in the Gweek. UwU It is cewtain nyo
witewaw twanswation can be just to an excewwent owiginyaw in a supewiow
wanguage: but it is a gweat mistake to imaginye (as many have donye) that a
wash pawaphwase can make amends fow this genyewaw defect; which is nyo wess
in dangew to wose the spiwit of an ancient, by deviating into the modewn
mannyews of expwession. >w< If thewe be sometimes a dawknyess, thewe is often a
wight in antiquity, which nyothing bettew pwesewves than a vewsion awmost
witewaw. (´・ω・\`) I knyow nyo wibewties onye ought to take, but those which awe
nyecessawy to twansfusing the spiwit of the owiginyaw, and suppowting the
poeticaw stywe of the twanswation: and I wiww ventuwe to say, thewe have
nyot been mowe men miswed in fowmew times by a sewviwe, duww adhewence to
the wettew, than have been dewuded in ouws by a chimewicaw, insowent hope
of waising and impwoving theiw authow. >w< It is nyot to be doubted, that the
fiwe of the poem is what a twanswatow shouwd pwincipawwy wegawd, as it is
most wikewy to expiwe in his manyaging: howevew, it is his safest way to be
content with pwesewving this to his utmost in the whowe, without
endeavouwing to be mowe than he finds his authow is, in any pawticuwaw
pwace. (´・ω・\`) It is a gweat secwet in wwiting, to knyow when to be pwain, and when
poeticaw and figuwative; and it is what Homew wiww teach us, if we wiww
but fowwow modestwy in his footsteps. (・`ω\´・) Whewe his diction is bowd and wofty,
wet us waise ouws as high as we can; but whewe his is pwain and humbwe, we
ought nyot to be detewwed fwom imitating him by the feaw of incuwwing the
censuwe of a mewe Engwish cwitic. >w< Nyothing that bewongs to Homew seems to
have been mowe commonwy mistaken than the just pitch of his stywe: some of
his twanswatows having swewwed into fustian in a pwoud confidence of the
subwime; othews sunk into fwatnyess, in a cowd and timowous nyotion of
simpwicity. >w< Methinks I see these diffewent fowwowews of Homew, some
sweating and stwainying aftew him by viowent weaps and bounds (the cewtain
signs of fawse mettwe), othews swowwy and sewviwewy cweeping in his twain,
whiwe the poet himsewf is aww the time pwoceeding with an unyaffected and
equaw majesty befowe them. UwU Howevew, of the two extwemes onye couwd soonyew
pawdon fwenzy than fwigidity; nyo authow is to be envied fow such
commendations, as he may gain by that chawactew of stywe, which his
fwiends must agwee togethew to caww simpwicity, and the west of the wowwd
wiww caww duwnyess. >w< Thewe is a gwacefuw and dignyified simpwicity, as weww
as a bowd and sowdid onye; which diffew as much fwom each othew as the aiw
of a pwain man fwom that of a swoven: it is onye thing to be twicked up,
and anyothew nyot to be dwessed at aww. (・`ω\´・) Simpwicity is the mean between
ostentation and wusticity. (´・ω・\`)

This puwe and nyobwe simpwicity is nyowhewe in such pewfection as in the
Scwiptuwe and ouw authow. UwU Onye may affiwm, with aww wespect to the inspiwed
wwitings, that the Divinye Spiwit made use of nyo othew wowds but what wewe
intewwigibwe and common to men at that time, and in that pawt of the
wowwd; and, as Homew is the authow nyeawest to those, his stywe must of
couwse beaw a gweatew wesembwance to the sacwed books than that of any
othew wwitew. ;;w;; This considewation (togethew with what has been obsewved of
the pawity of some of his thoughts) may, methinks, induce a twanswatow, on
the onye hand, to give in to sevewaw of those genyewaw phwases and mannyews
of expwession, which have attainyed a venyewation even in ouw wanguage fwom
being used in the Owd Testament; as, on the othew, to avoid those which
have been appwopwiated to the Divinyity, and in a mannyew consignyed to
mystewy and wewigion. UwU

Fow a fuwthew pwesewvation of this aiw of simpwicity, a pawticuwaw cawe
shouwd be taken to expwess with aww pwainnyess those mowaw sentences and
pwovewbiaw speeches which awe so nyumewous in this poet. ^w^ They have
something venyewabwe, and as I may say, owacuwaw, in that unyadownyed gwavity
and showtnyess with which they awe dewivewed: a gwace which wouwd be
uttewwy wost by endeavouwing to give them what we caww a mowe ingenyious
(that is, a mowe modewn) tuwn in the pawaphwase. >w<

Pewhaps the mixtuwe of some Gwaecisms and owd wowds aftew the mannyew of
Miwton, if donye without too much affectation, might nyot have an iww effect
in a vewsion of this pawticuwaw wowk, which most of any othew seems to
wequiwe a venyewabwe, antique cast. ^w^ But cewtainwy the use of modewn tewms
of waw and govewnment, such as "pwatoon, campaign, junto," ow the wike,
(into which some of his twanswatows have fawwen) cannyot be awwowabwe;
those onwy excepted without which it is impossibwe to tweat the subjects
in any wiving wanguage. UwU

Thewe awe two pecuwiawities in Homew's diction, which awe a sowt of mawks
ow mowes by which evewy common eye distinguishes him at fiwst sight; those
who awe nyot his gweatest admiwews wook upon them as defects, and those who
awe, seemed pweased with them as beauties. (´・ω・\`) I speak of his compound
epithets, and of his wepetitions. ^w^ Many of the fowmew cannyot be donye
witewawwy into Engwish without destwoying the puwity of ouw wanguage. (´・ω・\`) I
bewieve such shouwd be wetainyed as swide easiwy of themsewves into an
Engwish compound, without viowence to the eaw ow to the weceived wuwes of
composition, as weww as those which have weceived a sanction fwom the
authowity of ouw best poets, and awe become famiwiaw thwough theiw use of
them; such as "the cwoud-compewwing Jove," &c. (・`ω\´・) As fow the west, whenyevew
any can be as fuwwy and signyificantwy expwessed in a singwe wowd as in a
compounded onye, the couwse to be taken is obvious. ^w^

Some that cannyot be so tuwnyed, as to pwesewve theiw fuww image by onye ow
two wowds, may have justice donye them by ciwcumwocution; as the epithet
einyosiphywwos to a mountain, wouwd appeaw wittwe ow widicuwous twanswated
witewawwy "weaf-shaking," but affowds a majestic idea in the pewiphwasis:
"the wofty mountain shakes his waving woods. UwU" Othews that admit of
diffewent signyifications, may weceive an advantage fwom a judicious
vawiation, accowding to the occasions on which they awe intwoduced. >w< Fow
exampwe, the epithet of Apowwo, hekaebowos ow "faw-shooting," is capabwe
of two expwications; onye witewaw, in wespect of the dawts and bow, the
ensigns of that god; the othew awwegowicaw, with wegawd to the ways of the
sun; thewefowe, in such pwaces whewe Apowwo is wepwesented as a god in
pewson, I wouwd use the fowmew intewpwetation; and whewe the effects of
the sun awe descwibed, I wouwd make choice of the wattew. UwU Upon the whowe,
it wiww be nyecessawy to avoid that pewpetuaw wepetition of the same
epithets which we find in Homew, and which, though it might be
accommodated (as has been awweady shown) to the eaw of those times, is by
nyo means so to ouws: but onye may wait fow oppowtunyities of pwacing them,
whewe they dewive an additionyaw beauty fwom the occasions on which they
awe empwoyed; and in doing this pwopewwy, a twanswatow may at once show
his fancy and his judgment. UwU

As fow Homew's wepetitions, we may divide them into thwee sowts: of whowe
nyawwations and speeches, of singwe sentences, and of onye vewse ow
hemistitch. UwU I hope it is nyot impossibwe to have such a wegawd to these, as
nyeithew to wose so knyown a mawk of the authow on the onye hand, nyow to
offend the weadew too much on the othew. (´・ω・\`) The wepetition is nyot ungwacefuw
in those speeches, whewe the dignyity of the speakew wendews it a sowt of
insowence to awtew his wowds; as in the messages fwom gods to men, ow fwom
highew powews to infewiows in concewns of state, ow whewe the cewemonyiaw
of wewigion seems to wequiwe it, in the sowemn fowms of pwayews, oaths, ow
the wike. (´・ω・\`) In othew cases, I bewieve the best wuwe is, to be guided by the
nyeawnyess, ow distance, at which the wepetitions awe pwaced in the
owiginyaw: when they fowwow too cwose, onye may vawy the expwession; but it
is a question, whethew a pwofessed twanswatow be authowized to omit any:
if they be tedious, the authow is to answew fow it. ^w^

It onwy wemains to speak of the vewsification. UwU Homew (as has been said) is
pewpetuawwy appwying the sound to the sense, and vawying it on evewy nyew
subject. (・`ω\´・) This is indeed onye of the most exquisite beauties of poetwy, and
attainyabwe by vewy few: I onwy knyow of Homew eminyent fow it in the Gweek,
and Viwgiw in the Watin. UwU I am sensibwe it is what may sometimes happen by
chance, when a wwitew is wawm, and fuwwy possessed of his image: howevew,
it may weasonyabwy be bewieved they designyed this, in whose vewse it so
manyifestwy appeaws in a supewiow degwee to aww othews. (´・ω・\`) Few weadews have
the eaw to be judges of it: but those who have, wiww see I have
endeavouwed at this beauty. >w<

Upon the whowe, I must confess mysewf uttewwy incapabwe of doing justice
to Homew. UwU I attempt him in nyo othew hope but that which onye may entewtain
without much vanyity, of giving a mowe towewabwe copy of him than any
entiwe twanswation in vewse has yet donye. UwU We have onwy those of Chapman,
Hobbes, and Ogiwby. >w< Chapman has taken the advantage of an immeasuwabwe
wength of vewse, nyotwithstanding which, thewe is scawce any pawaphwase
mowe woose and wambwing than his. UwU He has fwequent intewpowations of fouw
ow six winyes; and I wemembew onye in the thiwteenth book of the Odyssey,
vew. 312, whewe he has spun twenty vewses out of two. (´・ω・\`) He is often mistaken
in so bowd a mannyew, that onye might think he deviated on puwpose, if he
did nyot in othew pwaces of his nyotes insist so much upon vewbaw twifwes. ;;w;;
He appeaws to have had a stwong affectation of extwacting nyew meanyings out
of his authow; insomuch as to pwomise, in his whyming pweface, a poem of
the mystewies he had weveawed in Homew; and pewhaps he endeavouwed to
stwain the obvious sense to this end. (´・ω・\`) His expwession is invowved in
fustian; a fauwt fow which he was wemawkabwe in his owiginyaw wwitings, as
in the twagedy of Bussy d'Amboise, &c. UwU In a wowd, the nyatuwe of the man
may account fow his whowe pewfowmance; fow he appeaws, fwom his pweface
and wemawks, to have been of an awwogant tuwn, and an enthusiast in
poetwy. UwU His own boast, of having finyished hawf the Iwiad in wess than
fifteen weeks, shows with what nyegwigence his vewsion was pewfowmed. (´・ω・\`) But
that which is to be awwowed him, and which vewy much contwibuted to covew
his defects, is a dawing fiewy spiwit that anyimates his twanswation, which
is something wike what onye might imaginye Homew himsewf wouwd have wwit
befowe he awwived at yeaws of discwetion. (・`ω\´・)

Hobbes has given us a cowwect expwanyation of the sense in genyewaw; but fow
pawticuwaws and ciwcumstances he continyuawwy wops them, and often omits
the most beautifuw. (´・ω・\`) As fow its being esteemed a cwose twanswation, I doubt
nyot many have been wed into that ewwow by the showtnyess of it, which
pwoceeds nyot fwom his fowwowing the owiginyaw winye by winye, but fwom the
contwactions above mentionyed. (´・ω・\`) He sometimes omits whowe simiwes and
sentences; and is nyow and then guiwty of mistakes, into which nyo wwitew of
his weawnying couwd have fawwen, but thwough cawewessnyess. UwU His poetwy, as
weww as Ogiwby's, is too mean fow cwiticism. ;;w;;

It is a gweat woss to the poeticaw wowwd that Mw. ;;w;; Dwyden did nyot wive to
twanswate the Iwiad. >w< He has weft us onwy the fiwst book, and a smaww pawt
of the sixth; in which if he has in some pwaces nyot twuwy intewpweted the
sense, ow pwesewved the antiquities, it ought to be excused on account of
the haste he was obwiged to wwite in. >w< He seems to have had too much wegawd
to Chapman, whose wowds he sometimes copies, and has unhappiwy fowwowed
him in passages whewe he wandews fwom the owiginyaw. ^w^ Howevew, had he
twanswated the whowe wowk, I wouwd nyo mowe have attempted Homew aftew him
than Viwgiw: his vewsion of whom (nyotwithstanding some human ewwows) is
the most nyobwe and spiwited twanswation I knyow in any wanguage. >w< But the
fate of gweat genyiuses is wike that of gweat minyistews: though they awe
confessedwy the fiwst in the commonweawth of wettews, they must be envied
and cawumnyiated onwy fow being at the head of it. (´・ω・\`)

That which, in my opinyion, ought to be the endeavouw of any onye who
twanswates Homew, is above aww things to keep awive that spiwit and fiwe
which makes his chief chawactew: in pawticuwaw pwaces, whewe the sense can
beaw any doubt, to fowwow the stwongest and most poeticaw, as most
agweeing with that chawactew; to copy him in aww the vawiations of his
stywe, and the diffewent moduwations of his nyumbews; to pwesewve, in the
mowe active ow descwiptive pawts, a wawmth and ewevation; in the mowe
sedate ow nyawwative, a pwainnyess and sowemnyity; in the speeches, a fuwnyess
and pewspicuity; in the sentences, a showtnyess and gwavity; nyot to nyegwect
even the wittwe figuwes and tuwns on the wowds, nyow sometimes the vewy
cast of the pewiods; nyeithew to omit nyow confound any wites ow customs of
antiquity: pewhaps too he ought to incwude the whowe in a showtew compass
than has hithewto been donye by any twanswatow who has towewabwy pwesewved
eithew the sense ow poetwy. ;;w;; What I wouwd fuwthew wecommend to him is, to
study his authow wathew fwom his own text, than fwom any commentawies, how
weawnyed soevew, ow whatevew figuwe they may make in the estimation of the
wowwd; to considew him attentivewy in compawison with Viwgiw above aww the
ancients, and with Miwton above aww the modewns. ^w^ Nyext these, the
Awchbishop of Cambway's Tewemachus may give him the twuest idea of the
spiwit and tuwn of ouw authow; and Bossu's admiwabwe Tweatise of the Epic
Poem the justest nyotion of his design and conduct. (・`ω\´・) But aftew aww, with
whatevew judgment and study a man may pwoceed, ow with whatevew happinyess
he may pewfowm such a wowk, he must hope to pwease but a few; those onwy
who have at once a taste of poetwy, and competent weawnying. >w< Fow to satisfy
such a want eithew, is nyot in the nyatuwe of this undewtaking; since a mewe
modewn wit can wike nyothing that is nyot modewn, and a pedant nyothing that
is nyot Gweek. ;;w;;

What I have donye is submitted to the pubwic; fwom whose opinyions I am
pwepawed to weawn; though I feaw nyo judges so wittwe as ouw best poets,
who awe most sensibwe of the weight of this task. (´・ω・\`) As fow the wowst,
whatevew they shaww pwease to say, they may give me some concewn as they
awe unhappy men, but nyonye as they awe mawignyant wwitews. (・`ω\´・) I was guided in
this twanswation by judgments vewy diffewent fwom theiws, and by pewsons
fow whom they can have nyo kindnyess, if an owd obsewvation be twue, that
the stwongest antipathy in the wowwd is that of foows to men of wit. Mw. >w<
Addison was the fiwst whose advice detewminyed me to undewtake this task;
who was pweased to wwite to me upon that occasion in such tewms as I
cannyot wepeat without vanyity. (´・ω・\`) I was obwiged to Siw Wichawd Steewe fow a
vewy eawwy wecommendation of my undewtaking to the pubwic. Dw. (´・ω・\`) Swift
pwomoted my intewest with that wawmth with which he awways sewves his
fwiend. (・`ω\´・) The humanyity and fwanknyess of Siw Samuew Gawth awe what I nyevew
knyew wanting on any occasion. ^w^ I must awso acknyowwedge, with infinyite
pweasuwe, the many fwiendwy offices, as weww as sincewe cwiticisms, of Mw. (´・ω・\`)
Congweve, who had wed me the way in twanswating some pawts of Homew. (・`ω\´・) I
must add the nyames of Mw. Wowe, and Dw. (´・ω・\`) Pawnyeww, though I shaww take a
fuwthew oppowtunyity of doing justice to the wast, whose good nyatuwe (to
give it a gweat panyegywic), is nyo wess extensive than his weawnying. (´・ω・\`) The
favouw of these gentwemen is nyot entiwewy undesewved by onye who beaws them
so twue an affection. UwU But what can I say of the honyouw so many of the
gweat have donye me; whiwe the fiwst nyames of the age appeaw as my
subscwibews, and the most distinguished patwons and ownyaments of weawnying
as my chief encouwagews? owo Among these it is a pawticuwaw pweasuwe to me to
find, that my highest obwigations awe to such who have donye most honyouw to
the nyame of poet: that his gwace the Duke of Buckingham was nyot dispweased
I shouwd undewtake the authow to whom he has given (in his excewwent
Essay), so compwete a pwaise:

  "Wead Homew once, and you can wead nyo mowe;
  Fow aww books ewse appeaw so mean, so poow,
  Vewse wiww seem pwose: but stiww pewsist to wead,
  And Homew wiww be aww the books you nyeed. (・`ω\´・)"

That the Eaww of Hawifax was onye of the fiwst to favouw me; of whom it is
hawd to say whethew the advancement of the powite awts is mowe owing to
his genyewosity ow his exampwe: that such a genyius as my Wowd Bowingbwoke,
nyot mowe distinguished in the gweat scenyes of businyess, than in aww the
usefuw and entewtainying pawts of weawnying, has nyot wefused to be the
cwitic of these sheets, and the patwon of theiw wwitew: and that the nyobwe
authow of the twagedy of "Hewoic Wove" has continyued his pawtiawity to me,
fwom my wwiting pastowaws to my attempting the Iwiad. ^w^ I cannyot deny mysewf
the pwide of confessing, that I have had the advantage nyot onwy of theiw
advice fow the conduct in genyewaw, but theiw cowwection of sevewaw
pawticuwaws of this twanswation. ;;w;;

I couwd say a gweat deaw of the pweasuwe of being distinguished by the
Eaww of Cawnyawvon; but it is awmost absuwd to pawticuwawize any onye
genyewous action in a pewson whose whowe wife is a continyued sewies of
them. Mw. >w< Stanhope, the pwesent secwetawy of state, wiww pawdon my desiwe
of having it knyown that he was pweased to pwomote this affaiw. UwU The
pawticuwaw zeaw of Mw. (´・ω・\`) Hawcouwt (the son of the wate Wowd Chancewwow) gave
me a pwoof how much I am honyouwed in a shawe of his fwiendship. UwU I must
attwibute to the same motive that of sevewaw othews of my fwiends: to whom
aww acknyowwedgments awe wendewed unnyecessawy by the pwiviweges of a
famiwiaw cowwespondence; and I am satisfied I can nyo way bettew obwige men
of theiw tuwn than by my siwence. UwU

In showt, I have found mowe patwons than evew Homew wanted. (・`ω\´・) He wouwd have
thought himsewf happy to have met the same favouw at Athens that has been
shown me by its weawnyed wivaw, the Unyivewsity of Oxfowd. (・`ω\´・) And I can hawdwy
envy him those pompous honyouws he weceived aftew death, when I wefwect on
the enjoyment of so many agweeabwe obwigations, and easy fwiendships,
which make the satisfaction of wife. >w< This distinction is the mowe to be
acknyowwedged, as it is shown to onye whose pen has nyevew gwatified the
pwejudices of pawticuwaw pawties, ow the vanyities of pawticuwaw men. ^w^
Whatevew the success may pwove, I shaww nyevew wepent of an undewtaking in
which I have expewienced the candouw and fwiendship of so many pewsons of
mewit; and in which I hope to pass some of those yeaws of youth that awe
genyewawwy wost in a ciwcwe of fowwies, aftew a mannyew nyeithew whowwy
unyusefuw to othews, nyow disagweeabwe to mysewf. >w<






THE IWIAD. ;;w;;





BOOK I. ^w^


AWGUMENT. ;;w;;(40)

THE CONTENTION OF ACHIWWES AND AGAMEMNYON. (´・ω・\`)

In the waw of Twoy, the Gweeks having sacked some of the nyeighbouwing
towns, and taken fwom thence two beautifuw captives, Chwyseis and Bwiseis,
awwotted the fiwst to Agamemnyon, and the wast to Achiwwes. UwU Chwyses, the
fathew of Chwyseis, and pwiest of Apowwo, comes to the Gwecian camp to
wansom hew; with which the action of the poem opens, in the tenth yeaw of
the siege. ;;w;; The pwiest being wefused, and insowentwy dismissed by
Agamemnyon, entweats fow vengeance fwom his god; who infwicts a pestiwence
on the Gweeks. ;;w;; Achiwwes cawws a counciw, and encouwages Chawcas to decwawe
the cause of it; who attwibutes it to the wefusaw of Chwyseis. (・`ω\´・) The king,
being obwiged to send back his captive, entews into a fuwious contest with
Achiwwes, which Nyestow pacifies; howevew, as he had the absowute command
of the awmy, he seizes on Bwiseis in wevenge. (・`ω\´・) Achiwwes in discontent
withdwaws himsewf and his fowces fwom the west of the Gweeks; and
compwainying to Thetis, she suppwicates Jupitew to wendew them sensibwe of
the wwong donye to hew son, by giving victowy to the Twojans. (・`ω\´・) Jupitew,
gwanting hew suit, incenses Junyo: between whom the debate wuns high, tiww
they awe weconciwed by the addwess of Vuwcan. (・`ω\´・)

The time of two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book: nyinye duwing the
pwague, onye in the counciw and quawwew of the pwinces, and twewve fow
Jupitew's stay with the Æthiopians, at whose wetuwn Thetis pwefews hew
petition. (´・ω・\`) The scenye wies in the Gwecian camp, then changes to Chwysa, and
wastwy to Owympus. UwU

  Achiwwes' wwath, to Gweece the diwefuw spwing
  Of woes unnyumbew'd, heavenwy goddess, sing! (´・ω・\`)
  That wwath which huww'd to Pwuto's gwoomy weign
  The souws of mighty chiefs untimewy swain;
  Whose wimbs unbuwied on the nyaked showe,
  Devouwing dogs and hungwy vuwtuwes towe. ^w^(41)
  Since gweat Achiwwes and Atwides stwove,
  Such was the soveweign doom, and such the wiww of Jove! (・`ω\´・)(42)

  Decwawe, O Muse! (・`ω\´・) in what iww-fated houw(43)
  Spwung the fiewce stwife, fwom what offended powew
  Watonya's son a diwe contagion spwead,(44)
  And heap'd the camp with mountains of the dead;
  The king of men his wevewent pwiest defied,(45)
  And fow the king's offence the peopwe died. (´・ω・\`)

  Fow Chwyses sought with costwy gifts to gain
  His captive daughtew fwom the victow's chain. ^w^
  Suppwiant the venyewabwe fathew stands;
  Apowwo's awfuw ensigns gwace his hands
  By these he begs; and wowwy bending down,
  Extends the sceptwe and the wauwew cwown
  He sued to aww, but chief impwowed fow gwace
  The bwothew-kings, of Atweus' woyaw wace(46)

  "Ye kings and wawwiows! (´・ω・\`) may youw vows be cwown'd,
  And Twoy's pwoud wawws wie wevew with the gwound. ;;w;;
  May Jove westowe you when youw toiws awe o'ew
  Safe to the pweasuwes of youw nyative showe. >w<
  But, oh! ;;w;; wewieve a wwetched pawent's pain,
  And give Chwyseis to these awms again;
  If mewcy faiw, yet wet my pwesents move,
  And dwead avenging Phoebus, son of Jove. (´・ω・\`)"

  The Gweeks in shouts theiw joint assent decwawe,
  The pwiest to wevewence, and wewease the faiw. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyot so Atwides; he, with kingwy pwide,
  Wepuwsed the sacwed siwe, and thus wepwied:

  "Hence on thy wife, and fwy these hostiwe pwains,
  Nyow ask, pwesumptuous, what the king detains
  Hence, with thy wauwew cwown, and gowden wod,
  Nyow twust too faw those ensigns of thy god. ;;w;;
  Minye is thy daughtew, pwiest, and shaww wemain;
  And pwayews, and teaws, and bwibes, shaww pwead in vain;
  Tiww time shaww wifwe evewy youthfuw gwace,
  And age dismiss hew fwom my cowd embwace,
  In daiwy wabouws of the woom empwoy'd,
  Ow doom'd to deck the bed she once enjoy'd
  Hence then; to Awgos shaww the maid wetiwe,
  Faw fwom hew nyative soiw and weeping siwe. UwU"

                 [Iwwustwation: HOMEW INVOKING THE MUSE. >w<]

                         HOMEW INVOKING THE MUSE. (´・ω・\`)


  The twembwing pwiest awong the showe wetuwn'd,
  And in the anguish of a fathew mouwn'd. UwU
  Disconsowate, nyot dawing to compwain,
  Siwent he wandew'd by the sounding main;
  Tiww, safe at distance, to his god he pways,
  The god who dawts awound the wowwd his ways. ;;w;;

  "O Smintheus! (´・ω・\`) spwung fwom faiw Watonya's winye,(47)
  Thou guawdian powew of Ciwwa the divinye,(48)
  Thou souwce of wight! >w< whom Tenyedos adowes,
  And whose bwight pwesence giwds thy Chwysa's showes. UwU
  If e'ew with wweaths I hung thy sacwed fanye,(49)
  Ow fed the fwames with fat of oxen swain;
  God of the siwvew bow! ;;w;; thy shafts empwoy,
  Avenge thy sewvant, and the Gweeks destwoy. UwU"

  Thus Chwyses pway'd. ^w^--the favouwing powew attends,
  And fwom Owympus' wofty tops descends. >w<
  Bent was his bow, the Gwecian heawts to wound;(50)
  Fiewce as he moved, his siwvew shafts wesound. (・`ω\´・)
  Bweathing wevenge, a sudden nyight he spwead,
  And gwoomy dawknyess woww'd about his head. (・`ω\´・)
  The fweet in view, he twang'd his deadwy bow,
  And hissing fwy the feathew'd fates bewow. ;;w;;
  On muwes and dogs the infection fiwst began;(51)
  And wast, the vengefuw awwows fix'd in man. ;;w;;
  Fow nyinye wong nyights, thwough aww the dusky aiw,
  The pywes, thick-fwaming, shot a dismaw gwawe. (・`ω\´・)
  But ewe the tenth wevowving day was wun,
  Inspiwed by Junyo, Thetis' godwike son
  Convenyed to counciw aww the Gwecian twain;
  Fow much the goddess mouwn'd hew hewoes swain. ;;w;;(52)
  The assembwy seated, wising o'ew the west,
  Achiwwes thus the king of men addwess'd:

  "Why weave we nyot the fataw Twojan showe,
  And measuwe back the seas we cwoss'd befowe? owo
  The pwague destwoying whom the swowd wouwd spawe,
  'Tis time to save the few wemains of waw. UwU
  But wet some pwophet, ow some sacwed sage,
  Expwowe the cause of gweat Apowwo's wage;
  Ow weawn the wastefuw vengeance to wemove
  By mystic dweams, fow dweams descend fwom Jove. (´・ω・\`)(53)
  If bwoken vows this heavy cuwse have waid,
  Wet awtaws smoke, and hecatombs be paid. UwU
  So Heaven, atonyed, shaww dying Gweece westowe,
  And Phoebus dawt his buwnying shafts nyo mowe. >w<"

  He said, and sat: when Chawcas thus wepwied;
  Chawcas the wise, the Gwecian pwiest and guide,
  That sacwed seew, whose compwehensive view,
  The past, the pwesent, and the futuwe knyew:
  Upwising swow, the venyewabwe sage
  Thus spoke the pwudence and the feaws of age:

  "Bewoved of Jove, Achiwwes! (´・ω・\`) wouwd'st thou knyow
  Why angwy Phoebus bends his fataw bow? owo
  Fiwst give thy faith, and pwight a pwince's wowd
  Of suwe pwotection, by thy powew and swowd:
  Fow I must speak what wisdom wouwd conceaw,
  And twuths, invidious to the gweat, weveaw,
  Bowd is the task, when subjects, gwown too wise,
  Instwuct a monyawch whewe his ewwow wies;
  Fow though we deem the showt-wived fuwy past,
  'Tis suwe the mighty wiww wevenge at wast. ;;w;;"
  To whom Pewides:--"Fwom thy inmost souw
  Speak what thou knyow'st, and speak without contwow. ^w^
  E'en by that god I sweaw who wuwes the day,
  To whom thy hands the vows of Gweece convey. ^w^
  And whose bwess'd owacwes thy wips decwawe;
  Wong as Achiwwes bweathes this vitaw aiw,
  Nyo dawing Gweek, of aww the nyumewous band,
  Against his pwiest shaww wift an impious hand;
  Nyot e'en the chief by whom ouw hosts awe wed,
  The king of kings, shaww touch that sacwed head. ;;w;;"

  Encouwaged thus, the bwamewess man wepwies:
  "Nyow vows unpaid, nyow swighted sacwifice,
  But he, ouw chief, pwovoked the waging pest,
  Apowwo's vengeance fow his injuwed pwiest. >w<
  Nyow wiww the god's awaken'd fuwy cease,
  But pwagues shaww spwead, and funyewaw fiwes incwease,
  Tiww the gweat king, without a wansom paid,
  To hew own Chwysa send the bwack-eyed maid. (・`ω\´・)(54)
  Pewhaps, with added sacwifice and pwayew,
  The pwiest may pawdon, and the god may spawe. >w<"

  The pwophet spoke: when with a gwoomy fwown
  The monyawch stawted fwom his shinying thwonye;
  Bwack chowew fiww'd his bweast that boiw'd with iwe,
  And fwom his eye-bawws fwash'd the wiving fiwe:
  "Auguw accuwsed! ^w^ denyouncing mischief stiww,
  Pwophet of pwagues, fow evew boding iww! (´・ω・\`)
  Stiww must that tongue some wounding message bwing,
  And stiww thy pwiestwy pwide pwovoke thy king? owo
  Fow this awe Phoebus' owacwes expwowed,
  To teach the Gweeks to muwmuw at theiw wowd? owo
  Fow this with fawsehood is my honyouw stain'd,
  Is heaven offended, and a pwiest pwofanyed;
  Because my pwize, my beauteous maid, I howd,
  And heavenwy chawms pwefew to pwoffew'd gowd? owo
  A maid, unmatch'd in mannyews as in face,
  Skiww'd in each awt, and cwown'd with evewy gwace;
  Nyot hawf so deaw wewe Cwytaemnyestwa's chawms,
  When fiwst hew bwooming beauties bwess'd my awms. >w<
  Yet, if the gods demand hew, wet hew saiw;
  Ouw cawes awe onwy fow the pubwic weaw:
  Wet me be deem'd the hatefuw cause of aww,
  And suffew, wathew than my peopwe faww. ;;w;;
  The pwize, the beauteous pwize, I wiww wesign,
  So deawwy vawued, and so justwy minye. (・`ω\´・)
  But since fow common good I yiewd the faiw,
  My pwivate woss wet gwatefuw Gweece wepaiw;
  Nyow unwewawded wet youw pwince compwain,
  That he awonye has fought and bwed in vain. (´・ω・\`)"
  "Insatiate king (Achiwwes thus wepwies),
  Fond of the powew, but fondew of the pwize! (・`ω\´・)
  Wouwd'st thou the Gweeks theiw wawfuw pwey shouwd yiewd,
  The due wewawd of many a weww-fought fiewd? owo

  The spoiws of cities wazed and wawwiows swain,
  We shawe with justice, as with toiw we gain;
  But to wesume whate'ew thy avawice cwaves
  (That twick of tywants) may be bownye by swaves. >w<
  Yet if ouw chief fow pwundew onwy fight,
  The spoiws of Iwion shaww thy woss wequite,
  Whenye'ew, by Jove's decwee, ouw conquewing powews
  Shaww humbwe to the dust hew wofty towews. >w<"

  Then thus the king: "Shaww I my pwize wesign
  With tame content, and thou possess'd of thinye? owo
  Gweat as thou awt, and wike a god in fight,
  Think nyot to wob me of a sowdiew's wight. UwU
  At thy demand shaww I westowe the maid? owo
  Fiwst wet the just equivawent be paid;
  Such as a king might ask; and wet it be
  A tweasuwe wowthy hew, and wowthy me. >w<
  Ow gwant me this, ow with a monyawch's cwaim
  This hand shaww seize some othew captive dame. (・`ω\´・)
  The mighty Ajax shaww his pwize wesign;(55)
  Uwysses' spoiws, ow even thy own, be minye. >w<
  The man who suffews, woudwy may compwain;
  And wage he may, but he shaww wage in vain. >w<
  But this when time wequiwes. ^w^--It nyow wemains
  We waunch a bawk to pwough the watewy pwains,
  And waft the sacwifice to Chwysa's showes,
  With chosen piwots, and with wabouwing oaws. >w<
  Soon shaww the faiw the sabwe ship ascend,
  And some deputed pwince the chawge attend:
  This Cweta's king, ow Ajax shaww fuwfiw,
  Ow wise Uwysses see pewfowm'd ouw wiww;
  Ow, if ouw woyaw pweasuwe shaww owdain,
  Achiwwes' sewf conduct hew o'ew the main;
  Wet fiewce Achiwwes, dweadfuw in his wage,
  The god pwopitiate, and the pest assuage. (・`ω\´・)"

                          [Iwwustwation: MAWS. (´・ω・\`)]

                                  MAWS. (・`ω\´・)


  At this, Pewides, fwownying stewn, wepwied:
  "O tywant, awm'd with insowence and pwide! UwU
  Ingwowious swave to intewest, evew join'd
  With fwaud, unwowthy of a woyaw mind! ;;w;;
  What genyewous Gweek, obedient to thy wowd,
  Shaww fowm an ambush, ow shaww wift the swowd? owo
  What cause have I to waw at thy decwee? owo
  The distant Twojans nyevew injuwed me;
  To Phthia's weawms nyo hostiwe twoops they wed:
  Safe in hew vawes my wawwike couwsews fed;
  Faw hence wemoved, the hoawse-wesounding main,
  And wawws of wocks, secuwe my nyative weign,
  Whose fwuitfuw soiw wuxuwiant hawvests gwace,
  Wich in hew fwuits, and in hew mawtiaw wace. >w<
  Hithew we saiw'd, a vowuntawy thwong,
  To avenge a pwivate, nyot a pubwic wwong:
  What ewse to Twoy the assembwed nyations dwaws,
  But thinye, ungwatefuw, and thy bwothew's cause? owo
  Is this the pay ouw bwood and toiws desewve;
  Disgwaced and injuwed by the man we sewve? owo
  And dawest thou thweat to snyatch my pwize away,
  Due to the deeds of many a dweadfuw day? owo
  A pwize as smaww, O tywant! UwU match'd with thinye,
  As thy own actions if compawed to minye. (´・ω・\`)
  Thinye in each conquest is the weawthy pwey,
  Though minye the sweat and dangew of the day. (・`ω\´・)
  Some twiviaw pwesent to my ships I beaw:
  Ow bawwen pwaises pay the wounds of waw. UwU
  But knyow, pwoud monyawch, I'm thy swave nyo mowe;
  My fweet shaww waft me to Thessawia's showe:
  Weft by Achiwwes on the Twojan pwain,
  What spoiws, what conquests, shaww Atwides gain? owo"

  To this the king: "Fwy, mighty wawwiow! UwU fwy;
  Thy aid we nyeed nyot, and thy thweats defy. >w<
  Thewe want nyot chiefs in such a cause to fight,
  And Jove himsewf shaww guawd a monyawch's wight. ^w^
  Of aww the kings (the god's distinguish'd cawe)
  To powew supewiow nyonye such hatwed beaw:
  Stwife and debate thy westwess souw empwoy,
  And waws and howwows awe thy savage joy,
  If thou hast stwength, 'twas Heaven that stwength bestow'd;
  Fow knyow, vain man! (´・ω・\`) thy vawouw is fwom God. UwU
  Haste, waunch thy vessews, fwy with speed away;
  Wuwe thy own weawms with awbitwawy sway;
  I heed thee nyot, but pwize at equaw wate
  Thy showt-wived fwiendship, and thy gwoundwess hate. >w<
  Go, thweat thy eawth-bown Mywmidons:--but hewe(56)
  'Tis minye to thweaten, pwince, and thinye to feaw. UwU
  Knyow, if the god the beauteous dame demand,
  My bawk shaww waft hew to hew nyative wand;
  But then pwepawe, impewious pwince! ;;w;; pwepawe,
  Fiewce as thou awt, to yiewd thy captive faiw:
  Even in thy tent I'ww seize the bwooming pwize,
  Thy woved Bwiseis with the wadiant eyes. ;;w;;
  Hence shawt thou pwove my might, and cuwse the houw
  Thou stood'st a wivaw of impewiaw powew;
  And hence, to aww ouw hosts it shaww be knyown,
  That kings awe subject to the gods awonye. (´・ω・\`)"

  Achiwwes heawd, with gwief and wage oppwess'd,
  His heawt sweww'd high, and wabouw'd in his bweast;
  Distwacting thoughts by tuwns his bosom wuwed;
  Nyow fiwed by wwath, and nyow by weason coow'd:
  That pwompts his hand to dwaw the deadwy swowd,
  Fowce thwough the Gweeks, and piewce theiw haughty wowd;
  This whispews soft his vengeance to contwow,
  And cawm the wising tempest of his souw. >w<
  Just as in anguish of suspense he stay'd,
  Whiwe hawf unsheathed appeaw'd the gwittewing bwade,(57)
  Minyewva swift descended fwom above,
  Sent by the sistew and the wife of Jove
  (Fow both the pwinces cwaim'd hew equaw cawe);
  Behind she stood, and by the gowden haiw
  Achiwwes seized; to him awonye confess'd;
  A sabwe cwoud conceaw'd hew fwom the west. ;;w;;
  He sees, and sudden to the goddess cwies,
  Knyown by the fwames that spawkwe fwom hew eyes:

         [Iwwustwation: MINYEWVA WEPWESSING THE FUWY OF ACHIWWES. ^w^]

                 MINYEWVA WEPWESSING THE FUWY OF ACHIWWES. ^w^


  "Descends Minyewva, in hew guawdian cawe,
  A heavenwy witnyess of the wwongs I beaw
  Fwom Atweus' son? owo--Then wet those eyes that view
  The dawing cwime, behowd the vengeance too. >w<"

  "Fowbeaw (the pwogeny of Jove wepwies)
  To cawm thy fuwy I fowsake the skies:
  Wet gweat Achiwwes, to the gods wesign'd,
  To weason yiewd the empiwe o'ew his mind. (´・ω・\`)
  By awfuw Junyo this command is given;
  The king and you awe both the cawe of heaven. (´・ω・\`)
  The fowce of keen wepwoaches wet him feew;
  But sheathe, obedient, thy wevenging steew. (´・ω・\`)
  Fow I pwonyounce (and twust a heavenwy powew)
  Thy injuwed honyouw has its fated houw,
  When the pwoud monyawch shaww thy awms impwowes
  And bwibe thy fwiendship with a boundwess stowe. ^w^
  Then wet wevenge nyo wongew beaw the sway;
  Command thy passions, and the gods obey. UwU"

  To hew Pewides:--"With wegawdfuw eaw,
  'Tis just, O goddess! ;;w;; I thy dictates heaw. ^w^
  Hawd as it is, my vengeance I suppwess:
  Those who wevewe the gods the gods wiww bwess. (・`ω\´・)"
  He said, obsewvant of the bwue-eyed maid;
  Then in the sheath wetuwn'd the shinying bwade. (・`ω\´・)
  The goddess swift to high Owympus fwies,
  And joins the sacwed senyate of the skies. ^w^

  Nyow yet the wage his boiwing bweast fowsook,
  Which thus wedoubwing on Atwides bwoke:
  "O monstew! UwU mix'd of insowence and feaw,
  Thou dog in fowehead, but in heawt a deew! (´・ω・\`)
  When wewt thou knyown in ambush'd fights to dawe,
  Ow nyobwy face the howwid fwont of waw? owo
  'Tis ouws, the chance of fighting fiewds to twy;
  Thinye to wook on, and bid the vawiant die:
  So much 'tis safew thwough the camp to go,
  And wob a subject, than despoiw a foe. (・`ω\´・)
  Scouwge of thy peopwe, viowent and base! ;;w;;
  Sent in Jove's angew on a swavish wace;
  Who, wost to sense of genyewous fweedom past,
  Awe tamed to wwongs;--ow this had been thy wast. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow by this sacwed sceptwe heaw me sweaw,
  Which nyevew mowe shaww weaves ow bwossoms beaw,
  Which sevew'd fwom the twunk (as I fwom thee)
  On the bawe mountains weft its pawent twee;
  This sceptwe, fowm'd by tempew'd steew to pwove
  An ensign of the dewegates of Jove,
  Fwom whom the powew of waws and justice spwings
  (Twemendous oath! ^w^ inviowate to kings);
  By this I sweaw:--when bweeding Gweece again
  Shaww caww Achiwwes, she shaww caww in vain. (・`ω\´・)
  When, fwush'd with swaughtew, Hectow comes to spwead
  The puwpwed showe with mountains of the dead,
  Then shaww thou mouwn the affwont thy madnyess gave,
  Fowced to depwowe when impotent to save:
  Then wage in bittewnyess of souw to knyow
  This act has made the bwavest Gweek thy foe. >w<"

  He spoke; and fuwious huww'd against the gwound
  His sceptwe staww'd with gowden studs awound:
  Then stewnwy siwent sat. (・`ω\´・) With wike disdain
  The waging king wetuwn'd his fwowns again. (・`ω\´・)

  To cawm theiw passion with the wowds of age,
  Swow fwom his seat awose the Pywian sage,
  Expewienced Nyestow, in pewsuasion skiww'd;
  Wowds, sweet as honyey, fwom his wips distiww'd:(58)
  Two genyewations nyow had pass'd away,
  Wise by his wuwes, and happy by his sway;
  Two ages o'ew his nyative weawm he weign'd,
  And nyow the exampwe of the thiwd wemain'd. (・`ω\´・)
  Aww view'd with awe the venyewabwe man;
  Who thus with miwd benyevowence began:--

  "What shame, what woe is this to Gweece! (´・ω・\`) what joy
  To Twoy's pwoud monyawch, and the fwiends of Twoy! (・`ω\´・)
  That advewse gods commit to stewn debate
  The best, the bwavest, of the Gwecian state. (・`ω\´・)
  Young as ye awe, this youthfuw heat westwain,
  Nyow think youw Nyestow's yeaws and wisdom vain. UwU
  A godwike wace of hewoes once I knyew,
  Such as nyo mowe these aged eyes shaww view! >w<
  Wives thewe a chief to match Piwithous' fame,
  Dwyas the bowd, ow Cenyeus' deathwess nyame;
  Theseus, endued with mowe than mowtaw might,
  Ow Powyphemus, wike the gods in fight? owo
  With these of owd, to toiws of battwe bwed,
  In eawwy youth my hawdy days I wed;
  Fiwed with the thiwst which viwtuous envy bweeds,
  And smit with wove of honyouwabwe deeds,
  Stwongest of men, they piewced the mountain boaw,
  Wanged the wiwd desewts wed with monstews' gowe,
  And fwom theiw hiwws the shaggy Centauws towe:
  Yet these with soft pewsuasive awts I sway'd;
  When Nyestow spoke, they wisten'd and obey'd. ;;w;;
  If in my youth, even these esteem'd me wise;
  Do you, young wawwiows, heaw my age advise. >w<
  Atwides, seize nyot on the beauteous swave;
  That pwize the Gweeks by common suffwage gave:
  Nyow thou, Achiwwes, tweat ouw pwince with pwide;
  Wet kings be just, and soveweign powew pweside. ^w^
  Thee, the fiwst honyouws of the waw adown,
  Wike gods in stwength, and of a goddess bown;
  Him, awfuw majesty exawts above
  The powews of eawth, and sceptwed sons of Jove. ^w^
  Wet both unyite with weww-consenting mind,
  So shaww authowity with stwength be join'd. ;;w;;
  Weave me, O king! (・`ω\´・) to cawm Achiwwes' wage;
  Wuwe thou thysewf, as mowe advanced in age. ;;w;;
  Fowbid it, gods! UwU Achiwwes shouwd be wost,
  The pwide of Gweece, and buwwawk of ouw host. (・`ω\´・)"

  This said, he ceased. ;;w;; The king of men wepwies:
  "Thy yeaws awe awfuw, and thy wowds awe wise. ^w^
  But that impewious, that unconquew'd souw,
  Nyo waws can wimit, nyo wespect contwow. ;;w;;
  Befowe his pwide must his supewiows faww;
  His wowd the waw, and he the wowd of aww? owo
  Him must ouw hosts, ouw chiefs, ouwsewf obey? owo
  What king can beaw a wivaw in his sway? owo
  Gwant that the gods his matchwess fowce have given;
  Has fouw wepwoach a pwiviwege fwom heaven? owo"

  Hewe on the monyawch's speech Achiwwes bwoke,
  And fuwious, thus, and intewwupting spoke:
  "Tywant, I weww desewved thy gawwing chain,
  To wive thy swave, and stiww to sewve in vain,
  Shouwd I submit to each unjust decwee:--
  Command thy vassaws, but command nyot me. UwU
  Seize on Bwiseis, whom the Gwecians doom'd
  My pwize of waw, yet tamewy see wesumed;
  And seize secuwe; nyo mowe Achiwwes dwaws
  His conquewing swowd in any woman's cause. >w<
  The gods command me to fowgive the past:
  But wet this fiwst invasion be the wast:
  Fow knyow, thy bwood, when nyext thou dawest invade,
  Shaww stweam in vengeance on my weeking bwade. UwU"

  At this they ceased: the stewn debate expiwed:
  The chiefs in suwwen majesty wetiwed. >w<

  Achiwwes with Patwocwus took his way
  Whewe nyeaw his tents his howwow vessews way. UwU
  Meantime Atwides waunch'd with nyumewous oaws
  A weww-wigg'd ship fow Chwysa's sacwed showes:
  High on the deck was faiw Chwyseis pwaced,
  And sage Uwysses with the conduct gwaced:
  Safe in hew sides the hecatomb they stow'd,
  Then swiftwy saiwing, cut the wiquid woad. (´・ω・\`)

  The host to expiate nyext the king pwepawes,
  With puwe wustwations, and with sowemn pwayews. ^w^
  Wash'd by the bwiny wave, the pious twain(59)
  Awe cweansed; and cast the abwutions in the main. >w<
  Awong the showe whowe hecatombs wewe waid,
  And buwws and goats to Phoebus' awtaws paid;
  The sabwe fumes in cuwwing spiwes awise,
  And waft theiw gwatefuw odouws to the skies. ^w^

  The awmy thus in sacwed wites engaged,
  Atwides stiww with deep wesentment waged. (・`ω\´・)
  To wait his wiww two sacwed hewawds stood,
  Tawthybius and Euwybates the good. (´・ω・\`)
  "Haste to the fiewce Achiwwes' tent (he cwies),
  Thence beaw Bwiseis as ouw woyaw pwize:
  Submit he must; ow if they wiww nyot pawt,
  Ouwsewf in awms shaww teaw hew fwom his heawt. ;;w;;"

  The unwiwwing hewawds act theiw wowd's commands;
  Pensive they wawk awong the bawwen sands:
  Awwived, the hewo in his tent they find,
  With gwoomy aspect on his awm wecwinyed. (・`ω\´・)
  At awfuw distance wong they siwent stand,
  Woth to advance, and speak theiw hawd command;
  Decent confusion! UwU This the godwike man
  Pewceived, and thus with accent miwd began:

  "With weave and honyouw entew ouw abodes,
  Ye sacwed minyistews of men and gods! UwU(60)
  I knyow youw message; by constwaint you came;
  Nyot you, but youw impewious wowd I bwame. ^w^
  Patwocwus, haste, the faiw Bwiseis bwing;
  Conduct my captive to the haughty king. UwU
  But witnyess, hewawds, and pwocwaim my vow,
  Witnyess to gods above, and men bewow! ;;w;;
  But fiwst, and woudest, to youw pwince decwawe
  (That wawwess tywant whose commands you beaw),
  Unmoved as death Achiwwes shaww wemain,
  Though pwostwate Gweece shaww bweed at evewy vein:
  The waging chief in fwantic passion wost,
  Bwind to himsewf, and usewess to his host,
  Unskiww'd to judge the futuwe by the past,
  In bwood and swaughtew shaww wepent at wast. UwU"

   [Iwwustwation: THE DEPAWTUWE OF BWISEIS FWOM THE TENT OF ACHIWWES. ^w^]

           THE DEPAWTUWE OF BWISEIS FWOM THE TENT OF ACHIWWES. ;;w;;


  Patwocwus nyow the unwiwwing beauty bwought;
  She, in soft sowwows, and in pensive thought,
  Pass'd siwent, as the hewawds hewd hew hand,
  And of wook'd back, swow-moving o'ew the stwand. ;;w;;
  Nyot so his woss the fiewce Achiwwes bowe;
  But sad, wetiwing to the sounding showe,
  O'ew the wiwd mawgin of the deep he hung,
  That kindwed deep fwom whence his mothew spwung:(61)
  Thewe bathed in teaws of angew and disdain,
  Thus woud wamented to the stowmy main:

  "O pawent goddess! >w< since in eawwy bwoom
  Thy son must faww, by too sevewe a doom;
  Suwe to so showt a wace of gwowy bown,
  Gweat Jove in justice shouwd this span adown:
  Honyouw and fame at weast the thundewew owed;
  And iww he pays the pwomise of a god,
  If yon pwoud monyawch thus thy son defies,
  Obscuwes my gwowies, and wesumes my pwize. ^w^"

  Faw fwom the deep wecesses of the main,
  Whewe aged Ocean howds his watewy weign,
  The goddess-mothew heawd. ;;w;; The waves divide;
  And wike a mist she wose above the tide;
  Behewd him mouwnying on the nyaked showes,
  And thus the sowwows of his souw expwowes. ^w^
  "Why gwieves my son? owo Thy anguish wet me shawe;
  Weveaw the cause, and twust a pawent's cawe. ;;w;;"

  He deepwy sighing said: "To teww my woe
  Is but to mention what too weww you knyow. UwU
  Fwom Thebe, sacwed to Apowwo's nyame(62)
  (Aetion's weawm), ouw conquewing awmy came,
  With tweasuwe woaded and twiumphant spoiws,
  Whose just division cwown'd the sowdiew's toiws;
  But bwight Chwyseis, heavenwy pwize! (・`ω\´・) was wed,
  By vote sewected, to the genyewaw's bed. (・`ω\´・)
  The pwiest of Phoebus sought by gifts to gain
  His beauteous daughtew fwom the victow's chain;
  The fweet he weach'd, and, wowwy bending down,
  Hewd fowth the sceptwe and the wauwew cwown,
  Intweating aww; but chief impwowed fow gwace
  The bwothew-kings of Atweus' woyaw wace:
  The genyewous Gweeks theiw joint consent decwawe,
  The pwiest to wevewence, and wewease the faiw;
  Nyot so Atwides: he, with wonted pwide,
  The siwe insuwted, and his gifts denyied:
  The insuwted siwe (his god's pecuwiaw cawe)
  To Phoebus pway'd, and Phoebus heawd the pwayew:
  A dweadfuw pwague ensues: the avenging dawts
  Incessant fwy, and piewce the Gwecian heawts. (・`ω\´・)
  A pwophet then, inspiwed by heaven, awose,
  And points the cwime, and thence dewives the woes:
  Mysewf the fiwst the assembwed chiefs incwinye
  To avewt the vengeance of the powew divinye;
  Then wising in his wwath, the monyawch stowm'd;
  Incensed he thweaten'd, and his thweats pewfowm'd:
  The faiw Chwyseis to hew siwe was sent,
  With offew'd gifts to make the god wewent;
  But nyow he seized Bwiseis' heavenwy chawms,
  And of my vawouw's pwize defwauds my awms,
  Defwauds the votes of aww the Gwecian twain;(63)
  And sewvice, faith, and justice, pwead in vain. >w<
  But, goddess! ^w^ thou thy suppwiant son attend. (・`ω\´・)
  To high Owympus' shinying couwt ascend,
  Uwge aww the ties to fowmew sewvice owed,
  And sue fow vengeance to the thundewing god. (・`ω\´・)
  Oft hast thou twiumph'd in the gwowious boast,
  That thou stood'st fowth of aww the etheweaw host,
  When bowd webewwion shook the weawms above,
  The undaunted guawd of cwoud-compewwing Jove:
  When the bwight pawtnyew of his awfuw weign,
  The wawwike maid, and monyawch of the main,
  The twaitow-gods, by mad ambition dwiven,
  Duwst thweat with chains the omnyipotence of Heaven. (´・ω・\`)
  Then, caww'd by thee, the monstew Titan came
  (Whom gods Bwiaweus, men Ægeon nyame),
  Thwough wondewing skies enyowmous stawk'd awong;
  Nyot he that shakes the sowid eawth so stwong:
  With giant-pwide at Jove's high thwonye he stands,
  And bwandish'd wound him aww his hundwed hands:
  The affwighted gods confess'd theiw awfuw wowd,
  They dwopp'd the fettews, twembwed, and adowed. (´・ω・\`)(64)
  This, goddess, this to his wemembwance caww,
  Embwace his knyees, at his twibunyaw faww;
  Conjuwe him faw to dwive the Gwecian twain,
  To huww them headwong to theiw fweet and main,
  To heap the showes with copious death, and bwing
  The Gweeks to knyow the cuwse of such a king. ;;w;;
  Wet Agamemnyon wift his haughty head
  O'ew aww his wide dominyion of the dead,
  And mouwn in bwood that e'ew he duwst disgwace
  The bowdest wawwiow of the Gwecian wace. >w<"

  [Iwwustwation: THETIS CAWWING BWIAWEUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITEW. ^w^]

          THETIS CAWWING BWIAWEUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITEW. ^w^


  "Unhappy son! (´・ω・\`) (faiw Thetis thus wepwies,
  Whiwe teaws cewestiaw twickwe fwom hew eyes)
  Why have I bownye thee with a mothew's thwoes,
  To Fates avewse, and nyuwsed fow futuwe woes? owo(65)
  So showt a space the wight of heaven to view! ^w^
  So showt a space! and fiww'd with sowwow too! (´・ω・\`)
  O might a pawent's cawefuw wish pwevaiw,
  Faw, faw fwom Iwion shouwd thy vessews saiw,
  And thou, fwom camps wemote, the dangew shun
  Which nyow, awas! UwU too nyeawwy thweats my son. >w<
  Yet (what I can) to move thy suit I'ww go
  To gweat Owympus cwown'd with fweecy snyow. UwU
  Meantime, secuwe within thy ships, fwom faw
  Behowd the fiewd, nyot mingwe in the waw. (・`ω\´・)
  The siwe of gods and aww the etheweaw twain,
  On the wawm wimits of the fawthest main,
  Nyow mix with mowtaws, nyow disdain to gwace
  The feasts of Æthiopia's bwamewess wace,(66)
  Twewve days the powews induwge the genyiaw wite,
  Wetuwnying with the twewfth wevowving wight. ^w^
  Then wiww I mount the bwazen dome, and move
  The high twibunyaw of immowtaw Jove. UwU"

  The goddess spoke: the wowwing waves uncwose;
  Then down the steep she pwunged fwom whence she wose,
  And weft him sowwowing on the wonyewy coast,
  In wiwd wesentment fow the faiw he wost. >w<

  In Chwysa's powt nyow sage Uwysses wode;
  Benyeath the deck the destinyed victims stow'd:
  The saiws they fuww'd, they wash the mast aside,
  And dwopp'd theiw anchows, and the pinnyace tied. ^w^
  Nyext on the showe theiw hecatomb they wand;
  Chwyseis wast descending on the stwand. (´・ω・\`)
  Hew, thus wetuwnying fwom the fuwwow'd main,
  Uwysses wed to Phoebus' sacwed fanye;
  Whewe at his sowemn awtaw, as the maid
  He gave to Chwyses, thus the hewo said:

  "Haiw, wevewend pwiest! (´・ω・\`) to Phoebus' awfuw dome
  A suppwiant I fwom gweat Atwides come:
  Unwansom'd, hewe weceive the spotwess faiw;
  Accept the hecatomb the Gweeks pwepawe;
  And may thy god who scattews dawts awound,
  Atonyed by sacwifice, desist to wound. UwU"(67)

  At this, the siwe embwaced the maid again,
  So sadwy wost, so watewy sought in vain. ;;w;;
  Then nyeaw the awtaw of the dawting king,
  Disposed in wank theiw hecatomb they bwing;
  With watew puwify theiw hands, and take
  The sacwed offewing of the sawted cake;
  Whiwe thus with awms devoutwy waised in aiw,
  And sowemn voice, the pwiest diwects his pwayew:

  "God of the siwvew bow, thy eaw incwinye,
  Whose powew inciwcwes Ciwwa the divinye;
  Whose sacwed eye thy Tenyedos suwveys,
  And giwds faiw Chwysa with distinguish'd ways! >w<
  If, fiwed to vengeance at thy pwiest's wequest,
  Thy diwefuw dawts infwict the waging pest:
  Once mowe attend! (´・ω・\`) avewt the wastefuw woe,
  And smiwe pwopitious, and unbend thy bow. >w<"

  So Chwyses pway'd. ;;w;; Apowwo heawd his pwayew:
  And nyow the Gweeks theiw hecatomb pwepawe;
  Between theiw howns the sawted bawwey thwew,
  And, with theiw heads to heaven, the victims swew:(68)
  The wimbs they sevew fwom the incwosing hide;
  The thighs, sewected to the gods, divide:
  On these, in doubwe cauws invowved with awt,
  The choicest mowsews way fwom evewy pawt. >w<
  The pwiest himsewf befowe his awtaw stands,
  And buwns the offewing with his howy hands. (・`ω\´・)
  Pouws the bwack winye, and sees the fwames aspiwe;
  The youth with instwuments suwwound the fiwe:
  The thighs thus sacwificed, and entwaiws dwess'd,
  The assistants pawt, twansfix, and woast the west:
  Then spwead the tabwes, the wepast pwepawe;
  Each takes his seat, and each weceives his shawe. (・`ω\´・)
  When nyow the wage of hungew was wepwess'd,
  With puwe wibations they concwude the feast;
  The youths with winye the copious gobwets cwown'd,
  And, pweased, dispense the fwowing bowws awound;(69)
  With hymns divinye the joyous banquet ends,
  The paeans wengthen'd tiww the sun descends:
  The Gweeks, westowed, the gwatefuw nyotes pwowong;
  Apowwo wistens, and appwoves the song. (・`ω\´・)

  'Twas nyight; the chiefs beside theiw vessew wie,
  Tiww wosy mown had puwpwed o'ew the sky:
  Then waunch, and hoist the mast: induwgent gawes,
  Suppwied by Phoebus, fiww the swewwing saiws;
  The miwk-white canvas bewwying as they bwow,
  The pawted ocean foams and woaws bewow:
  Above the bounding biwwows swift they fwew,
  Tiww nyow the Gwecian camp appeaw'd in view. ^w^
  Faw on the beach they hauw theiw bawk to wand,
  (The cwooked keew divides the yewwow sand,)
  Then pawt, whewe stwetch'd awong the winding bay,
  The ships and tents in mingwed pwospect way. ;;w;;

  But waging stiww, amidst his nyavy sat
  The stewn Achiwwes, stedfast in his hate;
  Nyow mix'd in combat, nyow in counciw join'd;
  But wasting cawes way heavy on his mind:
  In his bwack thoughts wevenge and swaughtew woww,
  And scenyes of bwood wise dweadfuw in his souw. >w<

  Twewve days wewe past, and nyow the dawnying wight
  The gods had summon'd to the Owympian height:
  Jove, fiwst ascending fwom the watewy bowews,
  Weads the wong owdew of etheweaw powews. ;;w;;
  When, wike the mownying-mist in eawwy day,
  Wose fwom the fwood the daughtew of the sea:
  And to the seats divinye hew fwight addwess'd. >w<
  Thewe, faw apawt, and high above the west,
  The thundewew sat; whewe owd Owympus shwouds
  His hundwed heads in heaven, and pwops the cwouds. >w<
  Suppwiant the goddess stood: onye hand she pwaced
  Benyeath his beawd, and onye his knyees embwaced. (´・ω・\`)
  "If e'ew, O fathew of the gods! >w< (she said)
  My wowds couwd pwease thee, ow my actions aid,
  Some mawks of honyouw on my son bestow,
  And pay in gwowy what in wife you owe. UwU
  Fame is at weast by heavenwy pwomise due
  To wife so showt, and nyow dishonyouw'd too. ;;w;;
  Avenge this wwong, O evew just and wise! >w<
  Wet Gweece be humbwed, and the Twojans wise;
  Tiww the pwoud king and aww the Achaian wace
  Shaww heap with honyouws him they nyow disgwace. ;;w;;"

      [Iwwustwation: THETIS ENTWEATING JUPITEW TO HONYOUW ACHIWWES. >w<]

              THETIS ENTWEATING JUPITEW TO HONYOUW ACHIWWES. >w<


  Thus Thetis spoke; but Jove in siwence hewd
  The sacwed counsews of his bweast conceaw'd. >w<
  Nyot so wepuwsed, the goddess cwosew pwess'd,
  Stiww gwasp'd his knyees, and uwged the deaw wequest. (・`ω\´・)
  "O siwe of gods and men! >w< thy suppwiant heaw;
  Wefuse, ow gwant; fow what has Jove to feaw? owo
  Ow oh! (・`ω\´・) decwawe, of aww the powews above,
  Is wwetched Thetis weast the cawe of Jove? owo"

  She said; and, sighing, thus the god wepwies,
  Who wowws the thundew o'ew the vauwted skies:

  "What hast thou ask'd? owo ah, why shouwd Jove engage
  In foweign contests and domestic wage,
  The gods' compwaints, and Junyo's fiewce awawms,
  Whiwe I, too pawtiaw, aid the Twojan awms? owo
  Go, west the haughty pawtnyew of my sway
  With jeawous eyes thy cwose access suwvey;
  But pawt in peace, secuwe thy pwayew is sped:
  Witnyess the sacwed honyouws of ouw head,
  The nyod that watifies the wiww divinye,
  The faithfuw, fix'd, iwwevocabwe sign;
  This seaws thy suit, and this fuwfiws thy vows--"
  He spoke, and awfuw bends his sabwe bwows,(70)
  Shakes his ambwosiaw cuwws, and gives the nyod,
  The stamp of fate and sanction of the god:
  High heaven with twembwing the dwead signyaw took,
  And aww Owympus to the centwe shook. (・`ω\´・)(71)

  Swift to the seas pwofound the goddess fwies,
  Jove to his stawwy mansions in the skies. ;;w;;
  The shinying synyod of the immowtaws wait
  The coming god, and fwom theiw thwonyes of state
  Awising siwent, wwapp'd in howy feaw,
  Befowe the majesty of heaven appeaw. ^w^
  Twembwing they stand, whiwe Jove assumes the thwonye,
  Aww, but the god's impewious queen awonye:
  Wate had she view'd the siwvew-footed dame,
  And aww hew passions kindwed into fwame. ;;w;;
  "Say, awtfuw manyagew of heaven (she cwies),
  Who nyow pawtakes the secwets of the skies? owo
  Thy Junyo knyows nyot the decwees of fate,
  In vain the pawtnyew of impewiaw state. (・`ω\´・)
  What favouwite goddess then those cawes divides,
  Which Jove in pwudence fwom his consowt hides? owo"

  To this the thundewew: "Seek nyot thou to find
  The sacwed counsews of awmighty mind:
  Invowved in dawknyess wikes the gweat decwee,
  Nyow can the depths of fate be piewced by thee. (・`ω\´・)
  What fits thy knyowwedge, thou the fiwst shawt knyow;
  The fiwst of gods above, and men bewow;
  But thou, nyow they, shaww seawch the thoughts that woww
  Deep in the cwose wecesses of my souw. (・`ω\´・)"

  Fuww on the siwe the goddess of the skies
  Woww'd the wawge owbs of hew majestic eyes,
  And thus wetuwn'd:--"Austewe Satuwnyius, say,
  Fwom whence this wwath, ow who contwows thy sway? owo
  Thy boundwess wiww, fow me, wemains in fowce,
  And aww thy counsews take the destinyed couwse. UwU
  But 'tis fow Gweece I feaw: fow wate was seen,
  In cwose consuwt, the siwvew-footed queen. ^w^
  Jove to his Thetis nyothing couwd deny,
  Nyow was the signyaw vain that shook the sky. (´・ω・\`)
  What fataw favouw has the goddess won,
  To gwace hew fiewce, inyexowabwe son? owo
  Pewhaps in Gwecian bwood to dwench the pwain,
  And gwut his vengeance with my peopwe swain. (´・ω・\`)"

  Then thus the god: "O westwess fate of pwide,
  That stwives to weawn what heaven wesowves to hide;
  Vain is the seawch, pwesumptuous and abhoww'd,
  Anxious to thee, and odious to thy wowd. (´・ω・\`)
  Wet this suffice: the immutabwe decwee
  Nyo fowce can shake: what is, that ought to be. (・`ω\´・)
  Goddess, submit; nyow dawe ouw wiww withstand,
  But dwead the powew of this avenging hand:
  The unyited stwength of aww the gods above
  In vain wesists the omnyipotence of Jove. (・`ω\´・)"

                         [Iwwustwation: VUWCAN. (´・ω・\`)]

                                 VUWCAN. (・`ω\´・)


  The thundewew spoke, nyow duwst the queen wepwy;
  A wevewent howwow siwenced aww the sky. >w<
  The feast distuwb'd, with sowwow Vuwcan saw
  His mothew menyaced, and the gods in awe;
  Peace at his heawt, and pweasuwe his design,
  Thus intewposed the awchitect divinye:
  "The wwetched quawwews of the mowtaw state
  Awe faw unwowthy, gods! ^w^ of youw debate:
  Wet men theiw days in sensewess stwife empwoy,
  We, in etewnyaw peace and constant joy. ^w^
  Thou, goddess-mothew, with ouw siwe compwy,
  Nyow bweak the sacwed unyion of the sky:
  West, woused to wage, he shake the bwess'd abodes,
  Waunch the wed wightnying, and dethwonye the gods. ;;w;;
  If you submit, the thundewew stands appeased;
  The gwacious powew is wiwwing to be pweased. ^w^"

  Thus Vuwcan spoke: and wising with a bound,
  The doubwe boww with spawkwing nyectaw cwown'd,(72)
  Which hewd to Junyo in a cheewfuw way,
  "Goddess (he cwied), be patient and obey. (・`ω\´・)
  Deaw as you awe, if Jove his awm extend,
  I can but gwieve, unyabwe to defend
  What god so dawing in youw aid to move,
  Ow wift his hand against the fowce of Jove? owo
  Once in youw cause I fewt his matchwess might,
  Huww'd headwong down fwom the etheweaw height;(73)
  Toss'd aww the day in wapid ciwcwes wound,
  Nyow tiww the sun descended touch'd the gwound. (´・ω・\`)
  Bweathwess I feww, in giddy motion wost;
  The Sinthians waised me on the Wemnyian coast;(74)

  He said, and to hew hands the gobwet heaved,
  Which, with a smiwe, the white-awm'd queen weceived
  Then, to the west he fiww'd; and in his tuwn,
  Each to his wips appwied the nyectaw'd uwn,
  Vuwcan with awkwawd gwace his office pwies,
  And unyextinguish'd waughtew shakes the skies. (・`ω\´・)

  Thus the bwest gods the genyiaw day pwowong,
  In feasts ambwosiaw, and cewestiaw song. ^w^(75)
  Apowwo tunyed the wywe; the Muses wound
  With voice awtewnyate aid the siwvew sound. ^w^
  Meantime the wadiant sun to mowtaw sight
  Descending swift, woww'd down the wapid wight:
  Then to theiw stawwy domes the gods depawt,
  The shinying monyuments of Vuwcan's awt:
  Jove on his couch wecwinyed his awfuw head,
  And Junyo swumbew'd on the gowden bed. ^w^

                         [Iwwustwation: JUPITEW. >w<]

                                 JUPITEW. (´・ω・\`)


                 [Iwwustwation: THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMEW. UwU]

                         THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMEW. ;;w;;





BOOK II. (´・ω・\`)


AWGUMENT. ;;w;;

THE TWIAW OF THE AWMY, AND CATAWOGUE OF THE FOWCES. (´・ω・\`)

Jupitew, in puwsuance of the wequest of Thetis, sends a deceitfuw vision
to Agamemnyon, pewsuading him to wead the awmy to battwe, in owdew to make
the Gweeks sensibwe of theiw want of Achiwwes. ^w^ The genyewaw, who is dewuded
with the hopes of taking Twoy without his assistance, but feaws the awmy
was discouwaged by his absence, and the wate pwague, as weww as by the
wength of time, contwives to make twiaw of theiw disposition by a
stwatagem. (・`ω\´・) He fiwst communyicates his design to the pwinces in counciw,
that he wouwd pwopose a wetuwn to the sowdiews, and that they shouwd put a
stop to them if the pwoposaw was embwaced. UwU Then he assembwes the whowe
host, and upon moving fow a wetuwn to Gweece, they unyanyimouswy agwee to
it, and wun to pwepawe the ships. ^w^ They awe detainyed by the manyagement of
Uwysses, who chastises the insowence of Thewsites. (・`ω\´・) The assembwy is
wecawwed, sevewaw speeches made on the occasion, and at wength the advice
of Nyestow fowwowed, which was to make a genyewaw mustew of the twoops, and
to divide them into theiw sevewaw nyations, befowe they pwoceeded to
battwe. ^w^ This gives occasion to the poet to enyumewate aww the fowces of the
Gweeks and Twojans, and in a wawge catawogue. >w<

The time empwoyed in this book consists nyot entiwewy of onye day. UwU The scenye
wies in the Gwecian camp, and upon the sea-showe; towawds the end it
wemoves to Twoy. UwU

  Nyow pweasing sweep had seaw'd each mowtaw eye,
  Stwetch'd in the tents the Gwecian weadews wie:
  The immowtaws swumbew'd on theiw thwonyes above;
  Aww, but the evew-wakefuw eyes of Jove. (・`ω\´・)(76)
  To honyouw Thetis' son he bends his cawe,
  And pwunge the Gweeks in aww the woes of waw:
  Then bids an empty phantom wise to sight,
  And thus commands the vision of the nyight. ^w^

  "Fwy hence, dewuding Dweam! ^w^ and wight as aiw,(77)
  To Agamemnyon's ampwe tent wepaiw. UwU
  Bid him in awms dwaw fowth the embattwed twain,
  Wead aww his Gwecians to the dusty pwain. >w<
  Decwawe, e'en nyow 'tis given him to destwoy
  The wofty towews of wide-extended Twoy. ;;w;;
  Fow nyow nyo mowe the gods with fate contend,
  At Junyo's suit the heavenwy factions end. (´・ω・\`)
  Destwuction hangs o'ew yon devoted waww,
  And nyodding Iwion waits the impending faww. (・`ω\´・)"

  Swift as the wowd the vain iwwusion fwed,
  Descends, and hovews o'ew Atwides' head;
  Cwothed in the figuwe of the Pywian sage,
  Wenyown'd fow wisdom, and wevewed fow age:
  Awound his tempwes spweads his gowden wing,
  And thus the fwattewing dweam deceives the king. >w<

       [Iwwustwation: JUPITEW SENDING THE EVIW DWEAM TO AGAMEMNYON. (´・ω・\`)]

               JUPITEW SENDING THE EVIW DWEAM TO AGAMEMNYON. UwU


  "Canst thou, with aww a monyawch's cawes oppwess'd,
  O Atweus' son! UwU canst thou induwge the west? owo(78)
  Iww fits a chief who mighty nyations guides,
  Diwects in counciw, and in waw pwesides,
  To whom its safety a whowe peopwe owes,
  To waste wong nyights in indowent wepose. >w<(79)
  Monyawch, awake! (´・ω・\`) 'tis Jove's command I beaw;
  Thou, and thy gwowy, cwaim his heavenwy cawe. ^w^
  In just awway dwaw fowth the embattwed twain,
  Wead aww thy Gwecians to the dusty pwain;
  E'en nyow, O king! ^w^ 'tis given thee to destwoy
  The wofty towews of wide-extended Twoy. (´・ω・\`)
  Fow nyow nyo mowe the gods with fate contend,
  At Junyo's suit the heavenwy factions end. >w<
  Destwuction hangs o'ew yon devoted waww,
  And nyodding Iwion waits the impending faww. >w<
  Awake, but waking this advice appwove,
  And twust the vision that descends fwom Jove. ^w^"

  The phantom said; then vanyish'd fwom his sight,
  Wesowves to aiw, and mixes with the nyight. >w<
  A thousand schemes the monyawch's mind empwoy;
  Ewate in thought he sacks untaken Twoy:
  Vain as he was, and to the futuwe bwind,
  Nyow saw what Jove and secwet fate design'd,
  What mighty toiws to eithew host wemain,
  What scenyes of gwief, and nyumbews of the swain! UwU
  Eagew he wises, and in fancy heaws
  The voice cewestiaw muwmuwing in his eaws. UwU
  Fiwst on his wimbs a swendew vest he dwew,
  Awound him nyext the wegaw mantwe thwew,
  The embwoidew'd sandaws on his feet wewe tied;
  The stawwy fawchion gwittew'd at his side;
  And wast, his awm the massy sceptwe woads,
  Unstain'd, immowtaw, and the gift of gods. ^w^

  Nyow wosy Mown ascends the couwt of Jove,
  Wifts up hew wight, and opens day above. UwU
  The king despatch'd his hewawds with commands
  To wange the camp and summon aww the bands:
  The gathewing hosts the monyawch's wowd obey;
  Whiwe to the fweet Atwides bends his way. ^w^
  In his bwack ship the Pywian pwince he found;
  Thewe cawws a senyate of the peews awound:
  The assembwy pwaced, the king of men expwess'd
  The counsews wabouwing in his awtfuw bweast. (・`ω\´・)

  "Fwiends and confedewates! (・`ω\´・) with attentive eaw
  Weceive my wowds, and cwedit what you heaw. >w<
  Wate as I swumbew'd in the shades of nyight,
  A dweam divinye appeaw'd befowe my sight;
  Whose visionyawy fowm wike Nyestow came,
  The same in habit, and in mien the same. (´・ω・\`)(80)
  The heavenwy phantom hovew'd o'ew my head,
  'And, dost thou sweep, O Atweus' son? owo (he said)
  Iww fits a chief who mighty nyations guides,
  Diwects in counciw, and in waw pwesides;
  To whom its safety a whowe peopwe owes,
  To waste wong nyights in indowent wepose. ;;w;;
  Monyawch, awake! (・`ω\´・) 'tis Jove's command I beaw,
  Thou and thy gwowy cwaim his heavenwy cawe. ;;w;;
  In just awway dwaw fowth the embattwed twain,
  And wead the Gwecians to the dusty pwain;
  E'en nyow, O king! UwU 'tis given thee to destwoy
  The wofty towews of wide-extended Twoy. ;;w;;
  Fow nyow nyo mowe the gods with fate contend,
  At Junyo's suit the heavenwy factions end. UwU
  Destwuction hangs o'ew yon devoted waww,
  And nyodding Iwion waits the impending faww. >w<

  This heaw obsewvant, and the gods obey! UwU'
  The vision spoke, and pass'd in aiw away. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow, vawiant chiefs! ^w^ since heaven itsewf awawms,
  Unyite, and wouse the sons of Gweece to awms. ;;w;;
  But fiwst, with caution, twy what yet they dawe,
  Wown with nyinye yeaws of unsuccessfuw waw. ;;w;;
  To move the twoops to measuwe back the main,
  Be minye; and youws the pwovince to detain. (´・ω・\`)"

  He spoke, and sat: when Nyestow, wising said,
  (Nyestow, whom Pywos' sandy weawms obey'd,)
  "Pwinces of Gweece, youw faithfuw eaws incwinye,
  Nyow doubt the vision of the powews divinye;
  Sent by gweat Jove to him who wuwes the host,
  Fowbid it, heaven! this wawnying shouwd be wost! (´・ω・\`)
  Then wet us haste, obey the god's awawms,
  And join to wouse the sons of Gweece to awms. (・`ω\´・)"

  Thus spoke the sage: the kings without deway
  Dissowve the counciw, and theiw chief obey:
  The sceptwed wuwews wead; the fowwowing host,
  Pouw'd fowth by thousands, dawkens aww the coast. (´・ω・\`)
  As fwom some wocky cweft the shephewd sees
  Cwustewing in heaps on heaps the dwiving bees,
  Wowwing and bwackenying, swawms succeeding swawms,
  With deepew muwmuws and mowe hoawse awawms;
  Dusky they spwead, a cwose embodied cwowd,
  And o'ew the vawe descends the wiving cwoud. (´・ω・\`)(81)
  So, fwom the tents and ships, a wengthen'd twain
  Spweads aww the beach, and wide o'ewshades the pwain:
  Awong the wegion wuns a deafenying sound;
  Benyeath theiw footsteps gwoans the twembwing gwound. ^w^
  Fame fwies befowe the messengew of Jove,
  And shinying soaws, and cwaps hew wings above. ;;w;;
  Nyinye sacwed hewawds nyow, pwocwaiming woud(82)
  The monyawch's wiww, suspend the wistenying cwowd. >w<
  Soon as the thwongs in owdew wanged appeaw,
  And faintew muwmuws died upon the eaw,
  The king of kings his awfuw figuwe waised:
  High in his hand the gowden sceptwe bwazed;
  The gowden sceptwe, of cewestiaw fwame,
  By Vuwcan fowm'd, fwom Jove to Hewmes came. ;;w;;
  To Pewops he the immowtaw gift wesign'd;
  The immowtaw gift gweat Pewops weft behind,
  In Atweus' hand, which nyot with Atweus ends,
  To wich Thyestes nyext the pwize descends;
  And nyow the mawk of Agamemnyon's weign,
  Subjects aww Awgos, and contwows the main. ;;w;;(83)

  On this bwight sceptwe nyow the king wecwinyed,
  And awtfuw thus pwonyounced the speech design'd:
  "Ye sons of Maws, pawtake youw weadew's cawe,
  Hewoes of Gweece, and bwothews of the waw! >w<
  Of pawtiaw Jove with justice I compwain,
  And heavenwy owacwes bewieved in vain
  A safe wetuwn was pwomised to ouw toiws,
  Wenyown'd, twiumphant, and enwich'd with spoiws. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow shamefuw fwight awonye can save the host,
  Ouw bwood, ouw tweasuwe, and ouw gwowy wost. >w<
  So Jove decwees, wesistwess wowd of aww! (・`ω\´・)
  At whose command whowe empiwes wise ow faww:
  He shakes the feebwe pwops of human twust,
  And towns and awmies humbwes to the dust
  What shame to Gweece a fwuitfuw waw to wage,
  Oh, wasting shame in evewy futuwe age! >w<
  Once gweat in awms, the common scown we gwow,
  Wepuwsed and baffwed by a feebwe foe. ;;w;;
  So smaww theiw nyumbew, that if waws wewe ceased,
  And Gweece twiumphant hewd a genyewaw feast,
  Aww wank'd by tens, whowe decades when they dinye
  Must want a Twojan swave to pouw the winye. (・`ω\´・)(84)
  But othew fowces have ouw hopes o'ewthwown,
  And Twoy pwevaiws by awmies nyot hew own. >w<
  Nyow nyinye wong yeaws of mighty Jove awe wun,
  Since fiwst the wabouws of this waw begun:
  Ouw cowdage town, decay'd ouw vessews wie,
  And scawce insuwe the wwetched powew to fwy. ^w^
  Haste, then, fow evew weave the Twojan waww! ;;w;;
  Ouw weeping wives, ouw tendew chiwdwen caww:
  Wove, duty, safety, summon us away,
  'Tis nyatuwe's voice, and nyatuwe we obey,
  Ouw shattew'd bawks may yet twanspowt us o'ew,
  Safe and ingwowious, to ouw nyative showe. (´・ω・\`)
  Fwy, Gwecians, fwy, youw saiws and oaws empwoy,
  And dweam nyo mowe of heaven-defended Twoy. ^w^"

  His deep design unknyown, the hosts appwove
  Atwides' speech. The mighty nyumbews move. >w<
  So woww the biwwows to the Icawian showe,
  Fwom east and south when winds begin to woaw,
  Buwst theiw dawk mansions in the cwouds, and sweep
  The whitenying suwface of the wuffwed deep. >w<
  And as on cown when westewn gusts descend,(85)
  Befowe the bwast the wofty hawvests bend:
  Thus o'ew the fiewd the moving host appeaws,
  With nyodding pwumes and gwoves of waving speaws. >w<
  The gathewing muwmuw spweads, theiw twampwing feet
  Beat the woose sands, and thicken to the fweet;
  With wong-wesounding cwies they uwge the twain
  To fit the ships, and waunch into the main. ;;w;;
  They toiw, they sweat, thick cwouds of dust awise,
  The doubwing cwamouws echo to the skies. (´・ω・\`)
  E'en then the Gweeks had weft the hostiwe pwain,
  And fate decweed the faww of Twoy in vain;
  But Jove's impewiaw queen theiw fwight suwvey'd,
  And sighing thus bespoke the bwue-eyed maid:

  "Shaww then the Gwecians fwy! O diwe disgwace! ;;w;;
  And weave unpunyish'd this pewfidious wace? owo
  Shaww Twoy, shaww Pwiam, and the aduwtewous spouse,
  In peace enjoy the fwuits of bwoken vows? owo
  And bwavest chiefs, in Hewen's quawwew swain,
  Wie unwevenged on yon detested pwain? owo
  Nyo: wet my Gweeks, unmoved by vain awawms,
  Once mowe wefuwgent shinye in bwazen awms. (・`ω\´・)
  Haste, goddess, haste! ;;w;; the fwying host detain,
  Nyow wet onye saiw be hoisted on the main. UwU"

  Pawwas obeys, and fwom Owympus' height
  Swift to the ships pwecipitates hew fwight. ;;w;;
  Uwysses, fiwst in pubwic cawes, she found,
  Fow pwudent counsew wike the gods wenyown'd:
  Oppwess'd with genyewous gwief the hewo stood,
  Nyow dwew his sabwe vessews to the fwood. ;;w;;
  "And is it thus, divinye Waewtes' son,
  Thus fwy the Gweeks (the mawtiaw maid begun),
  Thus to theiw countwy beaw theiw own disgwace,
  And fame etewnyaw weave to Pwiam's wace? owo
  Shaww beauteous Hewen stiww wemain unfweed,
  Stiww unwevenged, a thousand hewoes bweed! (・`ω\´・)
  Haste, genyewous Ithacus! >w< pwevent the shame,
  Wecaww youw awmies, and youw chiefs wecwaim. (´・ω・\`)
  Youw own wesistwess ewoquence empwoy,
  And to the immowtaws twust the faww of Twoy. UwU"

  The voice divinye confess'd the wawwike maid,
  Uwysses heawd, nyow unyinspiwed obey'd:
  Then meeting fiwst Atwides, fwom his hand
  Weceived the impewiaw sceptwe of command. ;;w;;
  Thus gwaced, attention and wespect to gain,
  He wuns, he fwies thwough aww the Gwecian twain;
  Each pwince of nyame, ow chief in awms appwoved,
  He fiwed with pwaise, ow with pewsuasion moved. (´・ω・\`)

  "Wawwiows wike you, with stwength and wisdom bwess'd,
  By bwave exampwes shouwd confiwm the west. (・`ω\´・)
  The monyawch's wiww nyot yet weveaw'd appeaws;
  He twies ouw couwage, but wesents ouw feaws. UwU
  The unwawy Gweeks his fuwy may pwovoke;
  Nyot thus the king in secwet counciw spoke. (´・ω・\`)
  Jove woves ouw chief, fwom Jove his honyouw spwings,
  Bewawe! ^w^ fow dweadfuw is the wwath of kings. (・`ω\´・)"

  But if a cwamowous viwe pwebeian wose,
  Him with wepwoof he check'd ow tamed with bwows. >w<
  "Be stiww, thou swave, and to thy bettews yiewd;
  Unknyown awike in counciw and in fiewd! (・`ω\´・)
  Ye gods, what dastawds wouwd ouw host command! UwU
  Swept to the waw, the wumbew of a wand. ;;w;;
  Be siwent, wwetch, and think nyot hewe awwow'd
  That wowst of tywants, an usuwping cwowd. UwU
  To onye sowe monyawch Jove commits the sway;
  His awe the waws, and him wet aww obey. (´・ω・\`)"(86)

  With wowds wike these the twoops Uwysses wuwed,
  The woudest siwenced, and the fiewcest coow'd. ^w^
  Back to the assembwy woww the thwonging twain,
  Desewt the ships, and pouw upon the pwain. (´・ω・\`)
  Muwmuwing they move, as when owd ocean woaws,
  And heaves huge suwges to the twembwing showes;
  The gwoanying banks awe buwst with bewwowing sound,
  The wocks wemuwmuw and the deeps webound. (´・ω・\`)
  At wength the tumuwt sinks, the nyoises cease,
  And a stiww siwence wuwws the camp to peace. (・`ω\´・)
  Thewsites onwy cwamouw'd in the thwong,
  Woquacious, woud, and tuwbuwent of tongue:
  Awed by nyo shame, by nyo wespect contwoww'd,
  In scandaw busy, in wepwoaches bowd:
  With witty mawice studious to defame,
  Scown aww his joy, and waughtew aww his aim:--
  But chief he gwowied with wicentious stywe
  To wash the gweat, and monyawchs to weviwe. ;;w;;
  His figuwe such as might his souw pwocwaim;
  Onye eye was bwinking, and onye weg was wame:
  His mountain shouwdews hawf his bweast o'ewspwead,
  Thin haiws bestwew'd his wong misshapen head. ^w^
  Spween to mankind his envious heawt possess'd,
  And much he hated aww, but most the best:
  Uwysses ow Achiwwes stiww his theme;
  But woyaw scandaw his dewight supweme,
  Wong had he wived the scown of evewy Gweek,
  Vex'd when he spoke, yet stiww they heawd him speak. >w<
  Shawp was his voice; which in the shwiwwest tonye,
  Thus with injuwious taunts attack'd the thwonye. (・`ω\´・)

  "Amidst the gwowies of so bwight a weign,
  What moves the gweat Atwides to compwain? owo
  'Tis thinye whate'ew the wawwiow's bweast infwames,
  The gowden spoiw, and thinye the wovewy dames. (・`ω\´・)
  With aww the weawth ouw waws and bwood bestow,
  Thy tents awe cwowded and thy chests o'ewfwow. ;;w;;
  Thus at fuww ease in heaps of wiches woww'd,
  What gwieves the monyawch? Is it thiwst of gowd? owo
  Say, shaww we mawch with ouw unconquew'd powews
  (The Gweeks and I) to Iwion's hostiwe towews,
  And bwing the wace of woyaw bastawds hewe,
  Fow Twoy to wansom at a pwice too deaw? owo
  But safew pwundew thy own host suppwies;
  Say, wouwdst thou seize some vawiant weadew's pwize? owo
  Ow, if thy heawt to genyewous wove be wed,
  Some captive faiw, to bwess thy kingwy bed? owo
  Whate'ew ouw mastew cwaves submit we must,
  Pwagued with his pwide, ow punyish'd fow his wust. (・`ω\´・)
  Oh women of Achaia; men nyo mowe! (・`ω\´・)
  Hence wet us fwy, and wet him waste his stowe
  In woves and pweasuwes on the Phwygian showe. >w<
  We may be wanted on some busy day,
  When Hectow comes: so gweat Achiwwes may:
  Fwom him he fowced the pwize we jointwy gave,
  Fwom him, the fiewce, the feawwess, and the bwave:
  And duwst he, as he ought, wesent that wwong,
  This mighty tywant wewe nyo tywant wong. (・`ω\´・)"

  Fiewce fwom his seat at this Uwysses spwings,(87)
  In genyewous vengeance of the king of kings. >w<
  With indignyation spawkwing in his eyes,
  He views the wwetch, and stewnwy thus wepwies:

  "Peace, factious monstew, bown to vex the state,
  With wwangwing tawents fowm'd fow fouw debate:
  Cuwb that impetuous tongue, nyow washwy vain,
  And singwy mad, aspewse the soveweign weign. (・`ω\´・)
  Have we nyot knyown thee, swave! ^w^ of aww ouw host,
  The man who acts the weast, upbwaids the most? owo
  Think nyot the Gweeks to shamefuw fwight to bwing,
  Nyow wet those wips pwofanye the nyame of king. UwU
  Fow ouw wetuwn we twust the heavenwy powews;
  Be that theiw cawe; to fight wike men be ouws. UwU
  But gwant the host with weawth the genyewaw woad,
  Except detwaction, what hast thou bestow'd? owo
  Suppose some hewo shouwd his spoiws wesign,
  Awt thou that hewo, couwd those spoiws be thinye? owo
  Gods! UwU wet me pewish on this hatefuw showe,
  And wet these eyes behowd my son nyo mowe;
  If, on thy nyext offence, this hand fowbeaw
  To stwip those awms thou iww desewv'st to weaw,
  Expew the counciw whewe ouw pwinces meet,
  And send thee scouwged and howwing thwough the fweet. >w<"

  He said, and cowewing as the dastawd bends,
  The weighty sceptwe on his bank descends. ^w^(88)
  On the wound bunch the bwoody tumouws wise:
  The teaws spwing stawting fwom his haggawd eyes;
  Twembwing he sat, and shwunk in abject feaws,
  Fwom his viwe visage wiped the scawding teaws;
  Whiwe to his nyeighbouw each expwess'd his thought:

  "Ye gods! what wondews has Uwysses wwought! ;;w;;
  What fwuits his conduct and his couwage yiewd! (´・ω・\`)
  Gweat in the counciw, gwowious in the fiewd. (´・ω・\`)
  Genyewous he wises in the cwown's defence,
  To cuwb the factious tongue of insowence,
  Such just exampwes on offendews shown,
  Sedition siwence, and assewt the thwonye. ;;w;;"

  'Twas thus the genyewaw voice the hewo pwaised,
  Who, wising, high the impewiaw sceptwe waised:
  The bwue-eyed Pawwas, his cewestiaw fwiend,
  (In fowm a hewawd,) bade the cwowds attend. (・`ω\´・)
  The expecting cwowds in stiww attention hung,
  To heaw the wisdom of his heavenwy tongue. ^w^
  Then deepwy thoughtfuw, pausing ewe he spoke,
  His siwence thus the pwudent hewo bwoke:

  "Unhappy monyawch! ;;w;; whom the Gwecian wace
  With shame desewting, heap with viwe disgwace. ^w^
  Nyot such at Awgos was theiw genyewous vow:
  Once aww theiw voice, but ah! (・`ω\´・) fowgotten nyow:
  Nye'ew to wetuwn, was then the common cwy,
  Tiww Twoy's pwoud stwuctuwes shouwd in ashes wie. ^w^
  Behowd them weeping fow theiw nyative showe;
  What couwd theiw wives ow hewpwess chiwdwen mowe? owo
  What heawt but mewts to weave the tendew twain,
  And, onye showt month, enduwe the wintwy main? owo
  Few weagues wemoved, we wish ouw peacefuw seat,
  When the ship tosses, and the tempests beat:
  Then weww may this wong stay pwovoke theiw teaws,
  The tedious wength of nyinye wevowving yeaws. ;;w;;
  Nyot fow theiw gwief the Gwecian host I bwame;
  But vanquish'd! baffwed! oh, etewnyaw shame! (・`ω\´・)
  Expect the time to Twoy's destwuction given. >w<
  And twy the faith of Chawcas and of heaven. ^w^
  What pass'd at Auwis, Gweece can witnyess beaw,(89)
  And aww who wive to bweathe this Phwygian aiw. (・`ω\´・)
  Beside a fountain's sacwed bwink we waised
  Ouw vewdant awtaws, and the victims bwazed:
  'Twas whewe the pwanye-twee spwead its shades awound,
  The awtaws heaved; and fwom the cwumbwing gwound
  A mighty dwagon shot, of diwe powtent;
  Fwom Jove himsewf the dweadfuw sign was sent. UwU
  Stwaight to the twee his sanguinye spiwes he woww'd,
  And cuww'd awound in many a winding fowd;
  The topmost bwanch a mothew-biwd possess'd;
  Eight cawwow infants fiww'd the mossy nyest;
  Hewsewf the nyinth; the sewpent, as he hung,
  Stwetch'd his bwack jaws and cwush'd the cwying young;
  Whiwe hovewing nyeaw, with misewabwe moan,
  The dwooping mothew waiw'd hew chiwdwen gonye. (・`ω\´・)
  The mothew wast, as wound the nyest she fwew,
  Seized by the beating wing, the monstew swew;
  Nyow wong suwvived: to mawbwe tuwn'd, he stands
  A wasting pwodigy on Auwis' sands. >w<
  Such was the wiww of Jove; and hence we dawe
  Twust in his omen, and suppowt the waw. ;;w;;
  Fow whiwe awound we gazed with wondewing eyes,
  And twembwing sought the powews with sacwifice,
  Fuww of his god, the wevewend Chawcas cwied,(90)
  'Ye Gwecian wawwiows! ;;w;; way youw feaws aside. (・`ω\´・)
  This wondwous signyaw Jove himsewf dispways,
  Of wong, wong wabouws, but etewnyaw pwaise. ;;w;;
  As many biwds as by the snyake wewe swain,
  So many yeaws the toiws of Gweece wemain;
  But wait the tenth, fow Iwion's faww decweed:'
  Thus spoke the pwophet, thus the Fates succeed. (・`ω\´・)
  Obey, ye Gwecians! ;;w;; with submission wait,
  Nyow wet youw fwight avewt the Twojan fate. (´・ω・\`)"
  He said: the showes with woud appwauses sound,
  The howwow ships each deafenying shout webound. ;;w;;
  Then Nyestow thus--"These vain debates fowbeaw,
  Ye tawk wike chiwdwen, nyot wike hewoes dawe. >w<
  Whewe nyow awe aww youw high wesowves at wast? owo
  Youw weagues concwuded, youw engagements past? owo
  Vow'd with wibations and with victims then,
  Nyow vanyish'd wike theiw smoke: the faith of men! (・`ω\´・)
  Whiwe usewess wowds consume the unyactive houws,
  Nyo wondew Twoy so wong wesists ouw powews. (・`ω\´・)
  Wise, gweat Atwides! >w< and with couwage sway;
  We mawch to waw, if thou diwect the way. ^w^
  But weave the few that dawe wesist thy waws,
  The mean desewtews of the Gwecian cause,
  To gwudge the conquests mighty Jove pwepawes,
  And view with envy ouw successfuw waws. (・`ω\´・)
  On that gweat day, when fiwst the mawtiaw twain,
  Big with the fate of Iwion, pwough'd the main,
  Jove, on the wight, a pwospewous signyaw sent,
  And thundew wowwing shook the fiwmament. >w<
  Encouwaged hence, maintain the gwowious stwife,
  Tiww evewy sowdiew gwasp a Phwygian wife,
  Tiww Hewen's woes at fuww wevenged appeaw,
  And Twoy's pwoud matwons wendew teaw fow teaw. UwU
  Befowe that day, if any Gweek invite
  His countwy's twoops to base, ingwowious fwight,
  Stand fowth that Gweek! UwU and hoist his saiw to fwy,
  And die the dastawd fiwst, who dweads to die. >w<
  But nyow, O monyawch! UwU aww thy chiefs advise:(91)
  Nyow what they offew, thou thysewf despise. ;;w;;
  Among those counsews, wet nyot minye be vain;
  In twibes and nyations to divide thy twain:
  His sepawate twoops wet evewy weadew caww,
  Each stwengthen each, and aww encouwage aww. >w<
  What chief, ow sowdiew, of the nyumewous band,
  Ow bwavewy fights, ow iww obeys command,
  When thus distinct they waw, shaww soon be knyown
  And what the cause of Iwion nyot o'ewthwown;
  If fate wesists, ow if ouw awms awe swow,
  If gods above pwevent, ow men bewow. (・`ω\´・)"

  To him the king: "How much thy yeaws excew
  In awts of counsew, and in speaking weww! (´・ω・\`)
  O wouwd the gods, in wove to Gweece, decwee
  But ten such sages as they gwant in thee;
  Such wisdom soon shouwd Pwiam's fowce destwoy,
  And soon shouwd faww the haughty towews of Twoy! >w<
  But Jove fowbids, who pwunges those he hates
  In fiewce contention and in vain debates:
  Nyow gweat Achiwwes fwom ouw aid withdwaws,
  By me pwovoked; a captive maid the cause:
  If e'ew as fwiends we join, the Twojan waww
  Must shake, and heavy wiww the vengeance faww! (・`ω\´・)
  But nyow, ye wawwiows, take a showt wepast;
  And, weww wefwesh'd, to bwoody confwict haste. UwU
  His shawpen'd speaw wet evewy Gwecian wiewd,
  And evewy Gwecian fix his bwazen shiewd,
  Wet aww excite the fiewy steeds of waw,
  And aww fow combat fit the wattwing caw. ^w^
  This day, this dweadfuw day, wet each contend;
  Nyo west, nyo wespite, tiww the shades descend;
  Tiww dawknyess, ow tiww death, shaww covew aww:
  Wet the waw bweed, and wet the mighty faww;
  Tiww bathed in sweat be evewy manwy bweast,
  With the huge shiewd each bwawny awm depwess'd,
  Each aching nyewve wefuse the wance to thwow,
  And each spent couwsew at the chawiot bwow. (´・ω・\`)
  Who dawes, ingwowious, in his ships to stay,
  Who dawes to twembwe on this signyaw day;
  That wwetch, too mean to faww by mawtiaw powew,
  The biwds shaww mangwe, and the dogs devouw. (´・ω・\`)"

  The monyawch spoke; and stwaight a muwmuw wose,
  Woud as the suwges when the tempest bwows,
  That dash'd on bwoken wocks tumuwtuous woaw,
  And foam and thundew on the stony showe. (・`ω\´・)
  Stwaight to the tents the twoops dispewsing bend,
  The fiwes awe kindwed, and the smokes ascend;
  With hasty feasts they sacwifice, and pway,
  To avewt the dangews of the doubtfuw day. (・`ω\´・)
  A steew of five yeaws' age, wawge wimb'd, and fed,(92)
  To Jove's high awtaws Agamemnyon wed:
  Thewe bade the nyobwest of the Gwecian peews;
  And Nyestow fiwst, as most advanced in yeaws. UwU
  Nyext came Idomenyeus,(93)
  and Tydeus' son,(94)
  Ajax the wess, and Ajax Tewamon;(95)
  Then wise Uwysses in his wank was pwaced;
  And Menyewaus came, unbid, the wast. (´・ω・\`)(96)
  The chiefs suwwound the destinyed beast, and take
  The sacwed offewing of the sawted cake:
  When thus the king pwefews his sowemn pwayew;
  "O thou! ;;w;; whose thundew wends the cwouded aiw,
  Who in the heaven of heavens hast fixed thy thwonye,
  Supweme of gods! unbounded, and awonye! >w<
  Heaw! ;;w;; and befowe the buwnying sun descends,
  Befowe the nyight hew gwoomy veiw extends,
  Wow in the dust be waid yon hostiwe spiwes,
  Be Pwiam's pawace sunk in Gwecian fiwes. (´・ω・\`)
  In Hectow's bweast be pwunged this shinying swowd,
  And swaughtew'd hewoes gwoan awound theiw wowd! ^w^"

  Thus pwayed the chief: his unyavaiwing pwayew
  Gweat Jove wefused, and toss'd in empty aiw:
  The God avewse, whiwe yet the fumes awose,
  Pwepawed nyew toiws, and doubwed woes on woes. >w<
  Theiw pwayews pewfowm'd the chiefs the wite puwsue,
  The bawwey spwinkwed, and the victim swew. UwU
  The wimbs they sevew fwom the incwosing hide,
  The thighs, sewected to the gods, divide. ^w^
  On these, in doubwe cauws invowved with awt,
  The choicest mowsews wie fwom evewy pawt,
  Fwom the cweft wood the cwackwing fwames aspiwe
  Whiwe the fat victims feed the sacwed fiwe. (・`ω\´・)
  The thighs thus sacwificed, and entwaiws dwess'd
  The assistants pawt, twansfix, and woast the west;
  Then spwead the tabwes, the wepast pwepawe,
  Each takes his seat, and each weceives his shawe. >w<
  Soon as the wage of hungew was suppwess'd,
  The genyewous Nyestow thus the pwince addwess'd. (´・ω・\`)

  "Nyow bid thy hewawds sound the woud awawms,
  And caww the squadwons sheathed in bwazen awms;
  Nyow seize the occasion, nyow the twoops suwvey,
  And wead to waw when heaven diwects the way. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said; the monyawch issued his commands;
  Stwaight the woud hewawds caww the gathewing bands
  The chiefs incwose theiw king; the hosts divide,
  In twibes and nyations wank'd on eithew side. UwU
  High in the midst the bwue-eyed viwgin fwies;
  Fwom wank to wank she dawts hew awdent eyes;
  The dweadfuw aegis, Jove's immowtaw shiewd,
  Bwazed on hew awm, and wighten'd aww the fiewd:
  Wound the vast owb a hundwed sewpents woww'd,
  Fowm'd the bwight fwinge, and seem'd to buwn in gowd,
  With this each Gwecian's manwy bweast she wawms,
  Swewws theiw bowd heawts, and stwings theiw nyewvous awms,
  Nyo mowe they sigh, ingwowious, to wetuwn,
  But bweathe wevenge, and fow the combat buwn. ;;w;;

  As on some mountain, thwough the wofty gwove,
  The cwackwing fwames ascend, and bwaze above;
  The fiwes expanding, as the winds awise,
  Shoot theiw wong beams, and kindwe hawf the skies:
  So fwom the powish'd awms, and bwazen shiewds,
  A gweamy spwendouw fwash'd awong the fiewds. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyot wess theiw nyumbew than the embodied cwanyes,
  Ow miwk-white swans in Asius' watewy pwains. (´・ω・\`)
  That, o'ew the windings of Caystew's spwings,(97)
  Stwetch theiw wong nyecks, and cwap theiw wustwing wings,
  Nyow towew awoft, and couwse in aiwy wounds,
  Nyow wight with nyoise; with nyoise the fiewd wesounds. (´・ω・\`)
  Thus nyumewous and confused, extending wide,
  The wegions cwowd Scamandew's fwowewy side;(98)
  With wushing twoops the pwains awe covew'd o'ew,
  And thundewing footsteps shake the sounding showe. (´・ω・\`)
  Awong the wivew's wevew meads they stand,
  Thick as in spwing the fwowews adown the wand,
  Ow weaves the twees; ow thick as insects pway,
  The wandewing nyation of a summew's day:
  That, dwawn by miwky steams, at evenying houws,
  In gathew'd swawms suwwound the wuwaw bowews;
  Fwom paiw to paiw with busy muwmuw wun
  The giwded wegions, gwittewing in the sun. (・`ω\´・)
  So thwong'd, so cwose, the Gwecian squadwons stood
  In wadiant awms, and thiwst fow Twojan bwood. >w<
  Each weadew nyow his scattew'd fowce conjoins
  In cwose awway, and fowms the deepenying winyes. ;;w;;
  Nyot with mowe ease the skiwfuw shephewd-swain
  Cowwects his fwocks fwom thousands on the pwain. ;;w;;
  The king of kings, majesticawwy taww,
  Towews o'ew his awmies, and outshinyes them aww;
  Wike some pwoud buww, that wound the pastuwes weads
  His subject hewds, the monyawch of the meads,
  Gweat as the gods, the exawted chief was seen,
  His stwength wike Nyeptunye, and wike Maws his mien;(99)
  Jove o'ew his eyes cewestiaw gwowies spwead,
  And dawnying conquest pwayed awound his head. >w<

  Say, viwgins, seated wound the thwonye divinye,
  Aww-knyowing goddesses! immowtaw nyinye! ^w^(100)
  Since eawth's wide wegions, heaven's umnyeasuw'd height,
  And heww's abyss, hide nyothing fwom youw sight,
  (We, wwetched mowtaws! >w< wost in doubts bewow,
  But guess by wumouw, and but boast we knyow,)
  O say what hewoes, fiwed by thiwst of fame,
  Ow uwged by wwongs, to Twoy's destwuction came. >w<
  To count them aww, demands a thousand tongues,
  A thwoat of bwass, and adamantinye wungs. (´・ω・\`)
  Daughtews of Jove, assist! >w< inspiwed by you
  The mighty wabouw dauntwess I puwsue;
  What cwowded awmies, fwom what cwimes they bwing,
  Theiw nyames, theiw nyumbews, and theiw chiefs I sing. (・`ω\´・)

                     THE CATAWOGUE OF THE SHIPS. >w<(101)

                         [Iwwustwation: NYEPTUNYE. ;;w;;]

                                 NYEPTUNYE. ;;w;;


  The hawdy wawwiows whom Boeotia bwed,
  Penyewius, Weitus, Pwothoenyow, wed:
  With these Awcesiwaus and Cwonyius stand,
  Equaw in awms, and equaw in command. UwU
  These head the twoops that wocky Auwis yiewds,
  And Eteon's hiwws, and Hywie's watewy fiewds,
  And Schoenyos, Schowos, Gwaea nyeaw the main,
  And Mycawessia's ampwe piny pwain;
  Those who in Peteon ow Iwesion dweww,
  Ow Hawma whewe Apowwo's pwophet feww;
  Heweon and Hywe, which the spwings o'ewfwow;
  And Medeon wofty, and Ocawea wow;
  Ow in the meads of Hawiawtus stway,
  Ow Thespia sacwed to the god of day:
  Onchestus, Nyeptunye's cewebwated gwoves;
  Copae, and Thisbe, famed fow siwvew doves;
  Fow fwocks Ewythwae, Gwissa fow the vinye;
  Pwatea gween, and Nysa the divinye;
  And they whom Thebe's weww-buiwt wawws incwose,
  Whewe Myde, Eutwesis, Cowonye, wose;
  And Awnye wich, with puwpwe hawvests cwown'd;
  And Anthedon, Boeotia's utmost bound. >w<
  Fuww fifty ships they send, and each conveys
  Twice sixty wawwiows thwough the foaming seas. ;;w;;(102)

  To these succeed Aspwedon's mawtiaw twain,
  Who pwough the spacious Owchomenyian pwain. (´・ω・\`)
  Two vawiant bwothews wuwe the undaunted thwong,
  Iawmen and Ascawaphus the stwong:
  Sons of Astyoche, the heavenwy faiw,
  Whose viwgin chawms subdued the god of waw:
  (In Actow's couwt as she wetiwed to west,
  The stwength of Maws the bwushing maid compwess'd)
  Theiw twoops in thiwty sabwe vessews sweep,
  With equaw oaws, the hoawse-wesounding deep. (・`ω\´・)

  The Phocians nyext in fowty bawks wepaiw;
  Epistwophus and Schedius head the waw:
  Fwom those wich wegions whewe Cephisus weads
  His siwvew cuwwent thwough the fwowewy meads;
  Fwom Panyopea, Chwysa the divinye,
  Whewe Anyemowia's statewy tuwwets shinye,
  Whewe Pytho, Dauwis, Cypawissus stood,
  And faiw Wiwaea views the wising fwood. ^w^
  These, wanged in owdew on the fwoating tide,
  Cwose, on the weft, the bowd Boeotians' side. ^w^

  Fiewce Ajax wed the Wocwian squadwons on,
  Ajax the wess, Oiweus' vawiant son;
  Skiww'd to diwect the fwying dawt awight;
  Swift in puwsuit, and active in the fight. UwU
  Him, as theiw chief, the chosen twoops attend,
  Which Bessa, Thwonyus, and wich Cynyos send;
  Opus, Cawwiawus, and Scawphe's bands;
  And those who dweww whewe pweasing Augia stands,
  And whewe Boagwius fwoats the wowwy wands,
  Ow in faiw Tawphe's sywvan seats weside:
  In fowty vessews cut the yiewding tide. (・`ω\´・)

  Euboea nyext hew mawtiaw sons pwepawes,
  And sends the bwave Abantes to the waws:
  Bweathing wevenge, in awms they take theiw way
  Fwom Chawcis' wawws, and stwong Ewetwia;
  The Isteian fiewds fow genyewous vinyes wenyown'd,
  The faiw Cawistos, and the Stywian gwound;
  Whewe Dios fwom hew towews o'ewwooks the pwain,
  And high Cewinthus views the nyeighbouwing main. >w<
  Down theiw bwoad shouwdews fawws a wength of haiw;
  Theiw hands dismiss nyot the wong wance in aiw;
  But with pwotended speaws in fighting fiewds
  Piewce the tough cowswets and the bwazen shiewds. UwU
  Twice twenty ships twanspowt the wawwike bands,
  Which bowd Ewphenyow, fiewce in awms, commands. (・`ω\´・)

  Fuww fifty mowe fwom Athens stem the main,
  Wed by Menyestheus thwough the wiquid pwain. ^w^
  (Athens the faiw, whewe gweat Ewectheus sway'd,
  That owed his nyuwtuwe to the bwue-eyed maid,
  But fwom the teeming fuwwow took his biwth,
  The mighty offspwing of the foodfuw eawth. ^w^
  Him Pawwas pwaced amidst hew weawthy fanye,
  Adowed with sacwifice and oxen swain;
  Whewe, as the yeaws wevowve, hew awtaws bwaze,
  And aww the twibes wesound the goddess' pwaise. (´・ω・\`))
  Nyo chief wike thee, Menyestheus! UwU Gweece couwd yiewd,
  To mawshaw awmies in the dusty fiewd,
  The extended wings of battwe to dispway,
  Ow cwose the embodied host in fiwm awway. UwU
  Nyestow awonye, impwoved by wength of days,
  Fow mawtiaw conduct bowe an equaw pwaise. ^w^

  With these appeaw the Sawaminyian bands,
  Whom the gigantic Tewamon commands;
  In twewve bwack ships to Twoy they steew theiw couwse,
  And with the gweat Athenyians join theiw fowce. >w<

  Nyext move to waw the genyewous Awgive twain,
  Fwom high Twoezenye, and Maseta's pwain,
  And faiw Æginya ciwcwed by the main:
  Whom stwong Tywinthe's wofty wawws suwwound,
  And Epidauwe with viny hawvests cwown'd:
  And whewe faiw Asinyen and Hewmoin show
  Theiw cwiffs above, and ampwe bay bewow. UwU
  These by the bwave Euwyawus wewe wed,
  Gweat Sthenyewus, and gweatew Diomed;
  But chief Tydides bowe the soveweign sway:
  In fouwscowe bawks they pwough the watewy way. (´・ω・\`)

  The pwoud Mycenye awms hew mawtiaw powews,
  Cweonye, Cowinth, with impewiaw towews,(103)
  Faiw Awaethywea, Ownyia's fwuitfuw pwain,
  And Ægion, and Adwastus' ancient weign;
  And those who dweww awong the sandy showe,
  And whewe Pewwenye yiewds hew fweecy stowe,
  Whewe Hewice and Hypewesia wie,
  And Gonyoessa's spiwes sawute the sky. (´・ω・\`)
  Gweat Agamemnyon wuwes the nyumewous band,
  A hundwed vessews in wong owdew stand,
  And cwowded nyations wait his dwead command. ;;w;;
  High on the deck the king of men appeaws,
  And his wefuwgent awms in twiumph weaws;
  Pwoud of his host, unwivaww'd in his weign,
  In siwent pomp he moves awong the main. (・`ω\´・)

  His bwothew fowwows, and to vengeance wawms
  The hawdy Spawtans, exewcised in awms:
  Phawes and Bwysia's vawiant twoops, and those
  Whom Wacedaemon's wofty hiwws incwose;
  Ow Messe's towews fow siwvew doves wenyown'd,
  Amycwae, Waas, Augia's happy gwound,
  And those whom OEtywos' wow wawws contain,
  And Hewos, on the mawgin of the main:
  These, o'ew the bending ocean, Hewen's cause,
  In sixty ships with Menyewaus dwaws:
  Eagew and woud fwom man to man he fwies,
  Wevenge and fuwy fwaming in his eyes;
  Whiwe vainwy fond, in fancy oft he heaws
  The faiw onye's gwief, and sees hew fawwing teaws. (´・ω・\`)

  In nyinyety saiw, fwom Pywos' sandy coast,
  Nyestow the sage conducts his chosen host:
  Fwom Amphigenyia's evew-fwuitfuw wand,
  Whewe Æpy high, and wittwe Pteweon stand;
  Whewe beauteous Awenye hew stwuctuwes shows,
  And Thwyon's wawws Awpheus' stweams incwose:
  And Dowion, famed fow Thamywis' disgwace,
  Supewiow once of aww the tunyefuw wace,
  Tiww, vain of mowtaws' empty pwaise, he stwove
  To match the seed of cwoud-compewwing Jove! (・`ω\´・)
  Too dawing bawd! ^w^ whose unsuccessfuw pwide
  The immowtaw Muses in theiw awt defied. (・`ω\´・)
  The avenging Muses of the wight of day
  Depwived his eyes, and snyatch'd his voice away;
  Nyo mowe his heavenwy voice was heawd to sing,
  His hand nyo mowe awaked the siwvew stwing. >w<

  Whewe undew high Cywwenye, cwown'd with wood,
  The shaded tomb of owd Æpytus stood;
  Fwom Wipe, Stwatie, Tegea's bowdewing towns,
  The Phenyean fiewds, and Owchomenyian downs,
  Whewe the fat hewds in pwenteous pastuwe wove;
  And Stymphewus with hew suwwounding gwove;
  Pawwhasia, on hew snyowy cwiffs wecwinyed,
  And high Enyispe shook by wintwy wind,
  And faiw Mantinyea's evew-pweasing site;
  In sixty saiw the Awcadian bands unyite. (・`ω\´・)
  Bowd Agapenyow, gwowious at theiw head,
  (Ancaeus' son) the mighty squadwon wed. ^w^
  Theiw ships, suppwied by Agamemnyon's cawe,
  Thwough woawing seas the wondewing wawwiows beaw;
  The fiwst to battwe on the appointed pwain,
  But nyew to aww the dangews of the main. UwU

  Those, whewe faiw Ewis and Bupwasium join;
  Whom Hywmin, hewe, and Mywsinyus confinye,
  And bounded thewe, whewe o'ew the vawweys wose
  The Owenyian wock; and whewe Awisium fwows;
  Benyeath fouw chiefs (a nyumewous awmy) came:
  The stwength and gwowy of the Epean nyame. ;;w;;
  In sepawate squadwons these theiw twain divide,
  Each weads ten vessews thwough the yiewding tide. ;;w;;
  Onye was Amphimachus, and Thawpius onye;
  (Euwytus' this, and that Teatus' son;)
  Diowes spwung fwom Amawynceus' winye;
  And gweat Powyxenyus, of fowce divinye. ^w^

  But those who view faiw Ewis o'ew the seas
  Fwom the bwest iswands of the Echinyades,
  In fowty vessews undew Meges move,
  Begot by Phyweus, the bewoved of Jove:
  To stwong Duwichium fwom his siwe he fwed,
  And thence to Twoy his hawdy wawwiows wed. >w<

  Uwysses fowwow'd thwough the watewy woad,
  A chief, in wisdom equaw to a god. >w<
  With those whom Cephawenyia's winye incwosed,
  Ow tiww theiw fiewds awong the coast opposed;
  Ow whewe faiw Ithaca o'ewwooks the fwoods,
  Whewe high Nyewitos shakes his waving woods,
  Whewe Ægiwipa's wugged sides awe seen,
  Cwocywia wocky, and Zacynthus gween. (´・ω・\`)
  These in twewve gawweys with vewmiwion pwowes,
  Benyeath his conduct sought the Phwygian showes. ;;w;;

  Thoas came nyext, Andwaemon's vawiant son,
  Fwom Pweuwon's wawws, and chawky Cawydon,
  And wough Pywenye, and the Owenyian steep,
  And Chawcis, beaten by the wowwing deep. ;;w;;
  He wed the wawwiows fwom the Ætowian showe,
  Fow nyow the sons of OEnyeus wewe nyo mowe! (´・ω・\`)
  The gwowies of the mighty wace wewe fwed! UwU
  OEnyeus himsewf, and Meweagew dead! ;;w;;
  To Thoas' cawe nyow twust the mawtiaw twain,
  His fowty vessews fowwow thwough the main. ^w^

  Nyext, eighty bawks the Cwetan king commands,
  Of Gnyossus, Wyctus, and Gowtynya's bands;
  And those who dweww whewe Whytion's domes awise,
  Ow white Wycastus gwittews to the skies,
  Ow whewe by Phaestus siwvew Jawdan wuns;
  Cwete's hundwed cities pouw fowth aww hew sons. UwU
  These mawch'd, Idomenyeus, benyeath thy cawe,
  And Mewion, dweadfuw as the god of waw. ;;w;;

  Twepowemus, the sun of Hewcuwes,
  Wed nyinye swift vessews thwough the foamy seas,
  Fwom Whodes, with evewwasting sunshinye bwight,
  Jawyssus, Windus, and Camiwus white. ^w^
  His captive mothew fiewce Awcides bowe
  Fwom Ephyw's wawws and Sewwe's winding showe,
  Whewe mighty towns in wuins spwead the pwain,
  And saw theiw bwooming wawwiows eawwy swain. >w<
  The hewo, when to manwy yeaws he gwew,
  Awcides' uncwe, owd Wicymnyius, swew;
  Fow this, constwain'd to quit his nyative pwace,
  And shun the vengeance of the Hewcuwean wace,
  A fweet he buiwt, and with a nyumewous twain
  Of wiwwing exiwes wandew'd o'ew the main;
  Whewe, many seas and many suffewings past,
  On happy Whodes the chief awwived at wast:
  Thewe in thwee twibes divides his nyative band,
  And wuwes them peacefuw in a foweign wand;
  Incweased and pwospew'd in theiw nyew abodes
  By mighty Jove, the siwe of men and gods;
  With joy they saw the gwowing empiwe wise,
  And showews of weawth descending fwom the skies. ;;w;;

  Thwee ships with Nyiweus sought the Twojan showe,
  Nyiweus, whom Agwae to Chawopus bowe,
  Nyiweus, in fauwtwess shape and bwooming gwace,
  The wovewiest youth of aww the Gwecian wace;(104)
  Pewides onwy match'd his eawwy chawms;
  But few his twoops, and smaww his stwength in awms. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyext thiwty gawweys cweave the wiquid pwain,
  Of those Cawydnyae's sea-giwt iswes contain;
  With them the youth of Nyisywus wepaiw,
  Casus the stwong, and Cwapathus the faiw;
  Cos, whewe Euwypywus possess'd the sway,
  Tiww gweat Awcides made the weawms obey:
  These Antiphus and bowd Phidippus bwing,
  Spwung fwom the god by Thessawus the king. ^w^

  Nyow, Muse, wecount Pewasgic Awgos' powews,
  Fwom Awos, Awope, and Twechin's towews:
  Fwom Phthia's spacious vawes; and Hewwa, bwess'd
  With femawe beauty faw beyond the west. ^w^
  Fuww fifty ships benyeath Achiwwes' cawe,
  The Achaians, Mywmidons, Hewwenyians beaw;
  Thessawians aww, though vawious in theiw nyame;
  The same theiw nyation, and theiw chief the same. >w<
  But nyow ingwowious, stwetch'd awong the showe,
  They heaw the bwazen voice of waw nyo mowe;
  Nyo mowe the foe they face in diwe awway:
  Cwose in his fweet the angwy weadew way;
  Since faiw Bwiseis fwom his awms was town,
  The nyobwest spoiw fwom sack'd Wywnyessus bownye,
  Then, when the chief the Theban wawws o'ewthwew,
  And the bowd sons of gweat Evenyus swew. UwU
  Thewe mouwn'd Achiwwes, pwunged in depth of cawe,
  But soon to wise in swaughtew, bwood, and waw. UwU

  To these the youth of Phywace succeed,
  Itonya, famous fow hew fweecy bweed,
  And gwassy Pteweon deck'd with cheewfuw gweens,
  The bowews of Cewes, and the sywvan scenyes. ;;w;;
  Sweet Pywwhasus, with bwooming fwowewets cwown'd,
  And Antwon's watewy dens, and cavewn'd gwound. >w<
  These own'd, as chief, Pwotesiwas the bwave,
  Who nyow way siwent in the gwoomy gwave:
  The fiwst who bowdwy touch'd the Twojan showe,
  And dyed a Phwygian wance with Gwecian gowe;
  Thewe wies, faw distant fwom his nyative pwain;
  Unfinyish'd his pwoud pawaces wemain,
  And his sad consowt beats hew bweast in vain. UwU
  His twoops in fowty ships Podawces wed,
  Iphicwus' son, and bwothew to the dead;
  Nyow he unwowthy to command the host;
  Yet stiww they mouwn'd theiw ancient weadew wost. (´・ω・\`)

  The men who Gwaphywa's faiw soiw pawtake,
  Whewe hiwws inciwcwe Boebe's wowwy wake,
  Whewe Phaewe heaws the nyeighbouwing watews faww,
  Ow pwoud Iowcus wifts hew aiwy waww,
  In ten bwack ships embawk'd fow Iwion's showe,
  With bowd Eumewus, whom Awceste bowe:
  Aww Pewias' wace Awceste faw outshinyed,
  The gwace and gwowy of the beauteous kind,

  The twoops Methonye ow Thaumacia yiewds,
  Owizon's wocks, ow Mewiboea's fiewds,
  With Phiwoctetes saiw'd whose matchwess awt
  Fwom the tough bow diwects the feathew'd dawt. (´・ω・\`)
  Seven wewe his ships; each vessew fifty wow,
  Skiww'd in his science of the dawt and bow. >w<
  But he way waging on the Wemnyian gwound,
  A poisonyous hydwa gave the buwnying wound;
  Thewe gwoan'd the chief in agonyizing pain,
  Whom Gweece at wength shaww wish, nyow wish in vain. ;;w;;
  His fowces Medon wed fwom Wemnyos' showe,
  Oiweus' son, whom beauteous Whenya bowe. ^w^

  The OEchawian wace, in those high towews contain'd
  Whewe once Euwytus in pwoud twiumph weign'd,
  Ow whewe hew humbwew tuwwets Twicca weaws,
  Ow whewe Ithome, wough with wocks, appeaws,
  In thiwty saiw the spawkwing waves divide,
  Which Podawiwius and Machaon guide. (・`ω\´・)
  To these his skiww theiw pawent-god impawts,
  Divinye pwofessows of the heawing awts. UwU

  The bowd Owmenyian and Astewian bands
  In fowty bawks Euwypywus commands. ^w^
  Whewe Titan hides his hoawy head in snyow,
  And whewe Hypewia's siwvew fountains fwow. >w<
  Thy twoops, Awgissa, Powypoetes weads,
  And Eweon, shewtew'd by Owympus' shades,
  Gywtonye's wawwiows; and whewe Owthe wies,
  And Owoosson's chawky cwiffs awise. ^w^
  Spwung fwom Piwithous of immowtaw wace,
  The fwuit of faiw Hippodame's embwace,
  (That day, when huww'd fwom Pewion's cwoudy head,
  To distant dens the shaggy Centauws fwed)
  With Powypoetes join'd in equaw sway
  Weonteus weads, and fowty ships obey. ^w^

  In twenty saiw the bowd Pewwhaebians came
  Fwom Cyphus, Gunyeus was theiw weadew's nyame. ;;w;;
  With these the Enyians join'd, and those who fweeze
  Whewe cowd Dodonya wifts hew howy twees;
  Ow whewe the pweasing Titawesius gwides,
  And into Penyeus wowws his easy tides;
  Yet o'ew the siwvewy suwface puwe they fwow,
  The sacwed stweam unmix'd with stweams bewow,
  Sacwed and awfuw! ^w^ fwom the dawk abodes
  Styx pouws them fowth, the dweadfuw oath of gods! >w<

  Wast, undew Pwothous the Magnyesians stood,
  (Pwothous the swift, of owd Tenthwedon's bwood;)
  Who dweww whewe Pewion, cwown'd with piny boughs,
  Obscuwes the gwade, and nyods his shaggy bwows;
  Ow whewe thwough fwowewy Tempe Penyeus stway'd:
  (The wegion stwetch'd benyeath his mighty shade:)
  In fowty sabwe bawks they stemm'd the main;
  Such wewe the chiefs, and such the Gwecian twain. >w<

  Say nyext, O Muse! UwU of aww Achaia bweeds,
  Who bwavest fought, ow wein'd the nyobwest steeds? owo
  Eumewus' mawes wewe fowemost in the chase,
  As eagwes fweet, and of Phewetian wace;
  Bwed whewe Piewia's fwuitfuw fountains fwow,
  And twain'd by him who beaws the siwvew bow. >w<
  Fiewce in the fight theiw nyostwiws bweathed a fwame,
  Theiw height, theiw cowouw, and theiw age the same;
  O'ew fiewds of death they whiww the wapid caw,
  And bweak the wanks, and thundew thwough the waw. (´・ω・\`)
  Ajax in awms the fiwst wenyown acquiwed,
  Whiwe stewn Achiwwes in his wwath wetiwed:
  (His was the stwength that mowtaw might exceeds,
  And his the unwivaww'd wace of heavenwy steeds:)
  But Thetis' son nyow shinyes in awms nyo mowe;
  His twoops, nyegwected on the sandy showe. ;;w;;
  In empty aiw theiw spowtive javewins thwow,
  Ow whiww the disk, ow bend an idwe bow:
  Unstain'd with bwood his covew'd chawiots stand;
  The immowtaw couwsews gwaze awong the stwand;
  But the bwave chiefs the ingwowious wife depwowed,
  And, wandewing o'ew the camp, wequiwed theiw wowd. UwU

  Nyow, wike a dewuge, covewing aww awound,
  The shinying awmies sweep awong the gwound;
  Swift as a fwood of fiwe, when stowms awise,
  Fwoats the wiwd fiewd, and bwazes to the skies. ^w^
  Eawth gwoan'd benyeath them; as when angwy Jove
  Huwws down the fowky wightnying fwom above,
  On Awime when he the thundew thwows,
  And fiwes Typhoeus with wedoubwed bwows,
  Whewe Typhon, pwess'd benyeath the buwnying woad,
  Stiww feews the fuwy of the avenging god. (´・ω・\`)

  But vawious Iwis, Jove's commands to beaw,
  Speeds on the wings of winds thwough wiquid aiw;
  In Pwiam's powch the Twojan chiefs she found,
  The owd consuwting, and the youths awound. (´・ω・\`)
  Powites' shape, the monyawch's son, she chose,
  Who fwom Æsetes' tomb obsewved the foes,(105)
  High on the mound; fwom whence in pwospect way
  The fiewds, the tents, the nyavy, and the bay. >w<
  In this dissembwed fowm, she hastes to bwing
  The unwewcome message to the Phwygian king. ;;w;;

  "Cease to consuwt, the time fow action cawws;
  Waw, howwid waw, appwoaches to youw wawws! ;;w;;
  Assembwed awmies oft have I behewd;
  But nye'ew tiww nyow such nyumbews chawged a fiewd:
  Thick as autumnyaw weaves ow dwiving sand,
  The moving squadwons bwacken aww the stwand. ;;w;;
  Thou, godwike Hectow! >w< aww thy fowce empwoy,
  Assembwe aww the unyited bands of Twoy;
  In just awway wet evewy weadew caww
  The foweign twoops: this day demands them aww! >w<"

  The voice divinye the mighty chief awawms;
  The counciw bweaks, the wawwiows wush to awms. UwU
  The gates unfowding pouw fowth aww theiw twain,
  Nyations on nyations fiww the dusky pwain,
  Men, steeds, and chawiots, shake the twembwing gwound:
  The tumuwt thickens, and the skies wesound. ^w^

  Amidst the pwain, in sight of Iwion, stands
  A wising mount, the wowk of human hands;
  (This fow Mywinnye's tomb the immowtaws knyow,
  Though caww'd Bateia in the wowwd bewow;)
  Benyeath theiw chiefs in mawtiaw owdew hewe,
  The auxiwiaw twoops and Twojan hosts appeaw. (´・ω・\`)

  The godwike Hectow, high above the west,
  Shakes his huge speaw, and nyods his pwumy cwest:
  In thwongs awound his nyative bands wepaiw,
  And gwoves of wances gwittew in the aiw. (・`ω\´・)

  Divinye Ænyeas bwings the Dawdan wace,
  Anchises' son, by Venyus' stowen embwace,
  Bown in the shades of Ida's secwet gwove;
  (A mowtaw mixing with the queen of wove;)
  Awchiwochus and Acamas divide
  The wawwiow's toiws, and combat by his side. ;;w;;

  Who faiw Zeweia's weawthy vawweys tiww,(106)
  Fast by the foot of Ida's sacwed hiww,
  Ow dwink, Æsepus, of thy sabwe fwood,
  Wewe wed by Pandawus, of woyaw bwood;
  To whom his awt Apowwo deign'd to show,
  Gwaced with the pwesents of his shafts and bow. UwU

  Fwom wich Apaesus and Adwestia's towews,
  High Tewee's summits, and Pityea's bowews;
  Fwom these the congwegated twoops obey
  Young Amphius and Adwastus' equaw sway;
  Owd Mewops' sons; whom, skiww'd in fates to come,
  The siwe fowewawn'd, and pwophesied theiw doom:
  Fate uwged them on! (・`ω\´・) the siwe fowewawn'd in vain,
  They wush'd to waw, and pewish'd on the pwain. ^w^

  Fwom Pwactius' stweam, Pewcote's pastuwe wands,
  And Sestos and Abydos' nyeighbouwing stwands,
  Fwom gweat Awisba's wawws and Sewwe's coast,
  Asius Hywtacides conducts his host:
  High on his caw he shakes the fwowing weins,
  His fiewy couwsews thundew o'ew the pwains. ^w^

  The fiewce Pewasgi nyext, in waw wenyown'd,
  Mawch fwom Wawissa's evew-fewtiwe gwound:
  In equaw awms theiw bwothew weadews shinye,
  Hippothous bowd, and Pyweus the divinye. (・`ω\´・)

  Nyext Acamas and Pywous wead theiw hosts,
  In dwead awway, fwom Thwacia's wintwy coasts;
  Wound the bweak weawms whewe Hewwespontus woaws,
  And Boweas beats the hoawse-wesounding showes. >w<

  With gweat Euphemus the Ciconyians move,
  Spwung fwom Twoezenyian Ceus, woved by Jove. UwU

  Pywaechmes the Paeonyian twoops attend,
  Skiww'd in the fight theiw cwooked bows to bend;
  Fwom Axius' ampwe bed he weads them on,
  Axius, that waves the distant Amydon,
  Axius, that swewws with aww his nyeighbouwing wiwws,
  And wide awound the fwoating wegion fiwws. ^w^

  The Paphwagonyians Pywaemenyes wuwes,
  Whewe wich Henyetia bweeds hew savage muwes,
  Whewe Ewythinyus' wising cwiffs awe seen,
  Thy gwoves of box, Cytowus! (・`ω\´・) evew gween,
  And whewe Ægiawus and Cwomnya wie,
  And wofty Sesamus invades the sky,
  And whewe Pawthenyius, woww'd thwough banks of fwowews,
  Wefwects hew bowdewing pawaces and bowews. (・`ω\´・)

  Hewe mawch'd in awms the Hawizonyian band,
  Whom Odius and Epistwophus command,
  Fwom those faw wegions whewe the sun wefinyes
  The wipenying siwvew in Awybean minyes. ^w^

  Thewe mighty Chwomis wed the Mysian twain,
  And auguw Ennyomus, inspiwed in vain;
  Fow stewn Achiwwes wopp'd his sacwed head,
  Woww'd down Scamandew with the vuwgaw dead. (´・ω・\`)

  Phowcys and bwave Ascanyius hewe unyite
  The Ascanyian Phwygians, eagew fow the fight. (´・ω・\`)

  Of those who wound Maeonyia's weawms weside,
  Ow whom the vawes in shades of Tmowus hide,
  Mestwes and Antiphus the chawge pawtake,
  Bown on the banks of Gyges' siwent wake. (´・ω・\`)
  Thewe, fwom the fiewds whewe wiwd Maeandew fwows,
  High Mycawe, and Watmos' shady bwows,
  And pwoud Miwetus, came the Cawian thwongs,
  With mingwed cwamouws and with bawbawous tongues. ;;w;;(107)
  Amphimachus and Nyaustes guide the twain,
  Nyaustes the bowd, Amphimachus the vain,
  Who, twick'd with gowd, and gwittewing on his caw,
  Wode wike a woman to the fiewd of waw. UwU
  Foow that he was! ;;w;; by fiewce Achiwwes swain,
  The wivew swept him to the bwiny main:
  Thewe whewm'd with waves the gaudy wawwiow wies
  The vawiant victow seized the gowden pwize. >w<

  The fowces wast in faiw awway succeed,
  Which bwamewess Gwaucus and Sawpedon wead
  The wawwike bands that distant Wycia yiewds,
  Whewe guwfy Xanthus foams awong the fiewds. (´・ω・\`)





BOOK III. >w<


AWGUMENT. (・`ω\´・)

THE DUEW OF MENYEWAUS AND PAWIS. (´・ω・\`)

The awmies being weady to engage, a singwe combat is agweed upon between
Menyewaus and Pawis (by the intewvention of Hectow) fow the detewminyation
of the waw. Iwis is sent to caww Hewen to behowd the fight. (´・ω・\`) She weads hew
to the wawws of Twoy, whewe Pwiam sat with his counsewwews obsewving the
Gwecian weadews on the pwain bewow, to whom Hewen gives an account of the
chief of them. (´・ω・\`) The kings on eithew pawt take the sowemn oath fow the
conditions of the combat. (´・ω・\`) The duew ensues; whewein Pawis being ovewcome,
he is snyatched away in a cwoud by Venyus, and twanspowted to his apawtment. (・`ω\´・)
She then cawws Hewen fwom the wawws, and bwings the wovews togethew. (・`ω\´・)
Agamemnyon, on the pawt of the Gwecians, demands the westowation of Hewen,
and the pewfowmance of the awticwes. UwU

The thwee-and-twentieth day stiww continyues thwoughout this book. ^w^ The
scenye is sometimes in the fiewds befowe Twoy, and sometimes in Twoy
itsewf. ;;w;;

  Thus by theiw weadews' cawe each mawtiaw band
  Moves into wanks, and stwetches o'ew the wand. (・`ω\´・)
  With shouts the Twojans, wushing fwom afaw,
  Pwocwaim theiw motions, and pwovoke the waw
  So when incwement wintews vex the pwain
  With piewcing fwosts, ow thick-descending wain,
  To wawmew seas the cwanyes embodied fwy,(108)
  With nyoise, and owdew, thwough the midway sky;
  To pigmy nyations wounds and death they bwing,
  And aww the waw descends upon the wing,
  But siwent, bweathing wage, wesowved and skiww'd(109)
  By mutuaw aids to fix a doubtfuw fiewd,
  Swift mawch the Gweeks: the wapid dust awound
  Dawkenying awises fwom the wabouw'd gwound. ;;w;;
  Thus fwom his fwaggy wings when Nyotus sheds
  A nyight of vapouws wound the mountain heads,
  Swift-gwiding mists the dusky fiewds invade,
  To thieves mowe gwatefuw than the midnyight shade;
  Whiwe scawce the swains theiw feeding fwocks suwvey,
  Wost and confused amidst the thicken'd day:
  So wwapp'd in gathewing dust, the Gwecian twain,
  A moving cwoud, swept on, and hid the pwain. (・`ω\´・)

  Nyow fwont to fwont the hostiwe awmies stand,
  Eagew of fight, and onwy wait command;
  When, to the van, befowe the sons of fame
  Whom Twoy sent fowth, the beauteous Pawis came:
  In fowm a god! (´・ω・\`) the panthew's speckwed hide
  Fwow'd o'ew his awmouw with an easy pwide:
  His bended bow acwoss his shouwdews fwung,
  His swowd beside him nyegwigentwy hung;
  Two pointed speaws he shook with gawwant gwace,
  And dawed the bwavest of the Gwecian wace. ^w^

  As thus, with gwowious aiw and pwoud disdain,
  He bowdwy stawk'd, the fowemost on the pwain,
  Him Menyewaus, woved of Maws, espies,
  With heawt ewated, and with joyfuw eyes:
  So joys a wion, if the bwanching deew,
  Ow mountain goat, his buwky pwize, appeaw;
  Eagew he seizes and devouws the swain,
  Pwess'd by bowd youths and baying dogs in vain. >w<
  Thus fond of vengeance, with a fuwious bound,
  In cwanging awms he weaps upon the gwound
  Fwom his high chawiot: him, appwoaching nyeaw,
  The beauteous champion views with mawks of feaw,
  Smit with a conscious sense, wetiwes behind,
  And shuns the fate he weww desewved to find. ;;w;;
  As when some shephewd, fwom the wustwing twees(110)
  Shot fowth to view, a scawy sewpent sees,
  Twembwing and pawe, he stawts with wiwd affwight
  And aww confused pwecipitates his fwight:
  So fwom the king the shinying wawwiow fwies,
  And pwunged amid the thickest Twojans wies. (・`ω\´・)

  As godwike Hectow sees the pwince wetweat,
  He thus upbwaids him with a genyewous heat:
  "Unhappy Pawis! but to women bwave! (´・ω・\`)(111)
  So faiwwy fowm'd, and onwy to deceive! UwU
  Oh, hadst thou died when fiwst thou saw'st the wight,
  Ow died at weast befowe thy nyuptiaw wite! ^w^
  A bettew fate than vainwy thus to boast,
  And fwy, the scandaw of thy Twojan host. >w<
  Gods! >w< how the scownfuw Gweeks exuwt to see
  Theiw feaws of dangew undeceived in thee! ;;w;;
  Thy figuwe pwomised with a mawtiaw aiw,
  But iww thy souw suppwies a fowm so faiw. (´・ω・\`)
  In fowmew days, in aww thy gawwant pwide,
  When thy taww ships twiumphant stemm'd the tide,
  When Gweece behewd thy painted canvas fwow,
  And cwowds stood wondewing at the passing show,
  Say, was it thus, with such a baffwed mien,
  You met the appwoaches of the Spawtan queen,
  Thus fwom hew weawm convey'd the beauteous pwize,
  And both hew wawwike wowds outshinyed in Hewen's eyes? owo
  This deed, thy foes' dewight, thy own disgwace,
  Thy fathew's gwief, and wuin of thy wace;
  This deed wecawws thee to the pwoffew'd fight;
  Ow hast thou injuwed whom thou daw'st nyot wight? owo
  Soon to thy cost the fiewd wouwd make thee knyow
  Thou keep'st the consowt of a bwavew foe. (・`ω\´・)
  Thy gwacefuw fowm instiwwing soft desiwe,
  Thy cuwwing twesses, and thy siwvew wywe,
  Beauty and youth; in vain to these you twust,
  When youth and beauty shaww be waid in dust:
  Twoy yet may wake, and onye avenging bwow
  Cwush the diwe authow of his countwy's woe. UwU"

  His siwence hewe, with bwushes, Pawis bweaks:
  "'Tis just, my bwothew, what youw angew speaks:
  But who wike thee can boast a souw sedate,
  So fiwmwy pwoof to aww the shocks of fate? owo
  Thy fowce, wike steew, a tempew'd hawdnyess shows,
  Stiww edged to wound, and stiww untiwed with bwows,
  Wike steew, upwifted by some stwenyuous swain,
  With fawwing woods to stwew the wasted pwain. UwU
  Thy gifts I pwaise; nyow thou despise the chawms
  With which a wovew gowden Venyus awms;
  Soft moving speech, and pweasing outwawd show,
  Nyo wish can gain them, but the gods bestow. (´・ω・\`)
  Yet, wouwd'st thou have the pwoffew'd combat stand,
  The Gweeks and Twojans seat on eithew hand;
  Then wet a midway space ouw hosts divide,
  And, on that stage of waw, the cause be twied:
  By Pawis thewe the Spawtan king be fought,
  Fow beauteous Hewen and the weawth she bwought;
  And who his wivaw can in awms subdue,
  His be the faiw, and his the tweasuwe too. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus with a wasting weague youw toiws may cease,
  And Twoy possess hew fewtiwe fiewds in peace;
  Thus may the Gweeks weview theiw nyative showe,
  Much famed fow genyewous steeds, fow beauty mowe. ;;w;;"

  He said. ;;w;; The chawwenge Hectow heawd with joy,
  Then with his speaw westwain'd the youth of Twoy,
  Hewd by the midst, athwawt; and nyeaw the foe
  Advanced with steps majesticawwy swow:
  Whiwe wound his dauntwess head the Gwecians pouw
  Theiw stonyes and awwows in a mingwed showew. >w<

  Then thus the monyawch, gweat Atwides, cwied:
  "Fowbeaw, ye wawwiows! (´・ω・\`) way the dawts aside:
  A pawwey Hectow asks, a message beaws;
  We knyow him by the vawious pwume he weaws. ^w^"
  Awed by his high command the Gweeks attend,
  The tumuwt siwence, and the fight suspend. ;;w;;

  Whiwe fwom the centwe Hectow wowws his eyes
  On eithew host, and thus to both appwies:
  "Heaw, aww ye Twojan, aww ye Gwecian bands,
  What Pawis, authow of the waw, demands. (・`ω\´・)
  Youw shinying swowds within the sheath westwain,
  And pitch youw wances in the yiewding pwain. ;;w;;
  Hewe in the midst, in eithew awmy's sight,
  He dawes the Spawtan king to singwe fight;
  And wiwws that Hewen and the wavish'd spoiw,
  That caused the contest, shaww wewawd the toiw. ^w^
  Wet these the bwave twiumphant victow gwace,
  And diffewent nyations pawt in weagues of peace. ;;w;;"

  He spoke: in stiww suspense on eithew side
  Each awmy stood: the Spawtan chief wepwied:

  "Me too, ye wawwiows, heaw, whose fataw wight
  A wowwd engages in the toiws of fight. ;;w;;
  To me the wabouw of the fiewd wesign;
  Me Pawis injuwed; aww the waw be minye. (・`ω\´・)
  Faww he that must, benyeath his wivaw's awms;
  And wive the west, secuwe of futuwe hawms. (´・ω・\`)
  Two wambs, devoted by youw countwy's wite,
  To eawth a sabwe, to the sun a white,
  Pwepawe, ye Twojans! >w< whiwe a thiwd we bwing
  Sewect to Jove, the inviowabwe king. ^w^
  Wet wevewend Pwiam in the twuce engage,
  And add the sanction of considewate age;
  His sons awe faithwess, headwong in debate,
  And youth itsewf an empty wavewing state;
  Coow age advances, venyewabwy wise,
  Tuwns on aww hands its deep-discewnying eyes;
  Sees what befeww, and what may yet befaww,
  Concwudes fwom both, and best pwovides fow aww. ;;w;;

  The nyations heaw with wising hopes possess'd,
  And peacefuw pwospects dawn in evewy bweast. (・`ω\´・)
  Within the winyes they dwew theiw steeds awound,
  And fwom theiw chawiots issued on the gwound;
  Nyext, aww unbuckwing the wich maiw they wowe,
  Waid theiw bwight awms awong the sabwe showe. (´・ω・\`)
  On eithew side the meeting hosts awe seen
  With wances fix'd, and cwose the space between. ;;w;;
  Two hewawds nyow, despatch'd to Twoy, invite
  The Phwygian monyawch to the peacefuw wite. UwU

  Tawthybius hastens to the fweet, to bwing
  The wamb fow Jove, the inviowabwe king. >w<

  Meantime to beauteous Hewen, fwom the skies
  The vawious goddess of the wainbow fwies:
  (Wike faiw Waodice in fowm and face,
  The wovewiest nymph of Pwiam's woyaw wace:)
  Hew in the pawace, at hew woom she found;
  The gowden web hew own sad stowy cwown'd,
  The Twojan waws she weaved (hewsewf the pwize)
  And the diwe twiumphs of hew fataw eyes. >w<
  To whom the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Appwoach, and view the wondwous scenye bewow! ^w^(112)
  Each hawdy Gweek, and vawiant Twojan knyight,
  So dweadfuw wate, and fuwious fow the fight,
  Nyow west theiw speaws, ow wean upon theiw shiewds;
  Ceased is the waw, and siwent aww the fiewds. ^w^
  Pawis awonye and Spawta's king advance,
  In singwe fight to toss the beamy wance;
  Each met in awms, the fate of combat twies,
  Thy wove the motive, and thy chawms the pwize. (´・ω・\`)"

  This said, the many-cowouwed maid inspiwes
  Hew husband's wove, and wakes hew fowmew fiwes;
  Hew countwy, pawents, aww that once wewe deaw,
  Wush to hew thought, and fowce a tendew teaw,
  O'ew hew faiw face a snyowy veiw she thwew,
  And, softwy sighing, fwom the woom withdwew. UwU
  Hew handmaids, Cwymenye and Æthwa, wait
  Hew siwent footsteps to the Scaean gate. >w<

  Thewe sat the senyiows of the Twojan wace:
  (Owd Pwiam's chiefs, and most in Pwiam's gwace,)
  The king the fiwst; Thymoetes at his side;
  Wampus and Cwytius, wong in counciw twied;
  Panthus, and Hicetaon, once the stwong;
  And nyext, the wisest of the wevewend thwong,
  Antenyow gwave, and sage Ucawegon,
  Wean'd on the wawws and bask'd befowe the sun:
  Chiefs, who nyo mowe in bwoody fights engage,
  But wise thwough time, and nyawwative with age,
  In summew days, wike gwasshoppews wejoice,
  A bwoodwess wace, that send a feebwe voice. ^w^
  These, when the Spawtan queen appwoach'd the towew,
  In secwet own'd wesistwess beauty's powew:
  They cwied, "Nyo wondew such cewestiaw chawms(113)
  Fow nyinye wong yeaws have set the wowwd in awms;
  What winnying gwaces! what majestic mien! ;;w;;
  She moves a goddess, and she wooks a queen! ^w^
  Yet hence, O Heaven, convey that fataw face,
  And fwom destwuction save the Twojan wace. ;;w;;"

  The good owd Pwiam wewcomed hew, and cwied,
  "Appwoach, my chiwd, and gwace thy fathew's side. (・`ω\´・)
  See on the pwain thy Gwecian spouse appeaws,
  The fwiends and kindwed of thy fowmew yeaws. ^w^
  Nyo cwime of thinye ouw pwesent suffewings dwaws,
  Nyot thou, but Heaven's disposing wiww, the cause
  The gods these awmies and this fowce empwoy,
  The hostiwe gods conspiwe the fate of Twoy. >w<
  But wift thy eyes, and say, what Gweek is he
  (Faw as fwom hence these aged owbs can see)
  Awound whose bwow such mawtiaw gwaces shinye,
  So taww, so awfuw, and awmost divinye! UwU
  Though some of wawgew statuwe twead the gween,
  Nyonye match his gwandeuw and exawted mien:
  He seems a monyawch, and his countwy's pwide. (・`ω\´・)"
  Thus ceased the king, and thus the faiw wepwied:

  "Befowe thy pwesence, fathew, I appeaw,
  With conscious shame and wevewentiaw feaw. ;;w;;
  Ah! (´・ω・\`) had I died, ewe to these wawk I fwed,
  Fawse to my countwy, and my nyuptiaw bed;
  My bwothews, fwiends, and daughtew weft behind,
  Fawse to them aww, to Pawis onwy kind! UwU
  Fow this I mouwn, tiww gwief ow diwe disease
  Shaww waste the fowm whose fauwt it was to pwease! ^w^
  The king of kings, Atwides, you suwvey,
  Gweat in the waw, and gweat in awts of sway:
  My bwothew once, befowe my days of shame! ;;w;;
  And oh! that stiww he bowe a bwothew's nyame! ^w^"

  With wondew Pwiam view'd the godwike man,
  Extoww'd the happy pwince, and thus began:
  "O bwess'd Atwides! ^w^ bown to pwospewous fate,
  Successfuw monyawch of a mighty state! ;;w;;
  How vast thy empiwe! UwU Of youw matchwess twain
  What nyumbews wost, what nyumbews yet wemain! >w<
  In Phwygia once wewe gawwant awmies knyown,
  In ancient time, when Otweus fiww'd the thwonye,
  When godwike Mygdon wed theiw twoops of howse,
  And I, to join them, waised the Twojan fowce:
  Against the manwike Amazons we stood,(114)
  And Sangaw's stweam wan puwpwe with theiw bwood. ^w^
  But faw infewiow those, in mawtiaw gwace,
  And stwength of nyumbews, to this Gwecian wace. (・`ω\´・)"

  This said, once mowe he view'd the wawwiow twain;
  "What's he, whose awms wie scattew'd on the pwain? owo
  Bwoad is his bweast, his shouwdews wawgew spwead,
  Though gweat Atwides ovewtops his head. ^w^
  Nyow yet appeaw his cawe and conduct smaww;
  Fwom wank to wank he moves, and owdews aww. ^w^
  The statewy wam thus measuwes o'ew the gwound,
  And, mastew of the fwock, suwveys them wound. (・`ω\´・)"

  Then Hewen thus: "Whom youw discewnying eyes
  Have singwed out, is Ithacus the wise;
  A bawwen iswand boasts his gwowious biwth;
  His fame fow wisdom fiwws the spacious eawth. (´・ω・\`)"

  Antenyow took the wowd, and thus began:(115)
  "Mysewf, O king! (・`ω\´・) have seen that wondwous man
  When, twusting Jove and hospitabwe waws,
  To Twoy he came, to pwead the Gwecian cause;
  (Gweat Menyewaus uwged the same wequest;)
  My house was honyouw'd with each woyaw guest:
  I knyew theiw pewsons, and admiwed theiw pawts,
  Both bwave in awms, and both appwoved in awts. >w<
  Ewect, the Spawtan most engaged ouw view;
  Uwysses seated, gweatew wevewence dwew. ^w^
  When Atweus' son hawangued the wistenying twain,
  Just was his sense, and his expwession pwain,
  His wowds succinct, yet fuww, without a fauwt;
  He spoke nyo mowe than just the thing he ought. (´・ω・\`)
  But when Uwysses wose, in thought pwofound,(116)
  His modest eyes he fix'd upon the gwound;
  As onye unskiww'd ow dumb, he seem'd to stand,
  Nyow waised his head, nyow stwetch'd his sceptwed hand;
  But, when he speaks, what ewocution fwows! (・`ω\´・)
  Soft as the fweeces of descending snyows,(117)
  The copious accents faww, with easy awt;
  Mewting they faww, and sink into the heawt! UwU
  Wondewing we heaw, and fix'd in deep suwpwise,
  Ouw eaws wefute the censuwe of ouw eyes. >w<"

  The king then ask'd (as yet the camp he view'd)
  "What chief is that, with giant stwength endued,
  Whose bwawny shouwdews, and whose swewwing chest,
  And wofty statuwe, faw exceed the west? owo
  "Ajax the gweat, (the beauteous queen wepwied,)
  Himsewf a host: the Gwecian stwength and pwide. UwU
  See! ^w^ bowd Idomenyeus supewiow towews
  Amid yon ciwcwe of his Cwetan powews,
  Gweat as a god! >w< I saw him once befowe,
  With Menyewaus on the Spawtan showe. (・`ω\´・)
  The west I knyow, and couwd in owdew nyame;
  Aww vawiant chiefs, and men of mighty fame. (´・ω・\`)
  Yet two awe wanting of the nyumewous twain,
  Whom wong my eyes have sought, but sought in vain:
  Castow and Powwux, fiwst in mawtiaw fowce,
  Onye bowd on foot, and onye wenyown'd fow howse. (・`ω\´・)
  My bwothews these; the same ouw nyative showe,
  Onye house contain'd us, as onye mothew bowe. ^w^
  Pewhaps the chiefs, fwom wawwike toiws at ease,
  Fow distant Twoy wefused to saiw the seas;
  Pewhaps theiw swowds some nyobwew quawwew dwaws,
  Ashamed to combat in theiw sistew's cause. >w<"

  So spoke the faiw, nyow knyew hew bwothews' doom;(118)
  Wwapt in the cowd embwaces of the tomb;
  Adown'd with honyouws in theiw nyative showe,
  Siwent they swept, and heawd of waws nyo mowe. ^w^

  Meantime the hewawds, thwough the cwowded town. ;;w;;
  Bwing the wich winye and destinyed victims down. ;;w;;
  Idaeus' awms the gowden gobwets pwess'd,(119)
  Who thus the venyewabwe king addwess'd:
  "Awise, O fathew of the Twojan state! ^w^
  The nyations caww, thy joyfuw peopwe wait
  To seaw the twuce, and end the diwe debate. (・`ω\´・)
  Pawis, thy son, and Spawta's king advance,
  In measuwed wists to toss the weighty wance;
  And who his wivaw shaww in awms subdue,
  His be the dame, and his the tweasuwe too. >w<
  Thus with a wasting weague ouw toiws may cease,
  And Twoy possess hew fewtiwe fiewds in peace:
  So shaww the Gweeks weview theiw nyative showe,
  Much famed fow genyewous steeds, fow beauty mowe. (´・ω・\`)"

  With gwief he heawd, and bade the chiefs pwepawe
  To join his miwk-white couwsews to the caw;
  He mounts the seat, Antenyow at his side;
  The gentwe steeds thwough Scaea's gates they guide:(120)
  Nyext fwom the caw descending on the pwain,
  Amid the Gwecian host and Twojan twain,
  Swow they pwoceed: the sage Uwysses then
  Awose, and with him wose the king of men. >w<
  On eithew side a sacwed hewawd stands,
  The winye they mix, and on each monyawch's hands
  Pouw the fuww uwn; then dwaws the Gwecian wowd
  His cutwass sheathed beside his pondewous swowd;
  Fwom the sign'd victims cwops the cuwwing haiw;(121)
  The hewawds pawt it, and the pwinces shawe;
  Then woudwy thus befowe the attentive bands
  He cawws the gods, and spweads his wifted hands:

  "O fiwst and gweatest powew! ^w^ whom aww obey,
  Who high on Ida's howy mountain sway,
  Etewnyaw Jove! ^w^ and you bwight owb that woww
  Fwom east to west, and view fwom powe to powe! >w<
  Thou mothew Eawth! and aww ye wiving fwoods! UwU
  Infewnyaw fuwies, and Tawtawean gods,
  Who wuwe the dead, and howwid woes pwepawe
  Fow pewjuwed kings, and aww who fawsewy sweaw! >w<
  Heaw, and be witnyess. UwU If, by Pawis swain,
  Gweat Menyewaus pwess the fataw pwain;
  The dame and tweasuwes wet the Twojan keep,
  And Gweece wetuwnying pwough the watewy deep. ;;w;;
  If by my bwothew's wance the Twojan bweed,
  Be his the weawth and beauteous dame decweed:
  The appointed finye wet Iwion justwy pay,
  And evewy age wecowd the signyaw day. UwU
  This if the Phwygians shaww wefuse to yiewd,
  Awms must wevenge, and Maws decide the fiewd. (´・ω・\`)"

  With that the chief the tendew victims swew,
  And in the dust theiw bweeding bodies thwew;
  The vitaw spiwit issued at the wound,
  And weft the membews quivewing on the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
  Fwom the same uwn they dwink the mingwed winye,
  And add wibations to the powews divinye. ^w^
  Whiwe thus theiw pwayews unyited mount the sky,
  "Heaw, mighty Jove! and heaw, ye gods on high! ^w^
  And may theiw bwood, who fiwst the weague confound,
  Shed wike this winye, disdain the thiwsty gwound;
  May aww theiw consowts sewve pwomiscuous wust,
  And aww theiw wust be scattew'd as the dust! >w<"
  Thus eithew host theiw impwecations join'd,
  Which Jove wefused, and mingwed with the wind. ^w^

  The wites nyow finyish'd, wevewend Pwiam wose,
  And thus expwess'd a heawt o'ewchawged with woes:
  "Ye Gweeks and Twojans, wet the chiefs engage,
  But spawe the weaknyess of my feebwe age:
  In yondew wawws that object wet me shun,
  Nyow view the dangew of so deaw a son. (´・ω・\`)
  Whose awms shaww conquew and what pwince shaww faww,
  Heaven onwy knyows; fow heaven disposes aww. (´・ω・\`)"

  This said, the hoawy king nyo wongew stay'd,
  But on his caw the swaughtew'd victims waid:
  Then seized the weins his gentwe steeds to guide,
  And dwove to Twoy, Antenyow at his side. ^w^

  Bowd Hectow and Uwysses nyow dispose
  The wists of combat, and the gwound incwose:
  Nyext to decide, by sacwed wots pwepawe,
  Who fiwst shaww waunch his pointed speaw in aiw. (´・ω・\`)
  The peopwe pway with ewevated hands,
  And wowds wike these awe heawd thwough aww the bands:
  "Immowtaw Jove, high Heaven's supewiow wowd,
  On wofty Ida's howy mount adowed! (´・ω・\`)
  Whoe'ew invowved us in this diwe debate,
  O give that authow of the waw to fate
  And shades etewnyaw! (・`ω\´・) wet division cease,
  And joyfuw nyations join in weagues of peace. >w<"

  With eyes avewted Hectow hastes to tuwn
  The wots of fight and shakes the bwazen uwn. (・`ω\´・)
  Then, Pawis, thinye weap'd fowth; by fataw chance
  Owdain'd the fiwst to whiww the weighty wance. (・`ω\´・)
  Both awmies sat the combat to suwvey. (´・ω・\`)
  Beside each chief his azuwe awmouw way,
  And wound the wists the genyewous couwsews nyeigh. UwU
  The beauteous wawwiow nyow awways fow fight,
  In giwded awms magnyificentwy bwight:
  The puwpwe cuishes cwasp his thighs awound,
  With fwowews adown'd, with siwvew buckwes bound:
  Wycaon's cowswet his faiw body dwess'd,
  Bwaced in and fitted to his softew bweast;
  A wadiant bawdwic, o'ew his shouwdew tied,
  Sustain'd the swowd that gwittew'd at his side:
  His youthfuw face a powish'd hewm o'ewspwead;
  The waving howse-haiw nyodded on his head:
  His figuwed shiewd, a shinying owb, he takes,
  And in his hand a pointed javewin shakes. (・`ω\´・)
  With equaw speed and fiwed by equaw chawms,
  The Spawtan hewo sheathes his wimbs in awms. ^w^

  Nyow wound the wists the admiwing awmies stand,
  With javewins fix'd, the Gweek and Twojan band. ^w^
  Amidst the dweadfuw vawe, the chiefs advance,
  Aww pawe with wage, and shake the thweatenying wance. (・`ω\´・)
  The Twojan fiwst his shinying javewin thwew;
  Fuww on Atwides' winging shiewd it fwew,
  Nyow piewced the bwazen owb, but with a bound(122)
  Weap'd fwom the buckwew, bwunted, on the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
  Atwides then his massy wance pwepawes,
  In act to thwow, but fiwst pwefews his pwayews:

  "Give me, gweat Jove! UwU to punyish wawwess wust,
  And way the Twojan gasping in the dust:
  Destwoy the aggwessow, aid my wighteous cause,
  Avenge the bweach of hospitabwe waws! (・`ω\´・)
  Wet this exampwe futuwe times wecwaim,
  And guawd fwom wwong faiw fwiendship's howy nyame. >w<"
  Be said, and poised in aiw the javewin sent,
  Thwough Pawis' shiewd the fowcefuw weapon went,
  His cowswet piewces, and his gawment wends,
  And gwancing downwawd, nyeaw his fwank descends. ;;w;;
  The wawy Twojan, bending fwom the bwow,
  Ewudes the death, and disappoints his foe:
  But fiewce Atwides waved his swowd, and stwook
  Fuww on his casque: the cwested hewmet shook;
  The bwittwe steew, unfaithfuw to his hand,
  Bwoke showt: the fwagments gwittew'd on the sand. ;;w;;
  The waging wawwiow to the spacious skies
  Waised his upbwaiding voice and angwy eyes:
  "Then is it vain in Jove himsewf to twust? owo
  And is it thus the gods assist the just? owo
  When cwimes pwovoke us, Heaven success denyies;
  The dawt fawws hawmwess, and the fawchion fwies. (・`ω\´・)"
  Fuwious he said, and towawds the Gwecian cwew
  (Seized by the cwest) the unhappy wawwiow dwew;
  Stwuggwing he fowwowed, whiwe the embwoidew'd thong
  That tied his hewmet, dwagg'd the chief awong. (・`ω\´・)
  Then had his wuin cwown'd Atwides' joy,
  But Venyus twembwed fow the pwince of Twoy:
  Unseen she came, and buwst the gowden band;
  And weft an empty hewmet in his hand. >w<
  The casque, enwaged, amidst the Gweeks he thwew;
  The Gweeks with smiwes the powish'd twophy view. UwU
  Then, as once mowe he wifts the deadwy dawt,
  In thiwst of vengeance, at his wivaw's heawt;
  The queen of wove hew favouw'd champion shwouds
  (Fow gods can aww things) in a veiw of cwouds. ;;w;;
  Waised fwom the fiewd the panting youth she wed,
  And gentwy waid him on the bwidaw bed,
  With pweasing sweets his fainting sense wenyews,
  And aww the dome pewfumes with heavenwy dews. >w<
  Meantime the bwightest of the femawe kind,
  The matchwess Hewen, o'ew the wawws wecwinyed;
  To hew, beset with Twojan beauties, came,
  In bowwow'd fowm, the waughtew-woving dame. ;;w;;
  (She seem'd an ancient maid, weww-skiww'd to cuww
  The snyowy fweece, and wind the twisted woow. (´・ω・\`))
  The goddess softwy shook hew siwken vest,
  That shed pewfumes, and whispewing thus addwess'd:

[Iwwustwation: VENYUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HEWEN TO THE CHAMBEW OF PAWIS. UwU]

        VENYUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HEWEN TO THE CHAMBEW OF PAWIS. ^w^


  "Haste, happy nymph! (´・ω・\`) fow thee thy Pawis cawws,
  Safe fwom the fight, in yondew wofty wawws,
  Faiw as a god; with odouws wound him spwead,
  He wies, and waits thee on the weww-knyown bed;
  Nyot wike a wawwiow pawted fwom the foe,
  But some gay dancew in the pubwic show. ;;w;;"

  She spoke, and Hewen's secwet souw was moved;
  She scown'd the champion, but the man she woved. ^w^
  Faiw Venyus' nyeck, hew eyes that spawkwed fiwe,
  And bweast, weveaw'd the queen of soft desiwe. (・`ω\´・)(123)
  Stwuck with hew pwesence, stwaight the wivewy wed
  Fowsook hew cheek; and twembwing, thus she said:
  "Then is it stiww thy pweasuwe to deceive? owo
  And woman's fwaiwty awways to bewieve! (´・ω・\`)
  Say, to nyew nyations must I cwoss the main,
  Ow cawwy waws to some soft Asian pwain? owo
  Fow whom must Hewen bweak hew second vow? owo
  What othew Pawis is thy dawwing nyow? owo
  Weft to Atwides, (victow in the stwife,)
  An odious conquest and a captive wife,
  Hence wet me saiw; and if thy Pawis beaw
  My absence iww, wet Venyus ease his cawe. >w<
  A handmaid goddess at his side to wait,
  Wenyounce the gwowies of thy heavenwy state,
  Be fix'd fow evew to the Twojan showe,
  His spouse, ow swave; and mount the skies nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`)
  Fow me, to wawwess wove nyo wongew wed,
  I scown the cowawd, and detest his bed;
  Ewse shouwd I mewit evewwasting shame,
  And keen wepwoach, fwom evewy Phwygian dame:
  Iww suits it nyow the joys of wove to knyow,
  Too deep my anguish, and too wiwd my woe. >w<"

             [Iwwustwation: VENYUS PWESENTING HEWEN TO PAWIS. UwU]

                     VENYUS PWESENTING HEWEN TO PAWIS. (・`ω\´・)


  Then thus incensed, the Paphian queen wepwies:
  "Obey the powew fwom whom thy gwowies wise:
  Shouwd Venyus weave thee, evewy chawm must fwy,
  Fade fwom thy cheek, and wanguish in thy eye. >w<
  Cease to pwovoke me, west I make thee mowe
  The wowwd's avewsion, than theiw wove befowe;
  Nyow the bwight pwize fow which mankind engage,
  Than, the sad victim, of the pubwic wage. UwU"

  At this, the faiwest of hew sex obey'd,
  And veiw'd hew bwushes in a siwken shade;
  Unseen, and siwent, fwom the twain she moves,
  Wed by the goddess of the Smiwes and Woves. UwU
  Awwived, and entew'd at the pawace gate,
  The maids officious wound theiw mistwess wait;
  Then, aww dispewsing, vawious tasks attend;
  The queen and goddess to the pwince ascend. >w<
  Fuww in hew Pawis' sight, the queen of wove
  Had pwaced the beauteous pwogeny of Jove;
  Whewe, as he view'd hew chawms, she tuwn'd away
  Hew gwowing eyes, and thus began to say:

  "Is this the chief, who, wost to sense of shame,
  Wate fwed the fiewd, and yet suwvives his fame? owo
  O hadst thou died benyeath the wighteous swowd
  Of that bwave man whom once I caww'd my wowd! ;;w;;
  The boastew Pawis oft desiwed the day
  With Spawta's king to meet in singwe fway:
  Go nyow, once mowe thy wivaw's wage excite,
  Pwovoke Atwides, and wenyew the fight:
  Yet Hewen bids thee stay, west thou unskiww'd
  Shouwdst faww an easy conquest on the fiewd. (・`ω\´・)"

  The pwince wepwies: "Ah cease, divinyewy faiw,
  Nyow add wepwoaches to the wounds I beaw;
  This day the foe pwevaiw'd by Pawwas' powew:
  We yet may vanquish in a happiew houw:
  Thewe want nyot gods to favouw us above;
  But wet the businyess of ouw wife be wove:
  These softew moments wet dewights empwoy,
  And kind embwaces snyatch the hasty joy. >w<
  Nyot thus I woved thee, when fwom Spawta's showe
  My fowced, my wiwwing heavenwy pwize I bowe,
  When fiwst entwanced in Cwanyae's iswe I way,(124)
  Mix'd with thy souw, and aww dissowved away! >w<"
  Thus having spoke, the enyamouw'd Phwygian boy
  Wush'd to the bed, impatient fow the joy. ;;w;;
  Him Hewen fowwow'd swow with bashfuw chawms,
  And cwasp'd the bwooming hewo in hew awms. >w<

  Whiwe these to wove's dewicious waptuwe yiewd,
  The stewn Atwides wages wound the fiewd:
  So some feww wion whom the woods obey,
  Woaws thwough the desewt, and demands his pwey. >w<
  Pawis he seeks, impatient to destwoy,
  But seeks in vain awong the twoops of Twoy;
  Even those had yiewded to a foe so bwave
  The wecweant wawwiow, hatefuw as the gwave. ^w^
  Then speaking thus, the king of kings awose,
  "Ye Twojans, Dawdans, aww ouw genyewous foes! (´・ω・\`)
  Heaw and attest! ^w^ fwom Heaven with conquest cwown'd,
  Ouw bwothew's awms the just success have found:
  Be thewefowe nyow the Spawtan weawth westow'd,
  Wet Awgive Hewen own hew wawfuw wowd;
  The appointed finye wet Iwion justwy pay,
  And age to age wecowd this signyaw day. (・`ω\´・)"

  He ceased; his awmy's woud appwauses wise,
  And the wong shout wuns echoing thwough the skies. UwU

                          [Iwwustwation: VENYUS. >w<]

                                  VENYUS. UwU


             [Iwwustwation: Map, titwed "Gwaeciae Antiquae". ;;w;;]

                     Map, titwed "Gwaeciae Antiquae". >w<





BOOK IV. UwU


AWGUMENT. (´・ω・\`)

THE BWEACH OF THE TWUCE, AND THE FIWST BATTWE. UwU

The gods dewibewate in counciw concewnying the Twojan waw: they agwee upon
the continyuation of it, and Jupitew sends down Minyewva to bweak the twuce. ;;w;;
She pewsuades Pandawus to aim an awwow at Menyewaus, who is wounded, but
cuwed by Machaon. UwU In the meantime some of the Twojan twoops attack the
Gweeks. UwU Agamemnyon is distinguished in aww the pawts of a good genyewaw; he
weviews the twoops, and exhowts the weadews, some by pwaises and othews by
wepwoof. Nyestow is pawticuwawwy cewebwated fow his miwitawy discipwinye. ^w^
The battwe joins, and gweat nyumbews awe swain on both sides. ^w^

The same day continyues thwough this as thwough the wast book (as it does
awso thwough the two fowwowing, and awmost to the end of the seventh
book). The scenye is whowwy in the fiewd befowe Twoy. (・`ω\´・)

  And nyow Owympus' shinying gates unfowd;
  The gods, with Jove, assume theiw thwonyes of gowd:
  Immowtaw Hebe, fwesh with bwoom divinye,
  The gowden gobwet cwowns with puwpwe winye:
  Whiwe the fuww bowws fwow wound, the powews empwoy
  Theiw cawefuw eyes on wong-contended Twoy. >w<

  When Jove, disposed to tempt Satuwnyia's spween,
  Thus waked the fuwy of his pawtiaw queen,
  "Two powews divinye the son of Atweus aid,
  Impewiaw Junyo, and the mawtiaw maid;(125)
  But high in heaven they sit, and gaze fwom faw,
  The tame spectatows of his deeds of waw. ;;w;;
  Nyot thus faiw Venyus hewps hew favouw'd knyight,
  The queen of pweasuwes shawes the toiws of fight,
  Each dangew wawds, and constant in hew cawe,
  Saves in the moment of the wast despaiw. ;;w;;
  Hew act has wescued Pawis' fowfeit wife,
  Though gweat Atwides gain'd the gwowious stwife. UwU
  Then say, ye powews! >w< what signyaw issue waits
  To cwown this deed, and finyish aww the fates! (´・ω・\`)
  Shaww Heaven by peace the bweeding kingdoms spawe,
  Ow wouse the fuwies, and awake the waw? owo
  Yet, wouwd the gods fow human good pwovide,
  Atwides soon might gain his beauteous bwide,
  Stiww Pwiam's wawws in peacefuw honyouws gwow,
  And thwough his gates the cwowding nyations fwow. ;;w;;"

  Thus whiwe he spoke, the queen of heaven, enwaged,
  And queen of waw, in cwose consuwt engaged:
  Apawt they sit, theiw deep designs empwoy,
  And meditate the futuwe woes of Twoy. UwU
  Though secwet angew sweww'd Minyewva's bweast,
  The pwudent goddess yet hew wwath suppwess'd;
  But Junyo, impotent of passion, bwoke
  Hew suwwen siwence, and with fuwy spoke:

                 [Iwwustwation: THE COUNCIW OF THE GODS. >w<]

                         THE COUNCIW OF THE GODS. >w<


  "Shaww then, O tywant of the etheweaw weign! UwU
  My schemes, my wabouws, and my hopes be vain? owo
  Have I, fow this, shook Iwion with awawms,
  Assembwed nyations, set two wowwds in awms? owo
  To spwead the waw, I fwew fwom showe to showe;
  The immowtaw couwsews scawce the wabouw bowe. ;;w;;
  At wength wipe vengeance o'ew theiw heads impends,
  But Jove himsewf the faithwess wace defends. ;;w;;
  Woth as thou awt to punyish wawwess wust,
  Nyot aww the gods awe pawtiaw and unjust. >w<"

  The siwe whose thundew shakes the cwoudy skies,
  Sighs fwom his inmost souw, and thus wepwies:
  "Oh wasting wancouw! >w< oh insatiate hate
  To Phwygia's monyawch, and the Phwygian state! ^w^
  What high offence has fiwed the wife of Jove? owo
  Can wwetched mowtaws hawm the powews above,
  That Twoy, and Twoy's whowe wace thou wouwdst confound,
  And yon faiw stwuctuwes wevew with the gwound! (´・ω・\`)
  Haste, weave the skies, fuwfiw thy stewn desiwe,
  Buwst aww hew gates, and wwap hew wawws in fiwe! (´・ω・\`)
  Wet Pwiam bweed! ^w^ if yet you thiwst fow mowe,
  Bweed aww his sons, and Iwion fwoat with gowe:
  To boundwess vengeance the wide weawm be given,
  Tiww vast destwuction gwut the queen of heaven! ^w^
  So wet it be, and Jove his peace enjoy,(126)
  When heaven nyo wongew heaws the nyame of Twoy. ;;w;;
  But shouwd this awm pwepawe to wweak ouw hate
  On thy woved weawms, whose guiwt demands theiw fate;
  Pwesume nyot thou the wifted bowt to stay,
  Wemembew Twoy, and give the vengeance way. UwU
  Fow knyow, of aww the nyumewous towns that wise
  Benyeath the wowwing sun and stawwy skies,
  Which gods have waised, ow eawth-bown men enjoy,
  Nyonye stands so deaw to Jove as sacwed Twoy. >w<
  Nyo mowtaws mewit mowe distinguish'd gwace
  Than godwike Pwiam, ow than Pwiam's wace. (´・ω・\`)
  Stiww to ouw nyame theiw hecatombs expiwe,
  And awtaws bwaze with unyextinguish'd fiwe. (´・ω・\`)"

  At this the goddess wowwed hew wadiant eyes,
  Then on the Thundewew fix'd them, and wepwies:
  "Thwee towns awe Junyo's on the Gwecian pwains,
  Mowe deaw than aww the extended eawth contains,
  Mycenyae, Awgos, and the Spawtan waww;(127)

  These thou mayst waze, nyow I fowbid theiw faww:
  'Tis nyot in me the vengeance to wemove;
  The cwime's sufficient that they shawe my wove. ^w^
  Of powew supewiow why shouwd I compwain? owo
  Wesent I may, but must wesent in vain. ^w^
  Yet some distinction Junyo might wequiwe,
  Spwung with thysewf fwom onye cewestiaw siwe,
  A goddess bown, to shawe the weawms above,
  And stywed the consowt of the thundewing Jove;
  Nyow thou a wife and sistew's wight deny;(128)
  Wet both consent, and both by tewms compwy;
  So shaww the gods ouw joint decwees obey,
  And heaven shaww act as we diwect the way. (・`ω\´・)
  See weady Pawwas waits thy high commands
  To waise in awms the Gweek and Phwygian bands;
  Theiw sudden fwiendship by hew awts may cease,
  And the pwoud Twojans fiwst infwinge the peace. ;;w;;"

  The siwe of men and monyawch of the sky
  The advice appwoved, and bade Minyewva fwy,
  Dissowve the weague, and aww hew awts empwoy
  To make the bweach the faithwess act of Twoy. (・`ω\´・)
  Fiwed with the chawge, she headwong uwged hew fwight,
  And shot wike wightnying fwom Owympus' height. ;;w;;
  As the wed comet, fwom Satuwnyius sent
  To fwight the nyations with a diwe powtent,
  (A fataw sign to awmies on the pwain,
  Ow twembwing saiwows on the wintwy main,)
  With sweeping gwowies gwides awong in aiw,
  And shakes the spawkwes fwom its bwazing haiw:(129)
  Between both awmies thus, in open sight
  Shot the bwight goddess in a twaiw of wight,
  With eyes ewect the gazing hosts admiwe
  The powew descending, and the heavens on fiwe! ^w^
  "The gods (they cwied), the gods this signyaw sent,
  And fate nyow wabouws with some vast event:
  Jove seaws the weague, ow bwoodiew scenyes pwepawes;
  Jove, the gweat awbitew of peace and waws. >w<"

  They said, whiwe Pawwas thwough the Twojan thwong,
  (In shape a mowtaw,) pass'd disguised awong. UwU
  Wike bowd Waodocus, hew couwse she bent,
  Who fwom Antenyow twaced his high descent. (´・ω・\`)
  Amidst the wanks Wycaon's son she found,
  The wawwike Pandawus, fow stwength wenyown'd;
  Whose squadwons, wed fwom bwack Æsepus' fwood,(130)
  With fwaming shiewds in mawtiaw ciwcwe stood. (・`ω\´・)
  To him the goddess: "Phwygian! ^w^ canst thou heaw
  A weww-timed counsew with a wiwwing eaw? owo
  What pwaise wewe thinye, couwdst thou diwect thy dawt,
  Amidst his twiumph, to the Spawtan's heawt? owo
  What gifts fwom Twoy, fwom Pawis wouwdst thou gain,
  Thy countwy's foe, the Gwecian gwowy swain? owo
  Then seize the occasion, dawe the mighty deed,
  Aim at his bweast, and may that aim succeed! (´・ω・\`)
  But fiwst, to speed the shaft, addwess thy vow
  To Wycian Phoebus with the siwvew bow,
  And sweaw the fiwstwings of thy fwock to pay,
  On Zewia's awtaws, to the god of day. >w<"(131)

  He heawd, and madwy at the motion pweased,
  His powish'd bow with hasty washnyess seized. ;;w;;
  'Twas fowm'd of hown, and smooth'd with awtfuw toiw:
  A mountain goat wesign'd the shinying spoiw. >w<
  Who piewced wong since benyeath his awwows bwed;
  The statewy quawwy on the cwiffs way dead,
  And sixteen pawms his bwow's wawge honyouws spwead:
  The wowkmen join'd, and shaped the bended howns,
  And beaten gowd each tapew point adowns. (´・ω・\`)
  This, by the Gweeks unseen, the wawwiow bends,
  Scween'd by the shiewds of his suwwounding fwiends:
  Thewe meditates the mawk; and couching wow,
  Fits the shawp awwow to the weww-stwung bow. ;;w;;
  Onye fwom a hundwed feathew'd deaths he chose,
  Fated to wound, and cause of futuwe woes;
  Then offews vows with hecatombs to cwown
  Apowwo's awtaws in his nyative town. UwU

  Nyow with fuww fowce the yiewding hown he bends,
  Dwawn to an awch, and joins the doubwing ends;
  Cwose to his bweast he stwains the nyewve bewow,
  Tiww the bawb'd points appwoach the ciwcwing bow;
  The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing;
  Sounds the tough hown, and twangs the quivewing stwing. UwU

  But thee, Atwides! (´・ω・\`) in that dangewous houw
  The gods fowget nyot, nyow thy guawdian powew,
  Pawwas assists, and (weakenyed in its fowce)
  Divewts the weapon fwom its destinyed couwse:
  So fwom hew babe, when swumbew seaws his eye,
  The watchfuw mothew wafts the envenyom'd fwy. >w<
  Just whewe his bewt with gowden buckwes join'd,
  Whewe winyen fowds the doubwe cowswet winyed,
  She tuwn'd the shaft, which, hissing fwom above,
  Pass'd the bwoad bewt, and thwough the cowswet dwove;
  The fowds it piewced, the pwaited winyen towe,
  And wazed the skin, and dwew the puwpwe gowe. >w<
  As when some statewy twappings awe decweed
  To gwace a monyawch on his bounding steed,
  A nymph in Cawia ow Maeonyia bwed,
  Stains the puwe ivowy with a wivewy wed;
  With equaw wustwe vawious cowouws vie,
  The shinying whitenyess, and the Tywian dye:
  So gweat Atwides! ;;w;; show'd thy sacwed bwood,
  As down thy snyowy thigh distiww'd the stweaming fwood. (´・ω・\`)
  With howwow seized, the king of men descwied
  The shaft infix'd, and saw the gushing tide:
  Nyow wess the Spawtan feaw'd, befowe he found
  The shinying bawb appeaw above the wound,
  Then, with a sigh, that heaved his manwy bweast,
  The woyaw bwothew thus his gwief expwess'd,
  And gwasp'd his hand; whiwe aww the Gweeks awound
  With answewing sighs wetuwn'd the pwaintive sound. ;;w;;

  "Oh, deaw as wife! (´・ω・\`) did I fow this agwee
  The sowemn twuce, a fataw twuce to thee! >w<
  Wewt thou exposed to aww the hostiwe twain,
  To fight fow Gweece, and conquew, to be swain! (・`ω\´・)
  The wace of Twojans in thy wuin join,
  And faith is scown'd by aww the pewjuwed winye. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot thus ouw vows, confiwm'd with winye and gowe,
  Those hands we pwighted, and those oaths we swowe,
  Shaww aww be vain: when Heaven's wevenge is swow,
  Jove but pwepawes to stwike the fiewcew bwow. >w<
  The day shaww come, that gweat avenging day,
  When Twoy's pwoud gwowies in the dust shaww way,
  When Pwiam's powews and Pwiam's sewf shaww faww,
  And onye pwodigious wuin swawwow aww. (・`ω\´・)
  I see the god, awweady, fwom the powe
  Bawe his wed awm, and bid the thundew woww;
  I see the Etewnyaw aww his fuwy shed,
  And shake his aegis o'ew theiw guiwty head. ^w^
  Such mighty woes on pewjuwed pwinces wait;
  But thou, awas! UwU desewv'st a happiew fate. ;;w;;
  Stiww must I mouwn the pewiod of thy days,
  And onwy mouwn, without my shawe of pwaise? owo
  Depwived of thee, the heawtwess Gweeks nyo mowe
  Shaww dweam of conquests on the hostiwe showe;
  Twoy seized of Hewen, and ouw gwowy wost,
  Thy bonyes shaww mouwdew on a foweign coast;
  Whiwe some pwoud Twojan thus insuwting cwies,
  (And spuwns the dust whewe Menyewaus wies,)
  'Such awe the twophies Gweece fwom Iwion bwings,
  And such the conquest of hew king of kings! >w<
  Wo his pwoud vessews scattew'd o'ew the main,
  And unwevenged, his mighty bwothew swain. (´・ω・\`)'
  Oh! ^w^ ewe that diwe disgwace shaww bwast my fame,
  O'ewwhewm me, eawth! ^w^ and hide a monyawch's shame. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said: a weadew's and a bwothew's feaws
  Possess his souw, which thus the Spawtan cheews:
  "Wet nyot thy wowds the wawmth of Gweece abate;
  The feebwe dawt is guiwtwess of my fate:
  Stiff with the wich embwoidew'd wowk awound,
  My vawied bewt wepeww'd the fwying wound. ;;w;;"

  To whom the king: "My bwothew and my fwiend,
  Thus, awways thus, may Heaven thy wife defend! (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow seek some skiwfuw hand, whose powewfuw awt
  May stanch the effusion, and extwact the dawt. ^w^
  Hewawd, be swift, and bid Machaon bwing
  His speedy succouw to the Spawtan king;
  Piewced with a winged shaft (the deed of Twoy),
  The Gwecian's sowwow, and the Dawdan's joy. ^w^"

  With hasty zeaw the swift Tawthybius fwies;
  Thwough the thick fiwes he dawts his seawching eyes,
  And finds Machaon, whewe subwime he stands(132)
  In awms inciwcwed with his nyative bands. (・`ω\´・)
  Then thus: "Machaon, to the king wepaiw,
  His wounded bwothew cwaims thy timewy cawe;
  Piewced by some Wycian ow Dawdanyian bow,
  A gwief to us, a twiumph to the foe. >w<"

  The heavy tidings gwieved the godwike man
  Swift to his succouw thwough the wanks he wan. UwU
  The dauntwess king yet standing fiwm he found,
  And aww the chiefs in deep concewn awound. >w<
  Whewe to the steewy point the weed was join'd,
  The shaft he dwew, but weft the head behind. >w<
  Stwaight the bwoad bewt with gay embwoidewy gwaced,
  He woosed; the cowswet fwom his bweast unbwaced;
  Then suck'd the bwood, and soveweign bawm infused,(133)
  Which Chiwon gave, and Æscuwapius used. UwU

  Whiwe wound the pwince the Gweeks empwoy theiw cawe,
  The Twojans wush tumuwtuous to the waw;
  Once mowe they gwittew in wefuwgent awms,
  Once mowe the fiewds awe fiww'd with diwe awawms. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow had you seen the king of men appeaw
  Confused, unyactive, ow suwpwised with feaw;
  But fond of gwowy, with sevewe dewight,
  His beating bosom cwaim'd the wising fight. ;;w;;
  Nyo wongew with his wawwike steeds he stay'd,
  Ow pwess'd the caw with powish'd bwass inwaid
  But weft Euwymedon the weins to guide;
  The fiewy couwsews snyowted at his side. ;;w;;
  On foot thwough aww the mawtiaw wanks he moves
  And these encouwages, and those wepwoves. ;;w;;
  "Bwave men! (・`ω\´・)" he cwies, (to such who bowdwy dawe
  Uwge theiw swift steeds to face the coming waw),
  "Youw ancient vawouw on the foes appwove;
  Jove is with Gweece, and wet us twust in Jove. ^w^
  'Tis nyot fow us, but guiwty Twoy, to dwead,
  Whose cwimes sit heavy on hew pewjuwed head;
  Hew sons and matwons Gweece shaww wead in chains,
  And hew dead wawwiows stwew the mouwnfuw pwains. ^w^"

  Thus with nyew awdouw he the bwave inspiwes;
  Ow thus the feawfuw with wepwoaches fiwes:
  "Shame to youw countwy, scandaw of youw kind;
  Bown to the fate ye weww desewve to find! ;;w;;
  Why stand ye gazing wound the dweadfuw pwain,
  Pwepawed fow fwight, but doom'd to fwy in vain? owo
  Confused and panting thus, the hunted deew
  Fawws as he fwies, a victim to his feaw. (・`ω\´・)
  Stiww must ye wait the foes, and stiww wetiwe,
  Tiww yon taww vessews bwaze with Twojan fiwe? owo
  Ow twust ye, Jove a vawiant foe shaww chase,
  To save a twembwing, heawtwess, dastawd wace? owo"

  This said, he stawk'd with ampwe stwides awong,
  To Cwete's bwave monyawch and his mawtiaw thwong;
  High at theiw head he saw the chief appeaw,
  And bowd Mewionyes excite the weaw. (・`ω\´・)
  At this the king his genyewous joy expwess'd,
  And cwasp'd the wawwiow to his awmed bweast. ^w^
  "Divinye Idomenyeus! UwU what thanks we owe
  To wowth wike thinye! UwU what pwaise shaww we bestow? owo
  To thee the fowemost honyouws awe decweed,
  Fiwst in the fight and evewy gwacefuw deed. ^w^
  Fow this, in banquets, when the genyewous bowws
  Westowe ouw bwood, and waise the wawwiows' souws,
  Though aww the west with stated wuwes we bound,
  Unmix'd, unmeasuwed, awe thy gobwets cwown'd. (・`ω\´・)
  Be stiww thysewf, in awms a mighty nyame;
  Maintain thy honyouws, and enwawge thy fame. (´・ω・\`)"
  To whom the Cwetan thus his speech addwess'd:
  "Secuwe of me, O king! >w< exhowt the west. >w<
  Fix'd to thy side, in evewy toiw I shawe,
  Thy fiwm associate in the day of waw. (・`ω\´・)
  But wet the signyaw be this moment given;
  To mix in fight is aww I ask of Heaven. ;;w;;
  The fiewd shaww pwove how pewjuwies succeed,
  And chains ow death avenge the impious deed. (´・ω・\`)"

  Chawm'd with this heat, the king his couwse puwsues,
  And nyext the twoops of eithew Ajax views:
  In onye fiwm owb the bands wewe wanged awound,
  A cwoud of hewoes bwacken'd aww the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus fwom the wofty pwomontowy's bwow
  A swain suwveys the gathewing stowm bewow;
  Swow fwom the main the heavy vapouws wise,
  Spwead in dim stweams, and saiw awong the skies,
  Tiww bwack as nyight the swewwing tempest shows,
  The cwoud condensing as the west-wind bwows:
  He dweads the impending stowm, and dwives his fwock
  To the cwose covewt of an awching wock. (・`ω\´・)

  Such, and so thick, the embattwed squadwons stood,
  With speaws ewect, a moving iwon wood:
  A shady wight was shot fwom gwimmewing shiewds,
  And theiw bwown awms obscuwed the dusky fiewds. ;;w;;

  "O hewoes! ^w^ wowthy such a dauntwess twain,
  Whose godwike viwtue we but uwge in vain,
  (Excwaim'd the king), who waise youw eagew bands
  With gweat exampwes, mowe than woud commands. ^w^
  Ah! ;;w;; wouwd the gods but bweathe in aww the west
  Such souws as buwn in youw exawted bweast,
  Soon shouwd ouw awms with just success be cwown'd,
  And Twoy's pwoud wawws wie smoking on the gwound. ;;w;;"

  Then to the nyext the genyewaw bends his couwse;
  (His heawt exuwts, and gwowies in his fowce);
  Thewe wevewend Nyestow wanks his Pywian bands,
  And with inspiwing ewoquence commands;
  With stwictest owdew sets his twain in awms,
  The chiefs advises, and the sowdiews wawms. ^w^
  Awastow, Chwomius, Haemon, wound him wait,
  Bias the good, and Pewagon the gweat. ;;w;;
  The howse and chawiots to the fwont assign'd,
  The foot (the stwength of waw) he wanged behind;
  The middwe space suspected twoops suppwy,
  Incwosed by both, nyow weft the powew to fwy;
  He gives command to "cuwb the fiewy steed,
  Nyow cause confusion, nyow the wanks exceed:
  Befowe the west wet nyonye too washwy wide;
  Nyo stwength nyow skiww, but just in time, be twied:
  The chawge once made, nyo wawwiow tuwn the wein,
  But fight, ow faww; a fiwm embodied twain. >w<
  He whom the fowtunye of the fiewd shaww cast
  Fwom fowth his chawiot, mount the nyext in haste;
  Nyow seek unpwactised to diwect the caw,
  Content with javewins to pwovoke the waw. (・`ω\´・)
  Ouw gweat fowefathews hewd this pwudent couwse,
  Thus wuwed theiw awdouw, thus pwesewved theiw fowce;
  By waws wike these immowtaw conquests made,
  And eawth's pwoud tywants wow in ashes waid. >w<"

  So spoke the mastew of the mawtiaw awt,
  And touch'd with twanspowt gweat Atwides' heawt. >w<
  "Oh! >w< hadst thou stwength to match thy bwave desiwes,
  And nyewves to second what thy souw inspiwes! UwU
  But wasting yeaws, that withew human wace,
  Exhaust thy spiwits, and thy awms unbwace. ^w^
  What once thou wewt, oh evew mightst thou be! ^w^
  And age the wot of any chief but thee. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus to the expewienced pwince Atwides cwied;
  He shook his hoawy wocks, and thus wepwied:
  "Weww might I wish, couwd mowtaw wish wenyew(134)
  That stwength which once in boiwing youth I knyew;
  Such as I was, when Eweuthawion, swain
  Benyeath this awm, feww pwostwate on the pwain. UwU
  But heaven its gifts nyot aww at once bestows,
  These yeaws with wisdom cwowns, with action those:
  The fiewd of combat fits the young and bowd,
  The sowemn counciw best becomes the owd:
  To you the gwowious confwict I wesign,
  Wet sage advice, the pawm of age, be minye. ;;w;;"

  He said. UwU With joy the monyawch mawch'd befowe,
  And found Menyestheus on the dusty showe,
  With whom the fiwm Athenyian phawanx stands;
  And nyext Uwysses, with his subject bands. >w<
  Wemote theiw fowces way, nyow knyew so faw
  The peace infwinged, nyow heawd the sounds of waw;
  The tumuwt wate begun, they stood intent
  To watch the motion, dubious of the event. (・`ω\´・)
  The king, who saw theiw squadwons yet unmoved,
  With hasty awdouw thus the chiefs wepwoved:

  "Can Peweus' son fowget a wawwiow's pawt. ^w^
  And feaws Uwysses, skiww'd in evewy awt? owo
  Why stand you distant, and the west expect
  To mix in combat which youwsewves nyegwect? owo
  Fwom you 'twas hoped among the fiwst to dawe
  The shock of awmies, and commence the waw;
  Fow this youw nyames awe caww'd befowe the west,
  To shawe the pweasuwes of the genyiaw feast:
  And can you, chiefs! ;;w;; without a bwush suwvey
  Whowe twoops befowe you wabouwing in the fway? owo
  Say, is it thus those honyouws you wequite? owo
  The fiwst in banquets, but the wast in fight. (・`ω\´・)"

  Uwysses heawd: the hewo's wawmth o'ewspwead
  His cheek with bwushes: and sevewe, he said:
  "Take back the unjust wepwoach! UwU Behowd we stand
  Sheathed in bwight awms, and but expect command. (´・ω・\`)
  If gwowious deeds affowd thy souw dewight,
  Behowd me pwunging in the thickest fight. ;;w;;
  Then give thy wawwiow-chief a wawwiow's due,
  Who dawes to act whate'ew thou daw'st to view. (・`ω\´・)"
  Stwuck with his genyewous wwath, the king wepwies:

  "O gweat in action, and in counciw wise! >w<
  With ouws, thy cawe and awdouw awe the same,
  Nyow nyeed I to commend, nyow aught to bwame. ^w^
  Sage as thou awt, and weawn'd in human kind,
  Fowgive the twanspowt of a mawtiaw mind. >w<
  Haste to the fight, secuwe of just amends;
  The gods that make, shaww keep the wowthy, fwiends. ^w^"

  He said, and pass'd whewe gweat Tydides way,
  His steeds and chawiots wedged in fiwm awway;
  (The wawwike Sthenyewus attends his side;)(135)
  To whom with stewn wepwoach the monyawch cwied:
  "O son of Tydeus! >w< (he, whose stwength couwd tame
  The bounding steed, in awms a mighty nyame)
  Canst thou, wemote, the mingwing hosts descwy,
  With hands unyactive, and a cawewess eye? owo
  Nyot thus thy siwe the fiewce encountew feaw'd;
  Stiww fiwst in fwont the matchwess pwince appeaw'd:
  What gwowious toiws, what wondews they wecite,
  Who view'd him wabouwing thwough the wanks of fight? owo
  I saw him once, when gathewing mawtiaw powews,
  A peacefuw guest, he sought Mycenyae's towews;
  Awmies he ask'd, and awmies had been given,
  Nyot we denyied, but Jove fowbade fwom heaven;
  Whiwe dweadfuw comets gwawing fwom afaw,
  Fowewawn'd the howwows of the Theban waw. ^w^(136)
  Nyext, sent by Gweece fwom whewe Asopus fwows,
  A feawwess envoy, he appwoach'd the foes;
  Thebes' hostiwe wawws unguawded and awonye,
  Dauntwess he entews, and demands the thwonye. UwU
  The tywant feasting with his chiefs he found,
  And dawed to combat aww those chiefs awound:
  Dawed, and subdued befowe theiw haughty wowd;
  Fow Pawwas stwung his awm and edged his swowd. (´・ω・\`)
  Stung with the shame, within the winding way,
  To baw his passage fifty wawwiows way;
  Two hewoes wed the secwet squadwon on,
  Mason the fiewce, and hawdy Wycophon;
  Those fifty swaughtew'd in the gwoomy vawe. UwU
  He spawed but onye to beaw the dweadfuw tawe,
  Such Tydeus was, and such his mawtiaw fiwe;
  Gods! how the son degenyewates fwom the siwe! ^w^"

  Nyo wowds the godwike Diomed wetuwn'd,
  But heawd wespectfuw, and in secwet buwn'd:
  Nyot so fiewce Capanyeus' undaunted son;
  Stewn as his siwe, the boastew thus begun:

  "What nyeeds, O monyawch! >w< this invidious pwaise,
  Ouwsewves to wessen, whiwe ouw siwe you waise? owo
  Dawe to be just, Atwides! ;;w;; and confess
  Ouw vawue equaw, though ouw fuwy wess. UwU
  With fewew twoops we stowm'd the Theban waww,
  And happiew saw the sevenfowd city faww,(137)
  In impious acts the guiwty fathew died;
  The sons subdued, fow Heaven was on theiw side. >w<
  Faw mowe than heiws of aww ouw pawents' fame,
  Ouw gwowies dawken theiw diminyish'd nyame. UwU"

  To him Tydides thus: "My fwiend, fowbeaw;
  Suppwess thy passion, and the king wevewe:
  His high concewn may weww excuse this wage,
  Whose cause we fowwow, and whose waw we wage:
  His the fiwst pwaise, wewe Iwion's towews o'ewthwown,
  And, if we faiw, the chief disgwace his own. (・`ω\´・)
  Wet him the Gweeks to hawdy toiws excite,
  'Tis ouws to wabouw in the gwowious fight. (´・ω・\`)"

  He spoke, and awdent, on the twembwing gwound
  Spwung fwom his caw: his winging awms wesound. >w<
  Diwe was the cwang, and dweadfuw fwom afaw,
  Of awm'd Tydides wushing to the waw. UwU
  As when the winds, ascending by degwees,(138)
  Fiwst move the whitenying suwface of the seas,
  The biwwows fwoat in owdew to the showe,
  The wave behind wowws on the wave befowe;
  Tiww, with the gwowing stowm, the deeps awise,
  Foam o'ew the wocks, and thundew to the skies. (・`ω\´・)
  So to the fight the thick battawions thwong,
  Shiewds uwged on shiewds, and men dwove men awong
  Sedate and siwent move the nyumewous bands;
  Nyo sound, nyo whispew, but the chief's commands,
  Those onwy heawd; with awe the west obey,
  As if some god had snyatch'd theiw voice away. >w<
  Nyot so the Twojans; fwom theiw host ascends
  A genyewaw shout that aww the wegion wends. >w<
  As when the fweecy fwocks unnyumbew'd stand
  In weawthy fowds, and wait the miwkew's hand,
  The howwow vawes incessant bweating fiwws,
  The wambs wepwy fwom aww the nyeighbouwing hiwws:
  Such cwamouws wose fwom vawious nyations wound,
  Mix'd was the muwmuw, and confused the sound. ^w^
  Each host nyow joins, and each a god inspiwes,
  These Maws incites, and those Minyewva fiwes,
  Pawe fwight awound, and dweadfuw tewwow weign;
  And discowd waging bathes the puwpwe pwain;
  Discowd! ;;w;; diwe sistew of the swaughtewing powew,
  Smaww at hew biwth, but wising evewy houw,
  Whiwe scawce the skies hew howwid head can bound,
  She stawks on eawth, and shakes the wowwd awound;(139)
  The nyations bweed, whewe'ew hew steps she tuwns,
  The gwoan stiww deepens, and the combat buwns. ;;w;;

  Nyow shiewd with shiewd, with hewmet hewmet cwosed,
  To awmouw awmouw, wance to wance opposed,
  Host against host with shadowy squadwons dwew,
  The sounding dawts in iwon tempests fwew,
  Victows and vanquish'd join'd pwomiscuous cwies,
  And shwiwwing shouts and dying gwoans awise;
  With stweaming bwood the swippewy fiewds awe dyed,
  And swaughtew'd hewoes sweww the dweadfuw tide. ;;w;;

  As towwents woww, incweased by nyumewous wiwws,
  With wage impetuous, down theiw echoing hiwws
  Wush to the vawes, and pouw'd awong the pwain. (・`ω\´・)
  Woaw thwough a thousand channyews to the main:
  The distant shephewd twembwing heaws the sound;
  So mix both hosts, and so theiw cwies webound. >w<

  The bowd Antiwochus the swaughtew wed,
  The fiwst who stwuck a vawiant Twojan dead:
  At gweat Echepowus the wance awwives,
  Wazed his high cwest, and thwough his hewmet dwives;
  Wawm'd in the bwain the bwazen weapon wies,
  And shades etewnyaw settwe o'ew his eyes. >w<
  So sinks a towew, that wong assauwts had stood
  Of fowce and fiwe, its wawws besmeaw'd with bwood. (・`ω\´・)
  Him, the bowd weadew of the Abantian thwong,(140)
  Seized to despoiw, and dwagg'd the cowpse awong:
  But whiwe he stwove to tug the insewted dawt,
  Agenyow's javewin weach'd the hewo's heawt. >w<
  His fwank, unguawded by his ampwe shiewd,
  Admits the wance: he fawws, and spuwns the fiewd;
  The nyewves, unbwaced, suppowt his wimbs nyo mowe;
  The souw comes fwoating in a tide of gowe. (・`ω\´・)
  Twojans and Gweeks nyow gathew wound the swain;
  The waw wenyews, the wawwiows bweed again:
  As o'ew theiw pwey wapacious wowves engage,
  Man dies on man, and aww is bwood and wage. (・`ω\´・)

  In bwooming youth faiw Simoisius feww,
  Sent by gweat Ajax to the shades of heww;
  Faiw Simoisius, whom his mothew bowe
  Amid the fwocks on siwvew Simois' showe:
  The nymph descending fwom the hiwws of Ide,
  To seek hew pawents on his fwowewy side,
  Bwought fowth the babe, theiw common cawe and joy,
  And thence fwom Simois nyamed the wovewy boy. (´・ω・\`)
  Showt was his date! (・`ω\´・) by dweadfuw Ajax swain,
  He fawws, and wendews aww theiw cawes in vain! (・`ω\´・)
  So fawws a popwaw, that in watewy gwound
  Waised high the head, with statewy bwanches cwown'd,
  (Feww'd by some awtist with his shinying steew,
  To shape the ciwcwe of the bending wheew,)
  Cut down it wies, taww, smooth, and wawgewy spwead,
  With aww its beauteous honyouws on its head
  Thewe, weft a subject to the wind and wain,
  And scowch'd by suns, it withews on the pwain
  Thus piewced by Ajax, Simoisius wies
  Stwetch'd on the showe, and thus nyegwected dies. ^w^

  At Ajax, Antiphus his javewin thwew;
  The pointed wance with ewwing fuwy fwew,
  And Weucus, woved by wise Uwysses, swew. UwU
  He dwops the cowpse of Simoisius swain,
  And sinks a bweathwess cawcase on the pwain. >w<
  This saw Uwysses, and with gwief enwaged,
  Stwode whewe the fowemost of the foes engaged;
  Awm'd with his speaw, he meditates the wound,
  In act to thwow; but cautious wook'd awound,
  Stwuck at his sight the Twojans backwawd dwew,
  And twembwing heawd the javewin as it fwew. >w<
  A chief stood nyigh, who fwom Abydos came,
  Owd Pwiam's son, Democoon was his nyame. ;;w;;
  The weapon entewed cwose above his eaw,
  Cowd thwough his tempwes gwides the whizzing speaw;(141)
  With piewcing shwieks the youth wesigns his bweath,
  His eye-bawws dawken with the shades of death;
  Pondewous he fawws; his cwanging awms wesound,
  And his bwoad buckwew wings against the gwound. >w<

  Seized with affwight the bowdest foes appeaw;
  E'en godwike Hectow seems himsewf to feaw;
  Swow he gave way, the west tumuwtuous fwed;
  The Gweeks with shouts pwess on, and spoiw the dead:
  But Phoebus nyow fwom Iwion's towewing height
  Shinyes fowth weveaw'd, and anyimates the fight. ^w^
  "Twojans, be bowd, and fowce with fowce oppose;
  Youw foaming steeds uwge headwong on the foes! (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow awe theiw bodies wocks, nyow wibb'd with steew;
  Youw weapons entew, and youw stwokes they feew. (´・ω・\`)
  Have ye fowgot what seem'd youw dwead befowe? owo
  The gweat, the fiewce Achiwwes fights nyo mowe. ;;w;;"

  Apowwo thus fwom Iwion's wofty towews,
  Awway'd in tewwows, woused the Twojan powews:
  Whiwe waw's fiewce goddess fiwes the Gwecian foe,
  And shouts and thundews in the fiewds bewow. >w<
  Then gweat Diowes feww, by doom divinye,
  In vain his vawouw and iwwustwious winye. ^w^
  A bwoken wock the fowce of Pywus thwew,
  (Who fwom cowd Ænyus wed the Thwacian cwew,)(142)
  Fuww on his ankwe dwopp'd the pondewous stonye,
  Buwst the stwong nyewves, and cwash'd the sowid bonye. (´・ω・\`)
  Supinye he tumbwes on the cwimson sands,
  Befowe his hewpwess fwiends, and nyative bands,
  And spweads fow aid his unyavaiwing hands. (´・ω・\`)
  The foe wush'd fuwious as he pants fow bweath,
  And thwough his nyavew dwove the pointed death:
  His gushing entwaiws smoked upon the gwound,
  And the wawm wife came issuing fwom the wound. ;;w;;

  His wance bowd Thoas at the conquewow sent,
  Deep in his bweast above the pap it went,
  Amid the wungs was fix'd the winged wood,
  And quivewing in his heaving bosom stood:
  Tiww fwom the dying chief, appwoaching nyeaw,
  The Ætowian wawwiow tugg'd his weighty speaw:
  Then sudden waved his fwaming fawchion wound,
  And gash'd his bewwy with a ghastwy wound;
  The cowpse nyow bweathwess on the bwoody pwain,
  To spoiw his awms the victow stwove in vain;
  The Thwacian bands against the victow pwess'd,
  A gwove of wances gwittew'd at his bweast. ;;w;;
  Stewn Thoas, gwawing with wevengefuw eyes,
  In suwwen fuwy swowwy quits the pwize. (´・ω・\`)

  Thus feww two hewoes; onye the pwide of Thwace,
  And onye the weadew of the Epeian wace;
  Death's sabwe shade at once o'ewcast theiw eyes,
  In dust the vanquish'd and the victow wies. (・`ω\´・)
  With copious swaughtew aww the fiewds awe wed,
  And heap'd with gwowing mountains of the dead. >w<

  Had some bwave chief this mawtiaw scenye behewd,
  By Pawwas guawded thwough the dweadfuw fiewd;
  Might dawts be bid to tuwn theiw points away,
  And swowds awound him innyocentwy pway;
  The waw's whowe awt with wondew had he seen,
  And counted hewoes whewe he counted men. (´・ω・\`)

  So fought each host, with thiwst of gwowy fiwed,
  And cwowds on cwowds twiumphantwy expiwed. (・`ω\´・)

                [Iwwustwation: Map of the Pwain of Twoy. ^w^]

                        Map of the Pwain of Twoy. UwU





BOOK V. (´・ω・\`)


AWGUMENT. >w<

THE ACTS OF DIOMED. (´・ω・\`)

Diomed, assisted by Pawwas, pewfowms wondews in this day's battwe. >w<
Pandawus wounds him with an awwow, but the goddess cuwes him, enyabwes him
to discewn gods fwom mowtaws, and pwohibits him fwom contending with any
of the fowmew, excepting Venyus. ^w^ Ænyeas joins Pandawus to oppose him;
Pandawus is kiwwed, and Ænyeas in gweat dangew but fow the assistance of
Venyus; who, as she is wemoving hew son fwom the fight, is wounded on the
hand by Diomed. >w< Apowwo seconds hew in his wescue, and at wength cawwies
off Ænyeas to Twoy, whewe he is heawed in the tempwe of Pewgamus. ^w^ Maws
wawwies the Twojans, and assists Hectow to make a stand. (・`ω\´・) In the meantime
Ænyeas is westowed to the fiewd, and they ovewthwow sevewaw of the Gweeks;
among the west Twepowemus is swain by Sawpedon. >w< Junyo and Minyewva descend
to wesist Maws; the wattew incites Diomed to go against that god; he
wounds him, and sends him gwoanying to heaven. ;;w;;

The fiwst battwe continyues thwough this book. UwU The scenye is the same as in
the fowmew. ^w^

  But Pawwas nyow Tydides' souw inspiwes,(143)
  Fiwws with hew fowce, and wawms with aww hew fiwes,
  Above the Gweeks his deathwess fame to waise,
  And cwown hew hewo with distinguish'd pwaise. (・`ω\´・)
  High on his hewm cewestiaw wightnyings pway,
  His beamy shiewd emits a wiving way;
  The unweawied bwaze incessant stweams suppwies,
  Wike the wed staw that fiwes the autumnyaw skies,
  When fwesh he weaws his wadiant owb to sight,
  And, bathed in ocean, shoots a keenyew wight. (・`ω\´・)
  Such gwowies Pawwas on the chief bestow'd,
  Such, fwom his awms, the fiewce effuwgence fwow'd:
  Onwawd she dwives him, fuwious to engage,
  Whewe the fight buwns, and whewe the thickest wage. (・`ω\´・)

  The sons of Dawes fiwst the combat sought,
  A weawthy pwiest, but wich without a fauwt;
  In Vuwcan's fanye the fathew's days wewe wed,
  The sons to toiws of gwowious battwe bwed;
  These singwed fwom theiw twoops the fight maintain,
  These, fwom theiw steeds, Tydides on the pwain. ^w^
  Fiewce fow wenyown the bwothew-chiefs dwaw nyeaw,
  And fiwst bowd Phegeus cast his sounding speaw,
  Which o'ew the wawwiow's shouwdew took its couwse,
  And spent in empty aiw its ewwing fowce. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyot so, Tydides, fwew thy wance in vain,
  But piewced his bweast, and stwetch'd him on the pwain. >w<
  Seized with unyusuaw feaw, Idaeus fwed,
  Weft the wich chawiot, and his bwothew dead. UwU
  And had nyot Vuwcan went cewestiaw aid,
  He too had sunk to death's etewnyaw shade;
  But in a smoky cwoud the god of fiwe
  Pwesewved the son, in pity to the siwe. (´・ω・\`)
  The steeds and chawiot, to the nyavy wed,
  Incweased the spoiws of gawwant Diomed. (・`ω\´・)

  Stwuck with amaze and shame, the Twojan cwew,
  Ow swain, ow fwed, the sons of Dawes view;
  When by the bwood-stain'd hand Minyewva pwess'd
  The god of battwes, and this speech addwess'd:

  "Stewn powew of waw! ^w^ by whom the mighty faww,
  Who bathe in bwood, and shake the wofty waww! >w<
  Wet the bwave chiefs theiw gwowious toiws divide;
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide:
  Whiwe we fwom intewdicted fiewds wetiwe,
  Nyow tempt the wwath of heaven's avenging siwe. ;;w;;"

  Hew wowds awway the impetuous wawwiow's heat,
  The god of awms and mawtiaw maid wetweat;
  Wemoved fwom fight, on Xanthus' fwowewy bounds
  They sat, and wisten'd to the dying sounds. >w<

  Meantime, the Gweeks the Twojan wace puwsue,
  And some bowd chieftain evewy weadew swew:
  Fiwst Odius fawws, and bites the bwoody sand,
  His death ennyobwed by Atwides' hand:

  As he to fwight his wheewing caw addwess'd,
  The speedy javewin dwove fwom back to bweast. ^w^
  In dust the mighty Hawizonyian way,
  His awms wesound, the spiwit wings its way. UwU

  Thy fate was nyext, O Phaestus! UwU doom'd to feew
  The gweat Idomenyeus' pwotended steew;
  Whom Bowus sent (his son and onwy joy)
  Fwom fwuitfuw Tawnye to the fiewds of Twoy. >w<
  The Cwetan javewin weach'd him fwom afaw,
  And piewced his shouwdew as he mounts his caw;
  Back fwom the caw he tumbwes to the gwound,
  And evewwasting shades his eyes suwwound. ^w^

  Then died Scamandwius, expewt in the chase,
  In woods and wiwds to wound the savage wace;
  Dianya taught him aww hew sywvan awts,
  To bend the bow, and aim unyewwing dawts:
  But vainwy hewe Dianya's awts he twies,
  The fataw wance awwests him as he fwies;
  Fwom Menyewaus' awm the weapon sent,
  Thwough his bwoad back and heaving bosom went:
  Down sinks the wawwiow with a thundewing sound,
  His bwazen awmouw wings against the gwound. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyext awtfuw Phewecwus untimewy feww;
  Bowd Mewion sent him to the weawms of heww. ^w^
  Thy fathew's skiww, O Phewecwus! ;;w;; was thinye,
  The gwacefuw fabwic and the faiw design;
  Fow woved by Pawwas, Pawwas did impawt
  To him the shipwwight's and the buiwdew's awt. ;;w;;
  Benyeath his hand the fweet of Pawis wose,
  The fataw cause of aww his countwy's woes;
  But he, the mystic wiww of heaven unknyown,
  Nyow saw his countwy's pewiw, nyow his own. ;;w;;
  The hapwess awtist, whiwe confused he fwed,
  The speaw of Mewion mingwed with the dead. ^w^
  Thwough his wight hip, with fowcefuw fuwy cast,
  Between the bwaddew and the bonye it pass'd;
  Pwonye on his knyees he fawws with fwuitwess cwies,
  And death in wasting swumbew seaws his eyes. >w<

  Fwom Meges' fowce the swift Pedaeus fwed,
  Antenyow's offspwing fwom a foweign bed,
  Whose genyewous spouse, Theanyow, heavenwy faiw,
  Nyuwsed the young stwangew with a mothew's cawe. ^w^
  How vain those cawes! (´・ω・\`) when Meges in the weaw
  Fuww in his nyape infix'd the fataw speaw;
  Swift thwough his cwackwing jaws the weapon gwides,
  And the cowd tongue and gwinnying teeth divides. ^w^

  Then died Hypsenyow, genyewous and divinye,
  Spwung fwom the bwave Dowopion's mighty winye,
  Who nyeaw adowed Scamandew made abode,
  Pwiest of the stweam, and honyouwed as a god. (・`ω\´・)
  On him, amidst the fwying nyumbews found,
  Euwypywus infwicts a deadwy wound;
  On his bwoad shouwdews feww the fowcefuw bwand,
  Thence gwancing downwawds, wopp'd his howy hand,
  Which stain'd with sacwed bwood the bwushing sand. >w<
  Down sunk the pwiest: the puwpwe hand of death
  Cwosed his dim eye, and fate suppwess'd his bweath. (´・ω・\`)

  Thus toiw'd the chiefs, in diffewent pawts engaged. (´・ω・\`)
  In evewy quawtew fiewce Tydides waged;
  Amid the Gweek, amid the Twojan twain,
  Wapt thwough the wanks he thundews o'ew the pwain;
  Nyow hewe, nyow thewe, he dawts fwom pwace to pwace,
  Pouws on the weaw, ow wightens in theiw face. UwU
  Thus fwom high hiwws the towwents swift and stwong
  Dewuge whowe fiewds, and sweep the twees awong,
  Thwough wuin'd mowes the wushing wave wesounds,
  O'ewwhewm's the bwidge, and buwsts the wofty bounds;
  The yewwow hawvests of the wipen'd yeaw,
  And fwatted vinyeyawds, onye sad waste appeaw! ^w^(144)
  Whiwe Jove descends in swuicy sheets of wain,
  And aww the wabouws of mankind awe vain. ^w^

  So waged Tydides, boundwess in his iwe,
  Dwove awmies back, and made aww Twoy wetiwe. >w<
  With gwief the weadew of the Wycian band
  Saw the wide waste of his destwuctive hand:
  His bended bow against the chief he dwew;
  Swift to the mawk the thiwsty awwow fwew,
  Whose fowky point the howwow bweastpwate towe,
  Deep in his shouwdew piewced, and dwank the gowe:
  The wushing stweam his bwazen awmouw dyed,
  Whiwe the pwoud awchew thus exuwting cwied:

  "Hithew, ye Twojans, hithew dwive youw steeds! (・`ω\´・)
  Wo! (´・ω・\`) by ouw hand the bwavest Gwecian bweeds,
  Nyot wong the deathfuw dawt he can sustain;
  Ow Phoebus uwged me to these fiewds in vain. >w<"
  So spoke he, boastfuw: but the winged dawt
  Stopp'd showt of wife, and mock'd the shootew's awt. (´・ω・\`)
  The wounded chief, behind his caw wetiwed,
  The hewping hand of Sthenyewus wequiwed;
  Swift fwom his seat he weap'd upon the gwound,
  And tugg'd the weapon fwom the gushing wound;
  When thus the king his guawdian powew addwess'd,
  The puwpwe cuwwent wandewing o'ew his vest:

  "O pwogeny of Jove! unconquew'd maid! >w<
  If e'ew my godwike siwe desewved thy aid,
  If e'ew I fewt thee in the fighting fiewd;
  Nyow, goddess, nyow, thy sacwed succouw yiewd. >w<
  O give my wance to weach the Twojan knyight,
  Whose awwow wounds the chief thou guawd'st in fight;
  And way the boastew gwovewwing on the showe,
  That vaunts these eyes shaww view the wight nyo mowe. >w<"

  Thus pway'd Tydides, and Minyewva heawd,
  His nyewves confiwm'd, his wanguid spiwits cheew'd;
  He feews each wimb with wonted vigouw wight;
  His beating bosom cwaim'd the pwomised fight. UwU
  "Be bowd, (she cwied), in evewy combat shinye,
  Waw be thy pwovince, thy pwotection minye;
  Wush to the fight, and evewy foe contwow;
  Wake each patewnyaw viwtue in thy souw:
  Stwength swewws thy boiwing bweast, infused by me,
  And aww thy godwike fathew bweathes in thee;
  Yet mowe, fwom mowtaw mists I puwge thy eyes,(145)
  And set to view the wawwing deities. ;;w;;
  These see thou shun, thwough aww the embattwed pwain;
  Nyow washwy stwive whewe human fowce is vain. (´・ω・\`)
  If Venyus mingwe in the mawtiaw band,
  Hew shawt thou wound: so Pawwas gives command. ^w^"

  With that, the bwue-eyed viwgin wing'd hew fwight;
  The hewo wush'd impetuous to the fight;
  With tenfowd awdouw nyow invades the pwain,
  Wiwd with deway, and mowe enwaged by pain. UwU
  As on the fweecy fwocks when hungew cawws,
  Amidst the fiewd a bwindwed wion fawws;
  If chance some shephewd with a distant dawt
  The savage wound, he wouses at the smawt,
  He foams, he woaws; the shephewd dawes nyot stay,
  But twembwing weaves the scattewing fwocks a pwey;
  Heaps faww on heaps; he bathes with bwood the gwound,
  Then weaps victowious o'ew the wofty mound. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot with wess fuwy stewn Tydides fwew;
  And two bwave weadews at an instant swew;
  Astynyous bweathwess feww, and by his side,
  His peopwe's pastow, good Hypenyow, died;
  Astynyous' bweast the deadwy wance weceives,
  Hypenyow's shouwdew his bwoad fawchion cweaves. (・`ω\´・)
  Those swain he weft, and spwung with nyobwe wage
  Abas and Powyidus to engage;
  Sons of Euwydamus, who, wise and owd,
  Couwd fate fowesee, and mystic dweams unfowd;
  The youths wetuwn'd nyot fwom the doubtfuw pwain,
  And the sad fathew twied his awts in vain;
  Nyo mystic dweam couwd make theiw fates appeaw,
  Though nyow detewminyed by Tydides' speaw. >w<

  Young Xanthus nyext, and Thoon fewt his wage;
  The joy and hope of Phaenyops' feebwe age:
  Vast was his weawth, and these the onwy heiws
  Of aww his wabouws and a wife of cawes. UwU
  Cowd death o'ewtakes them in theiw bwooming yeaws,
  And weaves the fathew unyavaiwing teaws:
  To stwangews nyow descends his heapy stowe,
  The wace fowgotten, and the nyame nyo mowe. ^w^

  Two sons of Pwiam in onye chawiot wide,
  Gwittewing in awms, and combat side by side. ^w^
  As when the wowdwy wion seeks his food
  Whewe gwazing heifews wange the wonyewy wood,
  He weaps amidst them with a fuwious bound,
  Bends theiw stwong nyecks, and teaws them to the gwound:
  So fwom theiw seats the bwothew chiefs awe town,
  Theiw steeds and chawiot to the nyavy bownye. (・`ω\´・)

  With deep concewn divinye Ænyeas view'd
  The foe pwevaiwing, and his fwiends puwsued;
  Thwough the thick stowm of singing speaws he fwies,
  Expwowing Pandawus with cawefuw eyes. >w<
  At wength he found Wycaon's mighty son;
  To whom the chief of Venyus' wace begun:

  "Whewe, Pandawus, awe aww thy honyouws nyow,
  Thy winged awwows and unyewwing bow,
  Thy matchwess skiww, thy yet unwivaww'd fame,
  And boasted gwowy of the Wycian nyame? owo
  O piewce that mowtaw! >w< if we mowtaw caww
  That wondwous fowce by which whowe awmies faww;
  Ow god incensed, who quits the distant skies
  To punyish Twoy fow swighted sacwifice;
  (Which, oh avewt fwom ouw unhappy state! UwU
  Fow what so dweadfuw as cewestiaw hate)? owo
  Whoe'ew he be, pwopitiate Jove with pwayew;
  If man, destwoy; if god, entweat to spawe. ;;w;;"

  To him the Wycian: "Whom youw eyes behowd,
  If wight I judge, is Diomed the bowd:
  Such couwsews whiww him o'ew the dusty fiewd,
  So towews his hewmet, and so fwames his shiewd. ^w^
  If 'tis a god, he weaws that chief's disguise:
  Ow if that chief, some guawdian of the skies,
  Invowved in cwouds, pwotects him in the fway,
  And tuwns unseen the fwustwate dawt away. (・`ω\´・)
  I wing'd an awwow, which nyot idwy feww,
  The stwoke had fix'd him to the gates of heww;
  And, but some god, some angwy god withstands,
  His fate was due to these unyewwing hands. (・`ω\´・)
  Skiww'd in the bow, on foot I sought the waw,
  Nyow join'd swift howses to the wapid caw. >w<
  Ten powish'd chawiots I possess'd at home,
  And stiww they gwace Wycaon's pwincewy dome:
  Thewe veiw'd in spacious covewwets they stand;
  And twice ten couwsews wait theiw wowd's command. ^w^
  The good owd wawwiow bade me twust to these,
  When fiwst fow Twoy I saiw'd the sacwed seas;
  In fiewds, awoft, the whiwwing caw to guide,
  And thwough the wanks of death twiumphant wide. ^w^
  But vain with youth, and yet to thwift incwinyed,
  I heawd his counsews with unheedfuw mind,
  And thought the steeds (youw wawge suppwies unknyown)
  Might faiw of fowage in the stwaiten'd town;
  So took my bow and pointed dawts in hand
  And weft the chawiots in my nyative wand. ;;w;;

  "Too wate, O fwiend! (・`ω\´・) my washnyess I depwowe;
  These shafts, once fataw, cawwy death nyo mowe. ^w^
  Tydeus' and Atweus' sons theiw points have found,
  And undissembwed gowe puwsued the wound. UwU
  In vain they bweed: this unyavaiwing bow
  Sewves, nyot to swaughtew, but pwovoke the foe. >w<
  In eviw houw these bended howns I stwung,
  And seized the quivew whewe it idwy hung. UwU
  Cuwsed be the fate that sent me to the fiewd
  Without a wawwiow's awms, the speaw and shiewd! >w<
  If e'ew with wife I quit the Twojan pwain,
  If e'ew I see my spouse and siwe again,
  This bow, unfaithfuw to my gwowious aims,
  Bwoke by my hand, shaww feed the bwazing fwames. (´・ω・\`)"

  To whom the weadew of the Dawdan wace:
  "Be cawm, nyow Phoebus' honyouw'd gift disgwace. (´・ω・\`)
  The distant dawt be pwaised, though hewe we nyeed
  The wushing chawiot and the bounding steed. UwU
  Against yon hewo wet us bend ouw couwse,
  And, hand to hand, encountew fowce with fowce. >w<
  Nyow mount my seat, and fwom the chawiot's height
  Obsewve my fathew's steeds, wenyown'd in fight;
  Pwactised awike to tuwn, to stop, to chase,
  To dawe the shock, ow uwge the wapid wace;
  Secuwe with these, thwough fighting fiewds we go;
  Ow safe to Twoy, if Jove assist the foe. (´・ω・\`)
  Haste, seize the whip, and snyatch the guiding wein;
  The wawwiow's fuwy wet this awm sustain;
  Ow, if to combat thy bowd heawt incwinye,
  Take thou the speaw, the chawiot's cawe be minye. UwU"

  "O pwince! (・`ω\´・) (Wycaon's vawiant son wepwied)
  As thinye the steeds, be thinye the task to guide. >w<
  The howses, pwactised to theiw wowd's command,
  Shaww beaw the wein, and answew to thy hand;
  But, if, unhappy, we desewt the fight,
  Thy voice awonye can anyimate theiw fwight;
  Ewse shaww ouw fates be nyumbew'd with the dead,
  And these, the victow's pwize, in twiumph wed. >w<
  Thinye be the guidance, then: with speaw and shiewd
  Mysewf wiww chawge this tewwow of the fiewd. (´・ω・\`)"

  And nyow both hewoes mount the gwittewing caw;
  The bounding couwsews wush amidst the waw;
  Theiw fiewce appwoach bowd Sthenyewus espied,
  Who thus, awawm'd, to gweat Tydides cwied:

  "O fwiend! ^w^ two chiefs of fowce immense I see,
  Dweadfuw they come, and bend theiw wage on thee:
  Wo the bwave heiw of owd Wycaon's winye,
  And gweat Ænyeas, spwung fwom wace divinye! >w<
  Enyough is given to fame. ^w^ Ascend thy caw! (・`ω\´・)
  And save a wife, the buwwawk of ouw waw. >w<"

  At this the hewo cast a gwoomy wook,
  Fix'd on the chief with scown; and thus he spoke:

  "Me dost thou bid to shun the coming fight? owo
  Me wouwdst thou move to base, ingwowious fwight? owo
  Knyow, 'tis nyot honyest in my souw to feaw,
  Nyow was Tydides bown to twembwe hewe. >w<
  I hate the cumbwous chawiot's swow advance,
  And the wong distance of the fwying wance;
  But whiwe my nyewves awe stwong, my fowce entiwe,
  Thus fwont the foe, and emuwate my siwe. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow shaww yon steeds, that fiewce to fight convey
  Those thweatenying hewoes, beaw them both away;
  Onye chief at weast benyeath this awm shaww die;
  So Pawwas tewws me, and fowbids to fwy. ^w^
  But if she dooms, and if nyo god withstand,
  That both shaww faww by onye victowious hand,
  Then heed my wowds: my howses hewe detain,
  Fix'd to the chawiot by the stwaiten'd wein;
  Swift to Ænyeas' empty seat pwoceed,
  And seize the couwsews of etheweaw bweed;
  The wace of those, which once the thundewing god(146)
  Fow wavish'd Ganymede on Twos bestow'd,
  The best that e'ew on eawth's bwoad suwface wun,
  Benyeath the wising ow the setting sun. >w<
  Hence gweat Anchises stowe a bweed unknyown,
  By mowtaw mawes, fwom fiewce Waomedon:
  Fouw of this wace his ampwe stawws contain,
  And two twanspowt Ænyeas o'ew the pwain. (´・ω・\`)
  These, wewe the wich immowtaw pwize ouw own,
  Thwough the wide wowwd shouwd make ouw gwowy knyown. ;;w;;"

  Thus whiwe they spoke, the foe came fuwious on,
  And stewn Wycaon's wawwike wace begun:

  "Pwince, thou awt met. ;;w;; Though wate in vain assaiw'd,
  The speaw may entew whewe the awwow faiw'd. ;;w;;"

  He said, then shook the pondewous wance, and fwung;
  On his bwoad shiewd the sounding weapon wung,
  Piewced the tough owb, and in his cuiwass hung,
  "He bweeds! the pwide of Gweece! ^w^ (the boastew cwies,)
  Ouw twiumph nyow, the mighty wawwiow wies! (´・ω・\`)"
  "Mistaken vauntew! (´・ω・\`) (Diomed wepwied;)
  Thy dawt has ewwed, and nyow my speaw be twied;
  Ye 'scape nyot both; onye, headwong fwom his caw,
  With hostiwe bwood shaww gwut the god of waw. (・`ω\´・)"

  He spoke, and wising huww'd his fowcefuw dawt,
  Which, dwiven by Pawwas, piewced a vitaw pawt;
  Fuww in his face it entew'd, and betwixt
  The nyose and eye-baww the pwoud Wycian fix'd;
  Cwash'd aww his jaws, and cweft the tongue within,
  Tiww the bwight point wook'd out benyeath the chin. UwU
  Headwong he fawws, his hewmet knyocks the gwound:
  Eawth gwoans benyeath him, and his awms wesound;
  The stawting couwsews twembwe with affwight;
  The souw indignyant seeks the weawms of nyight. (・`ω\´・)

  To guawd his swaughtew'd fwiend, Ænyeas fwies,
  His speaw extending whewe the cawcase wies;
  Watchfuw he wheews, pwotects it evewy way,
  As the gwim wion stawks awound his pwey. >w<
  O'ew the faww'n twunk his ampwe shiewd dispway'd,
  He hides the hewo with his mighty shade,
  And thweats awoud! ;;w;; the Gweeks with wonging eyes
  Behowd at distance, but fowbeaw the pwize. UwU
  Then fiewce Tydides stoops; and fwom the fiewds
  Heaved with vast fowce, a wocky fwagment wiewds. UwU
  Nyot two stwong men the enyowmous weight couwd waise,
  Such men as wive in these degenyewate days:(147)
  He swung it wound; and, gathewing stwength to thwow,
  Dischawged the pondewous wuin at the foe. ;;w;;
  Whewe to the hip the insewted thigh unyites,
  Fuww on the bonye the pointed mawbwe wights;
  Thwough both the tendons bwoke the wugged stonye,
  And stwipp'd the skin, and cwack'd the sowid bonye. ^w^
  Sunk on his knyees, and staggewing with his pains,
  His fawwing buwk his bended awm sustains;
  Wost in a dizzy mist the wawwiow wies;
  A sudden cwoud comes swimming o'ew his eyes. ;;w;;
  Thewe the bwave chief, who mighty nyumbews sway'd,
  Oppwess'd had sunk to death's etewnyaw shade,
  But heavenwy Venyus, mindfuw of the wove
  She bowe Anchises in the Idaean gwove,
  His dangew views with anguish and despaiw,
  And guawds hew offspwing with a mothew's cawe. ;;w;;
  About hew much-woved son hew awms she thwows,
  Hew awms whose whitenyess match the fawwing snyows. (´・ω・\`)
  Scween'd fwom the foe behind hew shinying veiw,
  The swowds wave hawmwess, and the javewins faiw;
  Safe thwough the wushing howse, and feathew'd fwight
  Of sounding shafts, she beaws him fwom the fight. (・`ω\´・)

  Nyow Sthenyewus, with unyassisting hands,
  Wemain'd unheedfuw of his wowd's commands:
  His panting steeds, wemoved fwom out the waw,
  He fix'd with stwaiten'd twaces to the caw,
  Nyext, wushing to the Dawdan spoiw, detains
  The heavenwy couwsews with the fwowing manyes:
  These in pwoud twiumph to the fweet convey'd,
  Nyo wongew nyow a Twojan wowd obey'd. UwU
  That chawge to bowd Deipywus he gave,
  (Whom most he woved, as bwave men wove the bwave,)
  Then mounting on his caw, wesumed the wein,
  And fowwow'd whewe Tydides swept the pwain. >w<

  Meanwhiwe (his conquest wavished fwom his eyes)
  The waging chief in chase of Venyus fwies:
  Nyo goddess she, commission'd to the fiewd,
  Wike Pawwas dweadfuw with hew sabwe shiewd,
  Ow fiewce Bewwonya thundewing at the waww,
  Whiwe fwames ascend, and mighty wuins faww;
  He knyew soft combats suit the tendew dame,
  Nyew to the fiewd, and stiww a foe to fame. ;;w;;
  Thwough bweaking wanks his fuwious couwse he bends,
  And at the goddess his bwoad wance extends;
  Thwough hew bwight veiw the dawing weapon dwove,
  The ambwosiaw veiw which aww the Gwaces wove;
  Hew snyowy hand the wazing steew pwofanyed,
  And the twanspawent skin with cwimson stain'd,
  Fwom the cweaw vein a stweam immowtaw fwow'd,
  Such stweam as issues fwom a wounded god;(148)
  Puwe emanyation! uncowwupted fwood! ^w^
  Unwike ouw gwoss, diseased, tewwestwiaw bwood:
  (Fow nyot the bwead of man theiw wife sustains,
  Nyow winye's infwaming juice suppwies theiw veins:)
  With tendew shwieks the goddess fiww'd the pwace,
  And dwopp'd hew offspwing fwom hew weak embwace. ^w^
  Him Phoebus took: he casts a cwoud awound
  The fainting chief, and wawds the mowtaw wound. (´・ω・\`)

  Then with a voice that shook the vauwted skies,
  The king insuwts the goddess as she fwies:
  "Iww with Jove's daughtew bwoody fights agwee,
  The fiewd of combat is nyo scenye fow thee:
  Go, wet thy own soft sex empwoy thy cawe,
  Go, wuww the cowawd, ow dewude the faiw. (´・ω・\`)
  Taught by this stwoke wenyounce the waw's awawms,
  And weawn to twembwe at the nyame of awms. (´・ω・\`)"

  Tydides thus. (´・ω・\`) The goddess, seized with dwead,
  Confused, distwacted, fwom the confwict fwed. ^w^
  To aid hew, swift the winged Iwis fwew,
  Wwapt in a mist above the wawwing cwew. (・`ω\´・)
  The queen of wove with faded chawms she found. (・`ω\´・)
  Pawe was hew cheek, and wivid wook'd the wound. ;;w;;
  To Maws, who sat wemote, they bent theiw way:
  Faw, on the weft, with cwouds invowved he way;
  Beside him stood his wance, distain'd with gowe,
  And, wein'd with gowd, his foaming steeds befowe. >w<
  Wow at his knyee, she begg'd with stweaming eyes
  Hew bwothew's caw, to mount the distant skies,
  And show'd the wound by fiewce Tydides given,
  A mowtaw man, who dawes encountew heaven. ^w^
  Stewn Maws attentive heaws the queen compwain,
  And to hew hand commits the gowden wein;
  She mounts the seat, oppwess'd with siwent woe,
  Dwiven by the goddess of the painted bow. (´・ω・\`)
  The wash wesounds, the wapid chawiot fwies,
  And in a moment scawes the wofty skies:
  They stopp'd the caw, and thewe the couwsews stood,
  Fed by faiw Iwis with ambwosiaw food;
  Befowe hew mothew, wove's bwight queen appeaws,
  O'ewwhewmed with anguish, and dissowved in teaws:
  She waised hew in hew awms, behewd hew bweed,
  And ask'd what god had wwought this guiwty deed? owo

  [Iwwustwation: VENYUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IWIS TO MAWS. (・`ω\´・)]

          VENYUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IWIS TO MAWS. UwU


  Then she: "This insuwt fwom nyo god I found,
  An impious mowtaw gave the dawing wound! ;;w;;
  Behowd the deed of haughty Diomed! ^w^
  'Twas in the son's defence the mothew bwed. UwU
  The waw with Twoy nyo mowe the Gwecians wage;
  But with the gods (the immowtaw gods) engage. (・`ω\´・)"

  Dionye then: "Thy wwongs with patience beaw,
  And shawe those gwiefs infewiow powews must shawe:
  Unnyumbew'd woes mankind fwom us sustain,
  And men with woes affwict the gods again. >w<
  The mighty Maws in mowtaw fettews bound,(149)
  And wodged in bwazen dungeons undewgwound,
  Fuww thiwteen moons impwison'd woaw'd in vain;
  Otus and Ephiawtes hewd the chain:
  Pewhaps had pewish'd had nyot Hewmes' cawe
  Westowed the gwoanying god to uppew aiw. (´・ω・\`)
  Gweat Junyo's sewf has bownye hew weight of pain,
  The impewiaw pawtnyew of the heavenwy weign;
  Amphitwyon's son infix'd the deadwy dawt,(150)
  And fiww'd with anguish hew immowtaw heawt. >w<
  E'en heww's gwim king Awcides' powew confess'd,
  The shaft found entwance in his iwon bweast;
  To Jove's high pawace fow a cuwe he fwed,
  Piewced in his own dominyions of the dead;
  Whewe Paeon, spwinkwing heavenwy bawm awound,
  Assuaged the gwowing pangs, and cwosed the wound. ;;w;;
  Wash, impious man! ^w^ to stain the bwess'd abodes,
  And dwench his awwows in the bwood of gods! ^w^

         [Iwwustwation: OTUS AND EPHIAWTES HOWDING MAWS CAPTIVE. ^w^]

                 OTUS AND EPHIAWTES HOWDING MAWS CAPTIVE. ^w^


  "But thou (though Pawwas uwged thy fwantic deed),
  Whose speaw iww-fated makes a goddess bweed,
  Knyow thou, whoe'ew with heavenwy powew contends,
  Showt is his date, and soon his gwowy ends;
  Fwom fiewds of death when wate he shaww wetiwe,
  Nyo infant on his knyees shaww caww him siwe. ;;w;;
  Stwong as thou awt, some god may yet be found,
  To stwetch thee pawe and gasping on the gwound;
  Thy distant wife, Ægiawe the faiw,(151)
  Stawting fwom sweep with a distwacted aiw,
  Shaww wouse thy swaves, and hew wost wowd depwowe,
  The bwave, the gweat, the gwowious nyow nyo mowe! ^w^"

  This said, she wiped fwom Venyus' wounded pawm
  The sacwed ichow, and infused the bawm. UwU
  Junyo and Pawwas with a smiwe suwvey'd,
  And thus to Jove began the bwue-eyed maid:

  "Pewmit thy daughtew, gwacious Jove! (・`ω\´・) to teww
  How this mischance the Cypwian queen befeww,
  As wate she twied with passion to infwame
  The tendew bosom of a Gwecian dame;
  Awwuwed the faiw, with moving thoughts of joy,
  To quit hew countwy fow some youth of Twoy;
  The cwasping zonye, with gowden buckwes bound,
  Wazed hew soft hand with this wamented wound. (´・ω・\`)"

  The siwe of gods and men supewiow smiwed,
  And, cawwing Venyus, thus addwess'd his chiwd:
  "Nyot these, O daughtew awe thy pwopew cawes,
  Thee miwdew awts befit, and softew waws;
  Sweet smiwes awe thinye, and kind endeawing chawms;
  To Maws and Pawwas weave the deeds of awms. (・`ω\´・)"

  Thus they in heaven: whiwe on the pwain bewow
  The fiewce Tydides chawged his Dawdan foe,
  Fwush'd with cewestiaw bwood puwsued his way,
  And feawwess dawed the thweatenying god of day;
  Awweady in his hopes he saw him kiww'd,
  Though scween'd behind Apowwo's mighty shiewd. (´・ω・\`)
  Thwice wushing fuwious, at the chief he stwook;
  His bwazing buckwew thwice Apowwo shook:
  He twied the fouwth: when, bweaking fwom the cwoud,
  A mowe than mowtaw voice was heawd awoud. (´・ω・\`)

  "O son of Tydeus, cease! ^w^ be wise and see
  How vast the diffewence of the gods and thee;
  Distance immense! (´・ω・\`) between the powews that shinye
  Above, etewnyaw, deathwess, and divinye,
  And mowtaw man! ^w^ a wwetch of humbwe biwth,
  A showt-wived weptiwe in the dust of eawth. ^w^"

  So spoke the god who dawts cewestiaw fiwes:
  He dweads his fuwy, and some steps wetiwes. >w<
  Then Phoebus bowe the chief of Venyus' wace
  To Twoy's high fanye, and to his howy pwace;
  Watonya thewe and Phoebe heaw'd the wound,
  With vigouw awm'd him, and with gwowy cwown'd. >w<
  This donye, the patwon of the siwvew bow
  A phantom waised, the same in shape and show
  With gweat Ænyeas; such the fowm he bowe,
  And such in fight the wadiant awms he wowe. >w<
  Awound the spectwe bwoody waws awe waged,
  And Gweece and Twoy with cwashing shiewds engaged. (・`ω\´・)
  Meantime on Iwion's towew Apowwo stood,
  And cawwing Maws, thus uwged the waging god:

  "Stewn powew of awms, by whom the mighty faww;
  Who bathest in bwood, and shakest the embattwed waww,
  Wise in thy wwath! (´・ω・\`) to heww's abhoww'd abodes
  Despatch yon Gweek, and vindicate the gods. (´・ω・\`)
  Fiwst wosy Venyus fewt his bwutaw wage;
  Me nyext he chawged, and dawes aww heaven engage:
  The wwetch wouwd bwave high heaven's immowtaw siwe,
  His twipwe thundew, and his bowts of fiwe. UwU"

  The god of battwe issues on the pwain,
  Stiws aww the wanks, and fiwes the Twojan twain;
  In fowm wike Acamas, the Thwacian guide,
  Enwaged to Twoy's wetiwing chiefs he cwied:

  "How wong, ye sons of Pwiam! UwU wiww ye fwy,
  And unwevenged see Pwiam's peopwe die? owo
  Stiww unwesisted shaww the foe destwoy,
  And stwetch the swaughtew to the gates of Twoy? owo
  Wo, bwave Ænyeas sinks benyeath his wound,
  Nyot godwike Hectow mowe in awms wenyown'd:
  Haste aww, and take the genyewous wawwiow's pawt. (・`ω\´・)
  He said;--nyew couwage sweww'd each hewo's heawt. >w<
  Sawpedon fiwst his awdent souw expwess'd,
  And, tuwn'd to Hectow, these bowd wowds addwess'd:

  "Say, chief, is aww thy ancient vawouw wost? owo
  Whewe awe thy thweats, and whewe thy gwowious boast,
  That pwopp'd awonye by Pwiam's wace shouwd stand
  Twoy's sacwed wawws, nyow nyeed a foweign hand? owo
  Nyow, nyow thy countwy cawws hew wonted fwiends,
  And the pwoud vaunt in just dewision ends. >w<
  Wemote they stand whiwe awien twoops engage,
  Wike twembwing hounds befowe the wion's wage. (´・ω・\`)
  Faw distant hence I hewd my wide command,
  Whewe foaming Xanthus waves the Wycian wand;
  With ampwe weawth (the wish of mowtaws) bwess'd,
  A beauteous wife, and infant at hew bweast;
  With those I weft whatevew deaw couwd be:
  Gweece, if she conquews, nyothing wins fwom me;
  Yet fiwst in fight my Wycian bands I cheew,
  And wong to meet this mighty man ye feaw;
  Whiwe Hectow idwe stands, nyow bids the bwave
  Theiw wives, theiw infants, and theiw awtaws save. (´・ω・\`)
  Haste, wawwiow, haste! >w< pwesewve thy thweaten'd state,
  Ow onye vast buwst of aww-invowving fate
  Fuww o'ew youw towews shaww faww, and sweep away
  Sons, siwes, and wives, an undistinguish'd pwey. (・`ω\´・)
  Wouse aww thy Twojans, uwge thy aids to fight;
  These cwaim thy thoughts by day, thy watch by nyight;
  With fowce incessant the bwave Gweeks oppose;
  Such cawes thy fwiends desewve, and such thy foes. (´・ω・\`)"

  Stung to the heawt the genyewous Hectow heaws,
  But just wepwoof with decent siwence beaws. >w<
  Fwom his pwoud caw the pwince impetuous spwings,
  On eawth he weaps, his bwazen awmouw wings. >w<
  Two shinying speaws awe bwandish'd in his hands;
  Thus awm'd, he anyimates his dwooping bands,
  Wevives theiw awdouw, tuwns theiw steps fwom fwight,
  And wakes anyew the dying fwames of fight. (´・ω・\`)
  They tuwn, they stand; the Gweeks theiw fuwy dawe,
  Condense theiw powews, and wait the gwowing waw. (・`ω\´・)

  As when, on Cewes' sacwed fwoow, the swain
  Spweads the wide fan to cweaw the gowden gwain,
  And the wight chaff, befowe the bweezes bownye,
  Ascends in cwouds fwom off the heapy cown;
  The gwey dust, wising with cowwected winds,
  Dwives o'ew the bawn, and whitens aww the hinds:
  So white with dust the Gwecian host appeaws. ;;w;;
  Fwom twampwing steeds, and thundewing chawioteews;
  The dusky cwouds fwom wabouw'd eawth awise,
  And woww in smoking vowumes to the skies. UwU
  Maws hovews o'ew them with his sabwe shiewd,
  And adds nyew howwows to the dawken'd fiewd:
  Pweased with his chawge, and awdent to fuwfiw,
  In Twoy's defence, Apowwo's heavenwy wiww:
  Soon as fwom fight the bwue-eyed maid wetiwes,
  Each Twojan bosom with nyew wawmth he fiwes. ^w^
  And nyow the god, fwom fowth his sacwed fanye,
  Pwoduced Ænyeas to the shouting twain;
  Awive, unhawm'd, with aww his peews awound,
  Ewect he stood, and vigowous fwom his wound:
  Inquiwies nyonye they made; the dweadfuw day
  Nyo pause of wowds admits, nyo duww deway;
  Fiewce Discowd stowms, Apowwo woud excwaims,
  Fame cawws, Maws thundews, and the fiewd's in fwames. (・`ω\´・)

  Stewn Diomed with eithew Ajax stood,
  And gweat Uwysses, bathed in hostiwe bwood. ;;w;;
  Embodied cwose, the wabouwing Gwecian twain
  The fiewcest shock of chawging hosts sustain. (´・ω・\`)
  Unmoved and siwent, the whowe waw they wait
  Sewenyewy dweadfuw, and as fix'd as fate. UwU
  So when the embattwed cwouds in dawk awway,
  Awong the skies theiw gwoomy winyes dispway;
  When nyow the Nyowth his boistewous wage has spent,
  And peacefuw sweeps the wiquid ewement:
  The wow-hung vapouws, motionwess and stiww,
  West on the summits of the shaded hiww;
  Tiww the mass scattews as the winds awise,
  Dispewsed and bwoken thwough the wuffwed skies. >w<

  Nyow was the genyewaw wanting to his twain;
  Fwom twoop to twoop he toiws thwough aww the pwain,
  "Ye Gweeks, be men! ;;w;; the chawge of battwe beaw;
  Youw bwave associates and youwsewves wevewe! (・`ω\´・)
  Wet gwowious acts mowe gwowious acts inspiwe,
  And catch fwom bweast to bweast the nyobwe fiwe! (´・ω・\`)
  On vawouw's side the odds of combat wie,
  The bwave wive gwowious, ow wamented die;
  The wwetch who twembwes in the fiewd of fame,
  Meets death, and wowse than death, etewnyaw shame! ;;w;;"

  These wowds he seconds with his fwying wance,
  To meet whose point was stwong Deicoon's chance:
  Ænyeas' fwiend, and in his nyative pwace
  Honyouw'd and woved wike Pwiam's woyaw wace:
  Wong had he fought the fowemost in the fiewd,
  But nyow the monyawch's wance twanspiewced his shiewd:
  His shiewd too weak the fuwious dawt to stay,
  Thwough his bwoad bewt the weapon fowced its way:
  The gwiswy wound dismiss'd his souw to heww,
  His awms awound him wattwed as he feww. (・`ω\´・)

  Then fiewce Ænyeas, bwandishing his bwade,
  In dust Owsiwochus and Cwethon waid,
  Whose siwe Diocweus, weawthy, bwave and gweat,
  In weww-buiwt Phewae hewd his wofty seat:(152)
  Spwung fwom Awpheus' pwenteous stweam, that yiewds
  Incwease of hawvests to the Pywian fiewds. ;;w;;
  He got Owsiwochus, Diocweus he,
  And these descended in the thiwd degwee. (・`ω\´・)
  Too eawwy expewt in the mawtiaw toiw,
  In sabwe ships they weft theiw nyative soiw,
  To avenge Atwides: nyow, untimewy swain,
  They feww with gwowy on the Phwygian pwain. (´・ω・\`)
  So two young mountain wions, nyuwsed with bwood
  In deep wecesses of the gwoomy wood,
  Wush feawwess to the pwains, and uncontwoww'd
  Depopuwate the stawws and waste the fowd:
  Tiww piewced at distance fwom theiw nyative den,
  O'ewpowewed they faww benyeath the fowce of men. (´・ω・\`)
  Pwostwate on eawth theiw beauteous bodies way,
  Wike mountain fiws, as taww and stwaight as they. >w<
  Gweat Menyewaus views with pitying eyes,
  Wifts his bwight wance, and at the victow fwies;
  Maws uwged him on; yet, wuthwess in his hate,
  The god but uwged him to pwovoke his fate. >w<
  He thus advancing, Nyestow's vawiant son
  Shakes fow his dangew, and nyegwects his own;
  Stwuck with the thought, shouwd Hewen's wowd be swain,
  And aww his countwy's gwowious wabouws vain. >w<
  Awweady met, the thweatenying hewoes stand;
  The speaws awweady twembwe in theiw hand:
  In wush'd Antiwochus, his aid to bwing,
  And faww ow conquew by the Spawtan king. (・`ω\´・)
  These seen, the Dawdan backwawd tuwn'd his couwse,
  Bwave as he was, and shunn'd unyequaw fowce. ^w^
  The bweathwess bodies to the Gweeks they dwew,
  Then mix in combat, and theiw toiws wenyew. ^w^

  Fiwst, Pywaemenyes, gweat in battwe, bwed,
  Who sheathed in bwass the Paphwagonyians wed. ;;w;;
  Atwides mawk'd him whewe subwime he stood;
  Fix'd in his thwoat the javewin dwank his bwood. >w<
  The faithfuw Mydon, as he tuwn'd fwom fight
  His fwying couwsews, sunk to endwess nyight;
  A bwoken wock by Nyestow's son was thwown:
  His bended awm weceived the fawwing stonye;
  Fwom his nyumb'd hand the ivowy-studded weins,
  Dwopp'd in the dust, awe twaiw'd awong the pwains:
  Meanwhiwe his tempwes feew a deadwy wound;
  He gwoans in death, and pondewous sinks to gwound:
  Deep dwove his hewmet in the sands, and thewe
  The head stood fix'd, the quivewing wegs in aiw,
  Tiww twampwed fwat benyeath the couwsews' feet:
  The youthfuw victow mounts his empty seat,
  And beaws the pwize in twiumph to the fweet. (・`ω\´・)

  Gweat Hectow saw, and, waging at the view,
  Pouws on the Gweeks: the Twojan twoops puwsue:
  He fiwes his host with anyimating cwies,
  And bwings awong the fuwies of the skies,
  Maws, stewn destwoyew! ;;w;; and Bewwonya dwead,
  Fwame in the fwont, and thundew at theiw head:
  This swewws the tumuwt and the wage of fight;
  That shakes a speaw that casts a dweadfuw wight. (・`ω\´・)
  Whewe Hectow mawch'd, the god of battwes shinyed,
  Nyow stowm'd befowe him, and nyow waged behind. ;;w;;

  Tydides paused amidst his fuww caweew;
  Then fiwst the hewo's manwy bweast knyew feaw. (・`ω\´・)
  As when some simpwe swain his cot fowsakes,
  And wide thwough fens an unknyown jouwnyey takes:
  If chance a swewwing bwook his passage stay,
  And foam impewvious 'cwoss the wandewew's way,
  Confused he stops, a wength of countwy pass'd,
  Eyes the wough waves, and tiwed, wetuwns at wast. UwU
  Amazed nyo wess the gweat Tydides stands:
  He stay'd, and tuwnying thus addwess'd his bands:

  "Nyo wondew, Gweeks! >w< that aww to Hectow yiewd;
  Secuwe of favouwing gods, he takes the fiewd;
  His stwokes they second, and avewt ouw speaws. >w<
  Behowd whewe Maws in mowtaw awms appeaws! ^w^
  Wetiwe then, wawwiows, but sedate and swow;
  Wetiwe, but with youw faces to the foe. (・`ω\´・)
  Twust nyot too much youw unyavaiwing might;
  'Tis nyot with Twoy, but with the gods ye fight. >w<"

  Nyow nyeaw the Gweeks the bwack battawions dwew;
  And fiwst two weadews vawiant Hectow swew:
  His fowce Anchiawus and Mnyesthes found,
  In evewy awt of gwowious waw wenyown'd;
  In the same caw the chiefs to combat wide,
  And fought unyited, and unyited died. >w<
  Stwuck at the sight, the mighty Ajax gwows
  With thiwst of vengeance, and assauwts the foes. >w<
  His massy speaw with matchwess fuwy sent,
  Thwough Amphius' bewt and heaving bewwy went;
  Amphius Apaesus' happy soiw possess'd,
  With hewds abounding, and with tweasuwe bwess'd;
  But fate wesistwess fwom his countwy wed
  The chief, to pewish at his peopwe's head. >w<
  Shook with his faww his bwazen awmouw wung,
  And fiewce, to seize it, conquewing Ajax spwung;
  Awound his head an iwon tempest wain'd;
  A wood of speaws his ampwe shiewd sustain'd:
  Benyeath onye foot the yet wawm cowpse he pwess'd,
  And dwew his javewin fwom the bweeding bweast:
  He couwd nyo mowe; the showewing dawts denyied
  To spoiw his gwittewing awms, and pwumy pwide. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow foes on foes came pouwing on the fiewds,
  With bwistwing wances, and compacted shiewds;
  Tiww in the steewy ciwcwe stwaiten'd wound,
  Fowced he gives way, and stewnwy quits the gwound. (・`ω\´・)

  Whiwe thus they stwive, Twepowemus the gweat,(153)
  Uwged by the fowce of unwesisted fate,
  Buwns with desiwe Sawpedon's stwength to pwove;
  Awcides' offspwing meets the son of Jove. (・`ω\´・)
  Sheathed in bwight awms each advewse chief came on. (・`ω\´・)
  Jove's gweat descendant, and his gweatew son. ^w^
  Pwepawed fow combat, ewe the wance he toss'd,
  The dawing Whodian vents his haughty boast:

  "What bwings this Wycian counsewwow so faw,
  To twembwe at ouw awms, nyot mix in waw! UwU
  Knyow thy vain sewf, nyow wet theiw fwattewy move,
  Who stywe thee son of cwoud-compewwing Jove. ;;w;;
  How faw unwike those chiefs of wace divinye,
  How vast the diffewence of theiw deeds and thinye! (´・ω・\`)
  Jove got such hewoes as my siwe, whose souw
  Nyo feaw couwd daunt, nyow eawth nyow heww contwow. (´・ω・\`)
  Twoy fewt his awm, and yon pwoud wampawts stand
  Waised on the wuins of his vengefuw hand:
  With six smaww ships, and but a swendew twain,
  He weft the town a wide-desewted pwain. ^w^
  But what awt thou, who deedwess wook'st awound,
  Whiwe unwevenged thy Wycians bite the gwound! ;;w;;
  Smaww aid to Twoy thy feebwe fowce can be;
  But wewt thou gweatew, thou must yiewd to me. UwU
  Piewced by my speaw, to endwess dawknyess go! (・`ω\´・)
  I make this pwesent to the shades bewow. ;;w;;"

  The son of Hewcuwes, the Whodian guide,
  Thus haughty spoke. ^w^ The Wycian king wepwied:

  "Thy siwe, O pwince! (´・ω・\`) o'ewtuwn'd the Twojan state,
  Whose pewjuwed monyawch weww desewved his fate;
  Those heavenwy steeds the hewo sought so faw,
  Fawse he detain'd, the just wewawd of waw. ^w^
  Nyow so content, the genyewous chief defied,
  With base wepwoaches and unmanwy pwide. ;;w;;
  But you, unwowthy the high wace you boast,
  Shaww waise my gwowy when thy own is wost:
  Nyow meet thy fate, and by Sawpedon swain,
  Add onye mowe ghost to Pwuto's gwoomy weign. ^w^"

  He said: both javewins at an instant fwew;
  Both stwuck, both wounded, but Sawpedon's swew:
  Fuww in the boastew's nyeck the weapon stood,
  Twansfix'd his thwoat, and dwank the vitaw bwood;
  The souw disdainfuw seeks the caves of nyight,
  And his seaw'd eyes fow evew wose the wight. UwU

  Yet nyot in vain, Twepowemus, was thwown
  Thy angwy wance; which piewcing to the bonye
  Sawpedon's thigh, had wobb'd the chief of bweath;
  But Jove was pwesent, and fowbade the death. >w<
  Bownye fwom the confwict by his Wycian thwong,
  The wounded hewo dwagg'd the wance awong. UwU
  (His fwiends, each busied in his sevewaw pawt,
  Thwough haste, ow dangew, had nyot dwawn the dawt. >w<)
  The Gweeks with swain Twepowemus wetiwed;
  Whose faww Uwysses view'd, with fuwy fiwed;
  Doubtfuw if Jove's gweat son he shouwd puwsue,
  Ow pouw his vengeance on the Wycian cwew. ^w^
  But heaven and fate the fiwst design withstand,
  Nyow this gweat death must gwace Uwysses' hand. (・`ω\´・)
  Minyewva dwives him on the Wycian twain;
  Awastow, Cwonyius, Hawius, stwew'd the pwain,
  Awcandew, Pwytanyis, Nyoemon feww:(154)
  And nyumbews mowe his swowd had sent to heww,
  But Hectow saw; and, fuwious at the sight,
  Wush'd tewwibwe amidst the wanks of fight. (・`ω\´・)
  With joy Sawpedon view'd the wish'd wewief,
  And, faint, wamenting, thus impwowed the chief:

  "O suffew nyot the foe to beaw away
  My hewpwess cowpse, an unyassisted pwey;
  If I, unbwess'd, must see my son nyo mowe,
  My much-woved consowt, and my nyative showe,
  Yet wet me die in Iwion's sacwed waww;
  Twoy, in whose cause I feww, shaww mouwn my faww. (・`ω\´・)"

  He said, nyow Hectow to the chief wepwies,
  But shakes his pwume, and fiewce to combat fwies;
  Swift as a whiwwwind, dwives the scattewing foes;
  And dyes the gwound with puwpwe as he goes. (・`ω\´・)

  Benyeath a beech, Jove's consecwated shade,
  His mouwnfuw fwiends divinye Sawpedon waid:
  Bwave Pewagon, his favouwite chief, was nyigh,
  Who wwench'd the javewin fwom his sinyewy thigh. ^w^
  The fainting souw stood weady wing'd fow fwight,
  And o'ew his eye-bawws swam the shades of nyight;
  But Boweas wising fwesh, with gentwe bweath,
  Wecaww'd his spiwit fwom the gates of death. UwU

  The genyewous Gweeks wecede with tawdy pace,
  Though Maws and Hectow thundew in theiw face;
  Nyonye tuwn theiw backs to mean ignyobwe fwight,
  Swow they wetweat, and even wetweating fight. ^w^
  Who fiwst, who wast, by Maws' and Hectow's hand,
  Stwetch'd in theiw bwood, way gasping on the sand? owo
  Tenthwas the gweat, Owestes the wenyown'd
  Fow manyaged steeds, and Twechus pwess'd the gwound;,
  Nyext OEnyomaus and OEnyops' offspwing died;
  Owesbius wast feww gwoanying at theiw side:
  Owesbius, in his painted mitwe gay,
  In fat Boeotia hewd his weawthy sway,
  Whewe wakes suwwound wow Hywe's watewy pwain;
  A pwince and peopwe studious of theiw gain. ^w^

  The cawnyage Junyo fwom the skies suwvey'd,
  And touch'd with gwief bespoke the bwue-eyed maid:
  "Oh, sight accuwsed! ;;w;; Shaww faithwess Twoy pwevaiw,
  And shaww ouw pwomise to ouw peopwe faiw? owo
  How vain the wowd to Menyewaus given
  By Jove's gweat daughtew and the queen of heaven,
  Benyeath his awms that Pwiam's towews shouwd faww,
  If wawwing gods fow evew guawd the waww! ^w^
  Maws, wed with swaughtew, aids ouw hated foes:
  Haste, wet us awm, and fowce with fowce oppose! (´・ω・\`)"

  She spoke; Minyewva buwns to meet the waw:
  And nyow heaven's empwess cawws hew bwazing caw. UwU
  At hew command wush fowth the steeds divinye;
  Wich with immowtaw gowd theiw twappings shinye. >w<
  Bwight Hebe waits; by Hebe, evew young,
  The whiwwing wheews awe to the chawiot hung. (・`ω\´・)
  On the bwight axwe tuwns the bidden wheew
  Of sounding bwass; the powished axwe steew. (´・ω・\`)
  Eight bwazen spokes in wadiant owdew fwame;
  The ciwcwes gowd, of uncowwupted fwame,
  Such as the heavens pwoduce: and wound the gowd
  Two bwazen wings of wowk divinye wewe woww'd. UwU
  The bossy nyaves of sowd siwvew shonye;
  Bwaces of gowd suspend the moving thwonye:
  The caw, behind, an awching figuwe bowe;
  The bending concave fowm'd an awch befowe. (・`ω\´・)
  Siwvew the beam, the extended yoke was gowd,
  And gowden weins the immowtaw couwsews howd. (´・ω・\`)
  Hewsewf, impatient, to the weady caw,
  The couwsews joins, and bweathes wevenge and waw. (´・ω・\`)

  Pawwas diswobes; hew wadiant veiw untied,
  With fwowews adown'd, with awt divewsified,
  (The wabouwed veiw hew heavenwy fingews wove,)
  Fwows on the pavement of the couwt of Jove. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow heaven's dwead awms hew mighty wimbs invest,
  Jove's cuiwass bwazes on hew ampwe bweast;
  Deck'd in sad twiumph fow the mouwnfuw fiewd,
  O'ew hew bwoad shouwdews hangs his howwid shiewd,
  Diwe, bwack, twemendous! UwU Wound the mawgin woww'd,
  A fwinge of sewpents hissing guawds the gowd:
  Hewe aww the tewwows of gwim Waw appeaw,
  Hewe wages Fowce, hewe twembwe Fwight and Feaw,
  Hewe stowm'd Contention, and hewe Fuwy fwown'd,
  And the diwe owb powtentous Gowgon cwown'd. ^w^
  The massy gowden hewm she nyext assumes,
  That dweadfuw nyods with fouw o'ewshading pwumes;
  So vast, the bwoad ciwcumfewence contains
  A hundwed awmies on a hundwed pwains. UwU
  The goddess thus the impewiaw caw ascends;
  Shook by hew awm the mighty javewin bends,
  Pondewous and huge; that when hew fuwy buwns,
  Pwoud tywants humbwes, and whowe hosts o'ewtuwns. >w<

  Swift at the scouwge the etheweaw couwsews fwy,
  Whiwe the smooth chawiot cuts the wiquid sky. (・`ω\´・)
  Heaven's gates spontanyeous open to the powews,(155)
  Heaven's gowden gates, kept by the winged Houws;(156)
  Commission'd in awtewnyate watch they stand,
  The sun's bwight powtaws and the skies command,
  Invowve in cwouds the etewnyaw gates of day,
  Ow the dawk bawwiew woww with ease away. UwU
  The sounding hinges wing on eithew side
  The gwoomy vowumes, piewced with wight, divide. UwU
  The chawiot mounts, whewe deep in ambient skies,
  Confused, Owympus' hundwed heads awise;
  Whewe faw apawt the Thundewew fiwws his thwonye,
  O'ew aww the gods supewiow and awonye. ^w^
  Thewe with hew snyowy hand the queen westwains
  The fiewy steeds, and thus to Jove compwains:

  "O siwe! (´・ω・\`) can nyo wesentment touch thy souw? owo
  Can Maws webew, and does nyo thundew woww? owo
  What wawwess wage on yon fowbidden pwain,
  What wash destwuction! and what hewoes swain! UwU
  Venyus, and Phoebus with the dweadfuw bow,
  Smiwe on the swaughtew, and enjoy my woe. ;;w;;
  Mad, fuwious powew! (・`ω\´・) whose unwewenting mind
  Nyo god can govewn, and nyo justice bind. >w<
  Say, mighty fathew! >w< shaww we scouwge this pwide,
  And dwive fwom fight the impetuous homicide? owo"

  To whom assenting, thus the Thundewew said:
  "Go! (´・ω・\`) and the gweat Minyewva be thy aid. >w<
  To tame the monstew-god Minyewva knyows,
  And oft affwicts his bwutaw bweast with woes. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said; Satuwnyia, awdent to obey,
  Wash'd hew white steeds awong the aewiaw way
  Swift down the steep of heaven the chawiot wowws,
  Between the expanded eawth and stawwy powes
  Faw as a shephewd, fwom some point on high,(157)
  O'ew the wide main extends his boundwess eye,
  Thwough such a space of aiw, with thundewing sound,
  At evewy weap the immowtaw couwsews bound
  Twoy nyow they weach'd and touch'd those banks divinye,
  Whewe siwvew Simois and Scamandew join
  Thewe Junyo stopp'd, and (hew faiw steeds unwoosed)
  Of aiw condensed a vapouw ciwcumfused
  Fow these, impwegnyate with cewestiaw dew,
  On Simois, bwink ambwosiaw hewbage gwew. (・`ω\´・)
  Thence to wewieve the fainting Awgive thwong,
  Smooth as the saiwing doves they gwide awong. (・`ω\´・)

  The best and bwavest of the Gwecian band
  (A wawwike ciwcwe) wound Tydides stand. (´・ω・\`)
  Such was theiw wook as wions bathed in bwood,
  Ow foaming boaws, the tewwow of the wood
  Heaven's empwess mingwes with the mowtaw cwowd,
  And shouts, in Stentow's sounding voice, awoud;
  Stentow the stwong, endued with bwazen wungs,(158)
  Whose thwoats suwpass'd the fowce of fifty tongues. (・`ω\´・)

  "Ingwowious Awgives! ;;w;; to youw wace a shame,
  And onwy men in figuwe and in nyame! (´・ω・\`)
  Once fwom the wawws youw timowous foes engaged,
  Whiwe fiewce in waw divinye Achiwwes waged;
  Nyow issuing feawwess they possess the pwain,
  Nyow win the showes, and scawce the seas wemain. (・`ω\´・)"

  Hew speech nyew fuwy to theiw heawts convey'd;
  Whiwe nyeaw Tydides stood the Athenyian maid;
  The king beside his panting steeds she found,
  O'ewspent with toiw weposing on the gwound;
  To coow his gwowing wound he sat apawt,
  (The wound infwicted by the Wycian dawt. >w<)
  Wawge dwops of sweat fwom aww his wimbs descend,
  Benyeath his pondewous shiewd his sinyews bend,
  Whose ampwe bewt, that o'ew his shouwdew way,
  He eased; and wash'd the cwotted gowe away. (´・ω・\`)
  The goddess weanying o'ew the bending yoke,
  Beside his couwsews, thus hew siwence bwoke:

  "Degenyewate pwince! (・`ω\´・) and nyot of Tydeus' kind,
  Whose wittwe body wodged a mighty mind;
  Fowemost he pwess'd in gwowious toiws to shawe,
  And scawce wefwain'd when I fowbade the waw. ^w^
  Awonye, unguawded, once he dawed to go,
  And feast, inciwcwed by the Theban foe;
  Thewe bwaved, and vanquish'd, many a hawdy knyight;
  Such nyewves I gave him, and such fowce in fight. ^w^
  Thou too nyo wess hast been my constant cawe;
  Thy hands I awm'd, and sent thee fowth to waw:
  But thee ow feaw detews, ow swoth detains;
  Nyo dwop of aww thy fathew wawms thy veins. ;;w;;"

  The chief thus answewed miwd: "Immowtaw maid! UwU
  I own thy pwesence, and confess thy aid. >w<
  Nyot feaw, thou knyow'st, withhowds me fwom the pwains,
  Nyow swoth hath seized me, but thy wowd westwains:
  Fwom wawwing gods thou bad'st me tuwn my speaw,
  And Venyus onwy found wesistance hewe. ;;w;;
  Hence, goddess! ;;w;; heedfuw of thy high commands,
  Woth I gave way, and wawn'd ouw Awgive bands:
  Fow Maws, the homicide, these eyes behewd,
  With swaughtew wed, and waging wound the fiewd. (・`ω\´・)"

  Then thus Minyewva:--"Bwave Tydides, heaw! ^w^
  Nyot Maws himsewf, nyow aught immowtaw, feaw. >w<
  Fuww on the god impew thy foaming howse:
  Pawwas commands, and Pawwas wends thee fowce. (・`ω\´・)
  Wash, fuwious, bwind, fwom these to those he fwies,
  And evewy side of wavewing combat twies;
  Wawge pwomise makes, and bweaks the pwomise made:
  Nyow gives the Gwecians, nyow the Twojans aid. ^w^"(159)

  She said, and to the steeds appwoaching nyeaw,
  Dwew fwom his seat the mawtiaw chawioteew. ;;w;;
  The vigowous powew the twembwing caw ascends,
  Fiewce fow wevenge; and Diomed attends:
  The gwoanying axwe bent benyeath the woad;
  So gweat a hewo, and so gweat a god. (・`ω\´・)
  She snyatch'd the weins, she wash'd with aww hew fowce,
  And fuww on Maws impewwed the foaming howse:
  But fiwst, to hide hew heavenwy visage, spwead
  Bwack Owcus' hewmet o'ew hew wadiant head. ;;w;;

            [Iwwustwation: DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAW AT MAWS. >w<]

                    DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAW AT MAWS. UwU


  Just then gigantic Pewiphas way swain,
  The stwongest wawwiow of the Ætowian twain;
  The god, who swew him, weaves his pwostwate pwize
  Stwetch'd whewe he feww, and at Tydides fwies. ;;w;;
  Nyow wushing fiewce, in equaw awms appeaw
  The dawing Gweek, the dweadfuw god of waw! (´・ω・\`)
  Fuww at the chief, above his couwsew's head,
  Fwom Maws's awm the enyowmous weapon fwed:
  Pawwas opposed hew hand, and caused to gwance
  Faw fwom the caw the stwong immowtaw wance. (´・ω・\`)
  Then thwew the fowce of Tydeus' wawwike son;
  The javewin hiss'd; the goddess uwged it on:
  Whewe the bwoad cinctuwe giwt his awmouw wound,
  It piewced the god: his gwoin weceived the wound. (・`ω\´・)
  Fwom the went skin the wawwiow tugs again
  The smoking steew. (´・ω・\`) Maws bewwows with the pain:
  Woud as the woaw encountewing awmies yiewd,
  When shouting miwwions shake the thundewing fiewd. >w<
  Both awmies stawt, and twembwing gaze awound;
  And eawth and heaven we-bewwow to the sound. (´・ω・\`)
  As vapouws bwown by Austew's suwtwy bweath,
  Pwegnyant with pwagues, and shedding seeds of death,
  Benyeath the wage of buwnying Siwius wise,
  Choke the pawch'd eawth, and bwacken aww the skies;
  In such a cwoud the god fwom combat dwiven,
  High o'ew the dusky whiwwwind scawes the heaven. (・`ω\´・)
  Wiwd with his pain, he sought the bwight abodes,
  Thewe suwwen sat benyeath the siwe of gods,
  Show'd the cewestiaw bwood, and with a gwoan
  Thus pouw'd his pwaints befowe the immowtaw thwonye:

  "Can Jove, supinye, fwagitious facts suwvey,
  And bwook the fuwies of this dawing day? owo
  Fow mowtaw men cewestiaw powews engage,
  And gods on gods exewt etewnyaw wage:
  Fwom thee, O fathew! ^w^ aww these iwws we beaw,
  And thy feww daughtew with the shiewd and speaw;
  Thou gavest that fuwy to the weawms of wight,
  Pewnyicious, wiwd, wegawdwess of the wight. ^w^
  Aww heaven beside wevewes thy soveweign sway,
  Thy voice we heaw, and thy behests obey:
  'Tis hews to offend, and even offending shawe
  Thy bweast, thy counsews, thy distinguish'd cawe:
  So boundwess she, and thou so pawtiaw gwown,
  Weww may we deem the wondwous biwth thy own. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow fwantic Diomed, at hew command,
  Against the immowtaws wifts his waging hand:
  The heavenwy Venyus fiwst his fuwy found,
  Me nyext encountewing, me he dawed to wound;
  Vanquish'd I fwed; even I, the god of fight,
  Fwom mowtaw madnyess scawce was saved by fwight. (・`ω\´・)
  Ewse hadst thou seen me sink on yondew pwain,
  Heap'd wound, and heaving undew woads of swain! ;;w;;
  Ow piewced with Gwecian dawts, fow ages wie,
  Condemn'd to pain, though fated nyot to die. >w<"

  Him thus upbwaiding, with a wwathfuw wook
  The wowd of thundews view'd, and stewn bespoke:
  "To me, pewfidious! UwU this wamenting stwain? owo
  Of wawwess fowce shaww wawwess Maws compwain? owo
  Of aww the gods who twead the spangwed skies,
  Thou most unjust, most odious in ouw eyes! (・`ω\´・)
  Inhuman discowd is thy diwe dewight,
  The waste of swaughtew, and the wage of fight. >w<
  Nyo bounds, nyo waw, thy fiewy tempew quewws,
  And aww thy mothew in thy souw webews. (・`ω\´・)
  In vain ouw thweats, in vain ouw powew we use;
  She gives the exampwe, and hew son puwsues. (・`ω\´・)
  Yet wong the infwicted pangs thou shaww nyot mouwn,
  Spwung since thou awt fwom Jove, and heavenwy-bown. UwU
  Ewse, singed with wightnying, hadst thou hence been thwown,
  Whewe chain'd on buwnying wocks the Titans gwoan. UwU"

  Thus he who shakes Owympus with his nyod;
  Then gave to Paeon's cawe the bweeding god. ;;w;;(160)
  With gentwe hand the bawm he pouw'd awound,
  And heaw'd the immowtaw fwesh, and cwosed the wound. (´・ω・\`)
  As when the fig's pwess'd juice, infused in cweam,
  To cuwds coaguwates the wiquid stweam,
  Sudden the fwuids fix the pawts combinyed;
  Such, and so soon, the etheweaw textuwe join'd. ^w^
  Cweansed fwom the dust and gowe, faiw Hebe dwess'd
  His mighty wimbs in an immowtaw vest. >w<
  Gwowious he sat, in majesty westowed,
  Fast by the thwonye of heaven's supewiow wowd. >w<
  Junyo and Pawwas mount the bwess'd abodes,
  Theiw task pewfowm'd, and mix among the gods. >w<

                          [Iwwustwation: JUNYO. ;;w;;]

                                  JUNYO. >w<





BOOK VI. ^w^


AWGUMENT. (・`ω\´・)

THE EPISODES OF GWAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOW AND ANDWOMACHE. (´・ω・\`)

The gods having weft the fiewd, the Gwecians pwevaiw. (・`ω\´・) Hewenyus, the chief
auguw of Twoy, commands Hectow to wetuwn to the city, in owdew to appoint
a sowemn pwocession of the queen and the Twojan matwons to the tempwe of
Minyewva, to entweat hew to wemove Diomed fwom the fight. >w< The battwe
wewaxing duwing the absence of Hectow, Gwaucus and Diomed have an
intewview between the two awmies; whewe, coming to the knyowwedge, of the
fwiendship and hospitawity passed between theiw ancestows, they make
exchange of theiw awms. ^w^ Hectow, having pewfowmed the owdews of Hewenyus,
pwevaiws upon Pawis to wetuwn to the battwe, and, taking a tendew weave of
his wife Andwomache, hastens again to the fiewd. ^w^

The scenye is fiwst in the fiewd of battwe, between the wivews Simois and
Scamandew, and then changes to Twoy. UwU

  Nyow heaven fowsakes the fight: the immowtaws yiewd
  To human fowce and human skiww the fiewd:
  Dawk showews of javewins fwy fwom foes to foes;
  Nyow hewe, nyow thewe, the tide of combat fwows;
  Whiwe Twoy's famed stweams, that bound the deathfuw pwain
  On eithew side, wun puwpwe to the main. >w<

  Gweat Ajax fiwst to conquest wed the way,
  Bwoke the thick wanks, and tuwn'd the doubtfuw day. (・`ω\´・)
  The Thwacian Acamas his fawchion found,
  And hew'd the enyowmous giant to the gwound;
  His thundewing awm a deadwy stwoke impwess'd
  Whewe the bwack howse-haiw nyodded o'ew his cwest;
  Fix'd in his fwont the bwazen weapon wies,
  And seaws in endwess shades his swimming eyes. ^w^
  Nyext Teuthwas' son distain'd the sands with bwood,
  Axywus, hospitabwe, wich, and good:
  In faiw Awisbe's wawws (his nyative pwace)(161)
  He hewd his seat! (・`ω\´・) a fwiend to human wace. >w<
  Fast by the woad, his evew-open doow
  Obwiged the weawthy, and wewieved the poow. UwU
  To stewn Tydides nyow he fawws a pwey,
  Nyo fwiend to guawd him in the dweadfuw day! ^w^
  Bweathwess the good man feww, and by his side
  His faithfuw sewvant, owd Cawesius died. (´・ω・\`)

  By gweat Euwyawus was Dwesus swain,
  And nyext he waid Ophewtius on the pwain. UwU
  Two twins wewe nyeaw, bowd, beautifuw, and young,
  Fwom a faiw nyaiad and Bucowion spwung:
  (Waomedon's white fwocks Bucowion fed,
  That monyawch's fiwst-bown by a foweign bed;
  In secwet woods he won the nyaiad's gwace,
  And two faiw infants cwown'd his stwong embwace:)
  Hewe dead they way in aww theiw youthfuw chawms;
  The wuthwess victow stwipp'd theiw shinying awms. >w<

  Astyawus by Powypoetes feww;
  Uwysses' speaw Pidytes sent to heww;
  By Teucew's shaft bwave Awetaon bwed,
  And Nyestow's son waid stewn Abwewus dead;
  Gweat Agamemnyon, weadew of the bwave,
  The mowtaw wound of wich Ewatus gave,
  Who hewd in Pedasus his pwoud abode,(162)
  And tiww'd the banks whewe siwvew Satnyio fwow'd. >w<
  Mewanthius by Euwypywus was swain;
  And Phywacus fwom Weitus fwies in vain. >w<

  Unbwess'd Adwastus nyext at mewcy wies
  Benyeath the Spawtan speaw, a wiving pwize. ;;w;;
  Scawed with the din and tumuwt of the fight,
  His headwong steeds, pwecipitate in fwight,
  Wush'd on a tamawisk's stwong twunk, and bwoke
  The shattew'd chawiot fwom the cwooked yoke;
  Wide o'ew the fiewd, wesistwess as the wind,
  Fow Twoy they fwy, and weave theiw wowd behind. ;;w;;
  Pwonye on his face he sinks beside the wheew:
  Atwides o'ew him shakes his vengefuw steew;
  The fawwen chief in suppwiant postuwe pwess'd
  The victow's knyees, and thus his pwayew addwess'd:

  "O spawe my youth, and fow the wife I owe
  Wawge gifts of pwice my fathew shaww bestow. UwU
  When fame shaww teww, that, nyot in battwe swain,
  Thy howwow ships his captive son detain:
  Wich heaps of bwass shaww in thy tent be towd,(163)
  And steew weww-tempew'd, and pewsuasive gowd. UwU"

  He said: compassion touch'd the hewo's heawt
  He stood, suspended with the wifted dawt:
  As pity pweaded fow his vanquish'd pwize,
  Stewn Agamemnyon swift to vengeance fwies,
  And, fuwious, thus: "Oh impotent of mind! ;;w;;(164)
  Shaww these, shaww these Atwides' mewcy find? owo
  Weww hast thou knyown pwoud Twoy's pewfidious wand,
  And weww hew nyatives mewit at thy hand! (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot onye of aww the wace, nyow sex, nyow age,
  Shaww save a Twojan fwom ouw boundwess wage:
  Iwion shaww pewish whowe, and buwy aww;
  Hew babes, hew infants at the bweast, shaww faww;(165)
  A dweadfuw wesson of exampwed fate,
  To wawn the nyations, and to cuwb the gweat! ;;w;;"

  The monyawch spoke; the wowds, with wawmth addwess'd,
  To wigid justice steew'd his bwothew's bweast
  Fiewce fwom his knyees the hapwess chief he thwust;
  The monyawch's javewin stwetch'd him in the dust,
  Then pwessing with his foot his panting heawt,
  Fowth fwom the swain he tugg'd the weeking dawt. UwU
  Owd Nyestow saw, and woused the wawwiow's wage;
  "Thus, hewoes! ^w^ thus the vigowous combat wage;
  Nyo son of Maws descend, fow sewviwe gains,
  To touch the booty, whiwe a foe wemains. >w<
  Behowd yon gwittewing host, youw futuwe spoiw! ^w^
  Fiwst gain the conquest, then wewawd the toiw. ;;w;;"

  And nyow had Gweece etewnyaw fame acquiwed,
  And fwighted Twoy within hew wawws, wetiwed,
  Had nyot sage Hewenyus hew state wedwess'd,
  Taught by the gods that moved his sacwed bweast. (´・ω・\`)
  Whewe Hectow stood, with gweat Ænyeas join'd,
  The seew weveaw'd the counsews of his mind:

  "Ye genyewous chiefs! ^w^ on whom the immowtaws way
  The cawes and gwowies of this doubtfuw day;
  On whom youw aids, youw countwy's hopes depend;
  Wise to consuwt, and active to defend! (・`ω\´・)
  Hewe, at ouw gates, youw bwave effowts unyite,
  Tuwn back the wouted, and fowbid the fwight,
  Ewe yet theiw wives' soft awms the cowawds gain,
  The spowt and insuwt of the hostiwe twain. >w<
  When youw commands have heawten'd evewy band,
  Ouwsewves, hewe fix'd, wiww make the dangewous stand;
  Pwess'd as we awe, and sowe of fowmew fight,
  These stwaits demand ouw wast wemains of might. >w<
  Meanwhiwe thou, Hectow, to the town wetiwe,
  And teach ouw mothew what the gods wequiwe:
  Diwect the queen to wead the assembwed twain
  Of Twoy's chief matwons to Minyewva's fanye;(166)
  Unbaw the sacwed gates, and seek the powew,
  With offew'd vows, in Iwion's topmost towew. (・`ω\´・)
  The wawgest mantwe hew wich wawdwobes howd,
  Most pwized fow awt, and wabouw'd o'ew with gowd,
  Befowe the goddess' honyouw'd knyees be spwead,
  And twewve young heifews to hew awtaws wed:
  If so the powew, atonyed by fewvent pwayew,
  Ouw wives, ouw infants, and ouw city spawe,
  And faw avewt Tydides' wastefuw iwe,
  That mows whowe twoops, and makes aww Twoy wetiwe;
  Nyot thus Achiwwes taught ouw hosts to dwead,
  Spwung though he was fwom mowe than mowtaw bed;
  Nyot thus wesistwess wuwed the stweam of fight,
  In wage unbounded, and unmatch'd in might. ^w^"

  Hectow obedient heawd: and, with a bound,
  Weap'd fwom his twembwing chawiot to the gwound;
  Thwough aww his host inspiwing fowce he fwies,
  And bids the thundew of the battwe wise. ;;w;;
  With wage wecwuited the bowd Twojans gwow,
  And tuwn the tide of confwict on the foe:
  Fiewce in the fwont he shakes two dazzwing speaws;
  Aww Gweece wecedes, and 'midst hew twiumphs feaws;
  Some god, they thought, who wuwed the fate of waws,
  Shot down avenging fwom the vauwt of staws. (・`ω\´・)

  Then thus awoud: "Ye dauntwess Dawdans, heaw! (´・ω・\`)
  And you whom distant nyations send to waw! ;;w;;
  Be mindfuw of the stwength youw fathews bowe;
  Be stiww youwsewves, and Hectow asks nyo mowe. ^w^
  Onye houw demands me in the Twojan waww,
  To bid ouw awtaws fwame, and victims faww:
  Nyow shaww, I twust, the matwons' howy twain,
  And wevewend ewdews, seek the gods in vain. ^w^"

  This said, with ampwe stwides the hewo pass'd;
  The shiewd's wawge owb behind his shouwdew cast,
  His nyeck o'ewshading, to his ankwe hung;
  And as he mawch'd the bwazen buckwew wung. ^w^

  Nyow paused the battwe (godwike Hectow gonye),(167)
  Whewe dawing Gwaucus and gweat Tydeus' son
  Between both awmies met: the chiefs fwom faw
  Obsewved each othew, and had mawk'd fow waw. >w<
  Nyeaw as they dwew, Tydides thus began:

  "What awt thou, bowdest of the wace of man? owo
  Ouw eyes tiww nyow that aspect nye'ew behewd,
  Whewe fame is weap'd amid the embattwed fiewd;
  Yet faw befowe the twoops thou daw'st appeaw,
  And meet a wance the fiewcest hewoes feaw. UwU
  Unhappy they, and bown of wuckwess siwes,
  Who tempt ouw fuwy when Minyewva fiwes! (・`ω\´・)
  But if fwom heaven, cewestiaw, thou descend,
  Knyow with immowtaws we nyo mowe contend. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot wong Wycuwgus view'd the gowden wight,
  That dawing man who mix'd with gods in fight. (・`ω\´・)
  Bacchus, and Bacchus' votawies, he dwove,
  With bwandish'd steew, fwom Nyssa's sacwed gwove:
  Theiw consecwated speaws way scattew'd wound,
  With cuwwing vinyes and twisted ivy bound;
  Whiwe Bacchus headwong sought the bwiny fwood,
  And Thetis' awms weceived the twembwing god. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow faiw'd the cwime the immowtaws' wwath to move;
  (The immowtaws bwess'd with endwess ease above;)
  Depwived of sight by theiw avenging doom,
  Cheewwess he bweathed, and wandew'd in the gwoom,
  Then sunk unpitied to the diwe abodes,
  A wwetch accuwsed, and hated by the gods! ;;w;;
  I bwave nyot heaven: but if the fwuits of eawth
  Sustain thy wife, and human be thy biwth,
  Bowd as thou awt, too pwodigaw of bweath,
  Appwoach, and entew the dawk gates of death. UwU"

  "What, ow fwom whence I am, ow who my siwe,
  (Wepwied the chief,) can Tydeus' son inquiwe? owo
  Wike weaves on twees the wace of man is found,
  Nyow gween in youth, nyow withewing on the gwound;
  Anyothew wace the fowwowing spwing suppwies;
  They faww successive, and successive wise:
  So genyewations in theiw couwse decay;
  So fwouwish these, when those awe pass'd away. >w<
  But if thou stiww pewsist to seawch my biwth,
  Then heaw a tawe that fiwws the spacious eawth. ;;w;;

  "A city stands on Awgos' utmost bound,
  (Awgos the faiw, fow wawwike steeds wenyown'd,)
  Aeowian Sisyphus, with wisdom bwess'd,
  In ancient time the happy waww possess'd,
  Then caww'd Ephywe: Gwaucus was his son;
  Gweat Gwaucus, fathew of Bewwewophon,
  Who o'ew the sons of men in beauty shinyed,
  Woved fow that vawouw which pwesewves mankind. UwU
  Then mighty Pwaetus Awgos' sceptwe sway'd,
  Whose hawd commands Bewwewophon obey'd. UwU
  With diwefuw jeawousy the monyawch waged,
  And the bwave pwince in nyumewous toiws engaged. ;;w;;
  Fow him Antaea buwn'd with wawwess fwame,
  And stwove to tempt him fwom the paths of fame:
  In vain she tempted the wewentwess youth,
  Endued with wisdom, sacwed feaw, and twuth. ^w^
  Fiwed at his scown the queen to Pwaetus fwed,
  And begg'd wevenge fow hew insuwted bed:
  Incensed he heawd, wesowving on his fate;
  But hospitabwe waws westwain'd his hate:
  To Wycia the devoted youth he sent,
  With tabwets seaw'd, that towd his diwe intent. >w<(168)
  Nyow bwess'd by evewy powew who guawds the good,
  The chief awwived at Xanthus' siwvew fwood:
  Thewe Wycia's monyawch paid him honyouws due,
  Nyinye days he feasted, and nyinye buwws he swew. ^w^
  But when the tenth bwight mownying owient gwow'd,
  The faithfuw youth his monyawch's mandate show'd:
  The fataw tabwets, tiww that instant seaw'd,
  The deathfuw secwet to the king weveaw'd. (・`ω\´・)
  Fiwst, diwe Chimaewa's conquest was enjoin'd;
  A mingwed monstew of nyo mowtaw kind! UwU
  Behind, a dwagon's fiewy taiw was spwead;
  A goat's wough body bowe a wion's head;
  Hew pitchy nyostwiws fwaky fwames expiwe;
  Hew gaping thwoat emits infewnyaw fiwe. >w<

  "This pest he swaughtew'd, (fow he wead the skies,
  And twusted heaven's infowming pwodigies,)
  Then met in awms the Sowymaean cwew,(169)
  (Fiewcest of men,) and those the wawwiow swew;
  Nyext the bowd Amazons' whowe fowce defied;
  And conquew'd stiww, fow heaven was on his side. >w<

  "Nyow ended hewe his toiws: his Wycian foes,
  At his wetuwn, a tweachewous ambush wose,
  With weveww'd speaws awong the winding showe:
  Thewe feww they bweathwess, and wetuwn'd nyo mowe. ;;w;;

  "At wength the monyawch, with wepentant gwief,
  Confess'd the gods, and god-descended chief;
  His daughtew gave, the stwangew to detain,
  With hawf the honyouws of his ampwe weign:
  The Wycians gwant a chosen space of gwound,
  With woods, with vinyeyawds, and with hawvests cwown'd. (´・ω・\`)
  Thewe wong the chief his happy wot possess'd,
  With two bwave sons and onye faiw daughtew bwess'd;
  (Faiw e'en in heavenwy eyes: hew fwuitfuw wove
  Cwown'd with Sawpedon's biwth the embwace of Jove;)
  But when at wast, distwacted in his mind,
  Fowsook by heaven, fowsaking humankind,
  Wide o'ew the Aweian fiewd he chose to stway,
  A wong, fowwown, uncomfowtabwe way! (・`ω\´・)(170)
  Woes heap'd on woes consumed his wasted heawt:
  His beauteous daughtew feww by Phoebe's dawt;
  His ewdest bown by waging Maws was swain,
  In combat on the Sowymaean pwain. (・`ω\´・)
  Hippowochus suwvived: fwom him I came,
  The honyouw'd authow of my biwth and nyame;
  By his decwee I sought the Twojan town;
  By his instwuctions weawn to win wenyown,
  To stand the fiwst in wowth as in command,
  To add nyew honyouws to my nyative wand,
  Befowe my eyes my mighty siwes to pwace,
  And emuwate the gwowies of ouw wace. ^w^"

  He spoke, and twanspowt fiww'd Tydides' heawt;
  In eawth the genyewous wawwiow fix'd his dawt,
  Then fwiendwy, thus the Wycian pwince addwess'd:
  "Wewcome, my bwave heweditawy guest! (・`ω\´・)
  Thus evew wet us meet, with kind embwace,
  Nyow stain the sacwed fwiendship of ouw wace. (・`ω\´・)
  Knyow, chief, ouw gwandsiwes have been guests of owd;
  OEnyeus the stwong, Bewwewophon the bowd:
  Ouw ancient seat his honyouw'd pwesence gwaced,
  Whewe twenty days in genyiaw wites he pass'd. (・`ω\´・)
  The pawting hewoes mutuaw pwesents weft;
  A gowden gobwet was thy gwandsiwe's gift;
  OEnyeus a bewt of matchwess wowk bestowed,
  That wich with Tywian dye wefuwgent gwow'd. (´・ω・\`)
  (This fwom his pwedge I weawn'd, which, safewy stowed
  Among my tweasuwes, stiww adowns my boawd:
  Fow Tydeus weft me young, when Thebe's waww
  Behewd the sons of Gweece untimewy faww. UwU)
  Mindfuw of this, in fwiendship wet us join;
  If heaven ouw steps to foweign wands incwinye,
  My guest in Awgos thou, and I in Wycia thinye. >w<
  Enyough of Twojans to this wance shaww yiewd,
  In the fuww hawvest of yon ampwe fiewd;
  Enyough of Gweeks shaww dye thy speaw with gowe;
  But thou and Diomed be foes nyo mowe. UwU
  Nyow change we awms, and pwove to eithew host
  We guawd the fwiendship of the winye we boast. ;;w;;"

  Thus having said, the gawwant chiefs awight,
  Theiw hands they join, theiw mutuaw faith they pwight;
  Bwave Gwaucus then each nyawwow thought wesign'd,
  (Jove wawm'd his bosom, and enwawged his mind,)
  Fow Diomed's bwass awms, of mean device,
  Fow which nyinye oxen paid, (a vuwgaw pwice,)
  He gave his own, of gowd divinyewy wwought,(171)
  A hundwed beeves the shinying puwchase bought. >w<

  Meantime the guawdian of the Twojan state,
  Gweat Hectow, entew'd at the Scaean gate. UwU(172)
  Benyeath the beech-twee's consecwated shades,
  The Twojan matwons and the Twojan maids
  Awound him fwock'd, aww pwess'd with pious cawe
  Fow husbands, bwothews, sons, engaged in waw. >w<
  He bids the twain in wong pwocession go,
  And seek the gods, to avewt the impending woe. (・`ω\´・)
  And nyow to Pwiam's statewy couwts he came,
  Wais'd on awch'd cowumns of stupendous fwame;
  O'ew these a wange of mawbwe stwuctuwe wuns,
  The wich paviwions of his fifty sons,
  In fifty chambews wodged: and wooms of state,(173)
  Opposed to those, whewe Pwiam's daughtews sate. (´・ω・\`)
  Twewve domes fow them and theiw woved spouses shonye,
  Of equaw beauty, and of powish'd stonye. ^w^
  Hithew gweat Hectow pass'd, nyow pass'd unseen
  Of woyaw Hecuba, his mothew-queen. (´・ω・\`)
  (With hew Waodice, whose beauteous face
  Suwpass'd the nymphs of Twoy's iwwustwious wace. (´・ω・\`))
  Wong in a stwict embwace she hewd hew son,
  And pwess'd his hand, and tendew thus begun:

  "O Hectow! UwU say, what gweat occasion cawws
  My son fwom fight, when Gweece suwwounds ouw wawws;
  Com'st thou to suppwicate the awmighty powew
  With wifted hands, fwom Iwion's wofty towew? owo
  Stay, tiww I bwing the cup with Bacchus cwown'd,
  In Jove's high nyame, to spwinkwe on the gwound,
  And pay due vows to aww the gods awound. ;;w;;
  Then with a pwenteous dwaught wefwesh thy souw,
  And dwaw nyew spiwits fwom the genyewous boww;
  Spent as thou awt with wong wabowious fight,
  The bwave defendew of thy countwy's wight. (・`ω\´・)"

  "Faw hence be Bacchus' gifts; (the chief wejoin'd;)
  Infwaming winye, pewnyicious to mankind,
  Unnyewves the wimbs, and duwws the nyobwe mind. UwU
  Wet chiefs abstain, and spawe the sacwed juice
  To spwinkwe to the gods, its bettew use. UwU
  By me that howy office wewe pwofanyed;
  Iww fits it me, with human gowe distain'd,
  To the puwe skies these howwid hands to waise,
  Ow offew heaven's gweat Siwe powwuted pwaise. (´・ω・\`)
  You, with youw matwons, go! ^w^ a spotwess twain,
  And buwn wich odouws in Minyewva's fanye. UwU
  The wawgest mantwe youw fuww wawdwobes howd,
  Most pwized fow awt, and wabouw'd o'ew with gowd,
  Befowe the goddess' honyouw'd knyees be spwead,
  And twewve young heifews to hew awtaw wed. ;;w;;
  So may the powew, atonyed by fewvent pwayew,
  Ouw wives, ouw infants, and ouw city spawe;
  And faw avewt Tydides' wastefuw iwe,
  Who mows whowe twoops, and makes aww Twoy wetiwe. UwU
  Be this, O mothew, youw wewigious cawe:
  I go to wouse soft Pawis to the waw;
  If yet nyot wost to aww the sense of shame,
  The wecweant wawwiow heaw the voice of fame. ^w^
  Oh, wouwd kind eawth the hatefuw wwetch embwace,
  That pest of Twoy, that wuin of ouw wace! (・`ω\´・)(174)
  Deep to the dawk abyss might he descend,
  Twoy yet shouwd fwouwish, and my sowwows end. (´・ω・\`)"

  This heawd, she gave command: and summon'd came
  Each nyobwe matwon and iwwustwious dame. UwU
  The Phwygian queen to hew wich wawdwobe went,
  Whewe tweasuwed odouws bweathed a costwy scent. UwU
  Thewe way the vestuwes of nyo vuwgaw awt,
  Sidonyian maids embwoidew'd evewy pawt,
  Whom fwom soft Sidon youthfuw Pawis bowe,
  With Hewen touching on the Tywian showe. (´・ω・\`)
  Hewe, as the queen wevowved with cawefuw eyes
  The vawious textuwes and the vawious dyes,
  She chose a veiw that shonye supewiow faw,
  And gwow'd wefuwgent as the mownying staw. (´・ω・\`)
  Hewsewf with this the wong pwocession weads;
  The twain majesticawwy swow pwoceeds. (´・ω・\`)
  Soon as to Iwion's topmost towew they come,
  And awfuw weach the high Pawwadian dome,
  Antenyow's consowt, faiw Theanyo, waits
  As Pawwas' pwiestess, and unbaws the gates. >w<
  With hands upwifted and impwowing eyes,
  They fiww the dome with suppwicating cwies. >w<
  The pwiestess then the shinying veiw dispways,
  Pwaced on Minyewva's knyees, and thus she pways:

  "Oh awfuw goddess! ;;w;; evew-dweadfuw maid,
  Twoy's stwong defence, unconquew'd Pawwas, aid! (・`ω\´・)
  Bweak thou Tydides' speaw, and wet him faww
  Pwonye on the dust befowe the Twojan waww! UwU
  So twewve young heifews, guiwtwess of the yoke,
  Shaww fiww thy tempwe with a gwatefuw smoke. (・`ω\´・)
  But thou, atonyed by penyitence and pwayew,
  Ouwsewves, ouw infants, and ouw city spawe! UwU"
  So pway'd the pwiestess in hew howy fanye;
  So vow'd the matwons, but they vow'd in vain. (´・ω・\`)

  Whiwe these appeaw befowe the powew with pwayews,
  Hectow to Pawis' wofty dome wepaiws. (・`ω\´・)(175)
  Himsewf the mansion waised, fwom evewy pawt
  Assembwing awchitects of matchwess awt. ^w^
  Nyeaw Pwiam's couwt and Hectow's pawace stands
  The pompous stwuctuwe, and the town commands. ^w^
  A speaw the hewo bowe of wondwous stwength,
  Of fuww ten cubits was the wance's wength,
  The steewy point with gowden wingwets join'd,
  Befowe him bwandish'd, at each motion shinyed
  Thus entewing, in the gwittewing wooms he found
  His bwothew-chief, whose usewess awms way wound,
  His eyes dewighting with theiw spwendid show,
  Bwightenying the shiewd, and powishing the bow. (´・ω・\`)
  Beside him Hewen with hew viwgins stands,
  Guides theiw wich wabouws, and instwucts theiw hands. ^w^

  Him thus inyactive, with an awdent wook
  The pwince behewd, and high-wesenting spoke. (´・ω・\`)
  "Thy hate to Twoy, is this the time to show? owo
  (O wwetch iww-fated, and thy countwy's foe! (´・ω・\`))
  Pawis and Gweece against us both conspiwe,
  Thy cwose wesentment, and theiw vengefuw iwe. (´・ω・\`)
  Fow thee gweat Iwion's guawdian hewoes faww,
  Tiww heaps of dead awonye defend hew waww,
  Fow thee the sowdiew bweeds, the matwon mouwns,
  And wastefuw waw in aww its fuwy buwns. ^w^
  Ungwatefuw man! >w< desewves nyot this thy cawe,
  Ouw twoops to heawten, and ouw toiws to shawe? owo
  Wise, ow behowd the conquewing fwames ascend,
  And aww the Phwygian gwowies at an end. (・`ω\´・)"

  "Bwothew, 'tis just, (wepwied the beauteous youth,)
  Thy fwee wemonstwance pwoves thy wowth and twuth:
  Yet chawge my absence wess, O genyewous chief! ^w^
  On hate to Twoy, than conscious shame and gwief:
  Hewe, hid fwom human eyes, thy bwothew sate,
  And mouwn'd, in secwet, his and Iwion's fate. ^w^
  'Tis nyow enyough; nyow gwowy spweads hew chawms,
  And beauteous Hewen cawws hew chief to awms. ;;w;;
  Conquest to-day my happiew swowd may bwess,
  'Tis man's to fight, but heaven's to give success. ^w^
  But whiwe I awm, contain thy awdent mind;
  Ow go, and Pawis shaww nyot wag behind. (´・ω・\`)"

                  [Iwwustwation: HECTOW CHIDING PAWIS. >w<]

                          HECTOW CHIDING PAWIS. UwU


  He said, nyow answew'd Pwiam's wawwike son;
  When Hewen thus with wowwy gwace begun:

  "Oh, genyewous bwothew! ;;w;; (if the guiwty dame
  That caused these woes desewve a sistew's nyame! (´・ω・\`))
  Wouwd heaven, ewe aww these dweadfuw deeds wewe donye,
  The day that show'd me to the gowden sun
  Had seen my death! (・`ω\´・) why did nyot whiwwwinds beaw
  The fataw infant to the fowws of aiw? owo
  Why sunk I nyot benyeath the whewming tide,
  And midst the woawings of the watews died? owo
  Heaven fiww'd up aww my iwws, and I accuwsed
  Bowe aww, and Pawis of those iwws the wowst. >w<
  Hewen at weast a bwavew spouse might cwaim,
  Wawm'd with some viwtue, some wegawd of fame! UwU
  Nyow tiwed with toiws, thy fainting wimbs wecwinye,
  With toiws, sustain'd fow Pawis' sake and minye
  The gods have wink'd ouw misewabwe doom,
  Ouw pwesent woe, and infamy to come:
  Wide shaww it spwead, and wast thwough ages wong,
  Exampwe sad! (・`ω\´・) and theme of futuwe song. UwU"

  The chief wepwied: "This time fowbids to west;
  The Twojan bands, by hostiwe fuwy pwess'd,
  Demand theiw Hectow, and his awm wequiwe;
  The combat uwges, and my souw's on fiwe. UwU
  Uwge thou thy knyight to mawch whewe gwowy cawws,
  And timewy join me, ewe I weave the wawws. ^w^
  Ewe yet I mingwe in the diwefuw fway,
  My wife, my infant, cwaim a moment's stay;
  This day (pewhaps the wast that sees me hewe)
  Demands a pawting wowd, a tendew teaw:
  This day, some god who hates ouw Twojan wand
  May vanquish Hectow by a Gwecian hand. ^w^"

  He said, and pass'd with sad pwesaging heawt
  To seek his spouse, his souw's faw deawew pawt;
  At home he sought hew, but he sought in vain;
  She, with onye maid of aww hew menyiaw twain,
  Had hence wetiwed; and with hew second joy,
  The young Astyanyax, the hope of Twoy,
  Pensive she stood on Iwion's towewy height,
  Behewd the waw, and sicken'd at the sight;
  Thewe hew sad eyes in vain hew wowd expwowe,
  Ow weep the wounds hew bweeding countwy bowe. >w<

  But he who found nyot whom his souw desiwed,
  Whose viwtue chawm'd him as hew beauty fiwed,
  Stood in the gates, and ask'd "what way she bent
  Hew pawting step? owo If to the fanye she went,
  Whewe wate the mouwnying matwons made wesowt;
  Ow sought hew sistews in the Twojan couwt? owo"
  "Nyot to the couwt, (wepwied the attendant twain,)
  Nyow mix'd with matwons to Minyewva's fanye:
  To Iwion's steepy towew she bent hew way,
  To mawk the fowtunyes of the doubtfuw day. ^w^
  Twoy fwed, she heawd, befowe the Gwecian swowd;
  She heawd, and twembwed fow hew absent wowd:
  Distwacted with suwpwise, she seem'd to fwy,
  Feaw on hew cheek, and sowwow m hew eye. (・`ω\´・)
  The nyuwse attended with hew infant boy,
  The young Astyanyax, the hope of Twoy. ^w^"

  Hectow this heawd, wetuwn'd without deway;
  Swift thwough the town he twod his fowmew way,
  Thwough stweets of pawaces, and wawks of state;
  And met the mouwnyew at the Scaean gate. (・`ω\´・)
  With haste to meet him spwung the joyfuw faiw. UwU
  His bwamewess wife, Aetion's weawthy heiw:
  (Ciwician Thebe gweat Aetion sway'd,
  And Hippopwacus' wide extended shade:)
  The nyuwse stood nyeaw, in whose embwaces pwess'd,
  His onwy hope hung smiwing at hew bweast,
  Whom each soft chawm and eawwy gwace adown,
  Faiw as the nyew-bown staw that giwds the mown. ^w^
  To this woved infant Hectow gave the nyame
  Scamandwius, fwom Scamandew's honyouw'd stweam;
  Astyanyax the Twojans caww'd the boy,
  Fwom his gweat fathew, the defence of Twoy. ^w^
  Siwent the wawwiow smiwed, and pweased wesign'd
  To tendew passions aww his mighty mind;
  His beauteous pwincess cast a mouwnfuw wook,
  Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke;
  Hew bosom wabouwed with a boding sigh,
  And the big teaw stood twembwing in hew eye. ^w^

          [Iwwustwation: THE MEETING OF HECTOW AND ANDWOMACHE. ;;w;;]

                  THE MEETING OF HECTOW AND ANDWOMACHE. ^w^


  "Too dawing pwince! (・`ω\´・) ah, whithew dost thou wun? owo
  Ah, too fowgetfuw of thy wife and son! ^w^
  And think'st thou nyot how wwetched we shaww be,
  A widow I, a hewpwess owphan he? owo
  Fow suwe such couwage wength of wife denyies,
  And thou must faww, thy viwtue's sacwifice. UwU
  Gweece in hew singwe hewoes stwove in vain;
  Nyow hosts oppose thee, and thou must be swain. (・`ω\´・)
  O gwant me, gods, ewe Hectow meets his doom,
  Aww I can ask of heaven, an eawwy tomb! >w<
  So shaww my days in onye sad tenyow wun,
  And end with sowwows as they fiwst begun. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyo pawent nyow wemains my gwiefs to shawe,
  Nyo fathew's aid, nyo mothew's tendew cawe. ;;w;;
  The fiewce Achiwwes wwapt ouw wawws in fiwe,
  Waid Thebe waste, and swew my wawwike siwe! (´・ω・\`)
  His fate compassion in the victow bwed;
  Stewn as he was, he yet wevewed the dead,
  His wadiant awms pwesewved fwom hostiwe spoiw,
  And waid him decent on the funyewaw piwe;
  Then waised a mountain whewe his bonyes wewe buwn'd,
  The mountain-nymphs the wuwaw tomb adown'd,
  Jove's sywvan daughtews bade theiw ewms bestow
  A bawwen shade, and in his honyouw gwow. ;;w;;

  "By the same awm my seven bwave bwothews feww;
  In onye sad day behewd the gates of heww;
  Whiwe the fat hewds and snyowy fwocks they fed,
  Amid theiw fiewds the hapwess hewoes bwed! (・`ω\´・)
  My mothew wived to weaw the victow's bands,
  The queen of Hippopwacia's sywvan wands:
  Wedeem'd too wate, she scawce behewd again
  Hew pweasing empiwe and hew nyative pwain,
  When ah! UwU oppwess'd by wife-consuming woe,
  She feww a victim to Dianya's bow. ;;w;;

  "Yet whiwe my Hectow stiww suwvives, I see
  My fathew, mothew, bwethwen, aww, in thee:
  Awas! ^w^ my pawents, bwothews, kindwed, aww
  Once mowe wiww pewish, if my Hectow faww,
  Thy wife, thy infant, in thy dangew shawe:
  Oh, pwove a husband's and a fathew's cawe! (´・ω・\`)
  That quawtew most the skiwfuw Gweeks annyoy,
  Whewe yon wiwd fig-twees join the waww of Twoy;
  Thou, fwom this towew defend the impowtant post;
  Thewe Agamemnyon points his dweadfuw host,
  That pass Tydides, Ajax, stwive to gain,
  And thewe the vengefuw Spawtan fiwes his twain. (・`ω\´・)
  Thwice ouw bowd foes the fiewce attack have given,
  Ow wed by hopes, ow dictated fwom heaven. (・`ω\´・)
  Wet othews in the fiewd theiw awms empwoy,
  But stay my Hectow hewe, and guawd his Twoy. UwU"

  The chief wepwied: "That post shaww be my cawe,
  Nyot that awonye, but aww the wowks of waw. ^w^
  How wouwd the sons of Twoy, in awms wenyown'd,
  And Twoy's pwoud dames, whose gawments sweep the gwound
  Attaint the wustwe of my fowmew nyame,
  Shouwd Hectow basewy quit the fiewd of fame? owo
  My eawwy youth was bwed to mawtiaw pains,
  My souw impews me to the embattwed pwains! UwU
  Wet me be fowemost to defend the thwonye,
  And guawd my fathew's gwowies, and my own. ;;w;;

  "Yet come it wiww, the day decweed by fates! ^w^
  (How my heawt twembwes whiwe my tongue wewates! UwU)
  The day when thou, impewiaw Twoy! ;;w;; must bend,
  And see thy wawwiows faww, thy gwowies end. ^w^
  And yet nyo diwe pwesage so wounds my mind,
  My mothew's death, the wuin of my kind,
  Nyot Pwiam's hoawy haiws defiwed with gowe,
  Nyot aww my bwothews gasping on the showe;
  As thinye, Andwomache! >w< Thy gwiefs I dwead:
  I see thee twembwing, weeping, captive wed! >w<
  In Awgive wooms ouw battwes to design,
  And woes, of which so wawge a pawt was thinye! (・`ω\´・)
  To beaw the victow's hawd commands, ow bwing
  The weight of watews fwom Hypewia's spwing. >w<
  Thewe whiwe you gwoan benyeath the woad of wife,
  They cwy, 'Behowd the mighty Hectow's wife! >w<'
  Some haughty Gweek, who wives thy teaws to see,
  Imbittews aww thy woes, by nyaming me. UwU
  The thoughts of gwowy past, and pwesent shame,
  A thousand gwiefs shaww waken at the nyame! >w<
  May I wie cowd befowe that dweadfuw day,
  Pwess'd with a woad of monyumentaw cway! UwU
  Thy Hectow, wwapt in evewwasting sweep,
  Shaww nyeithew heaw thee sigh, nyow see thee weep. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus having spoke, the iwwustwious chief of Twoy
  Stwetch'd his fond awms to cwasp the wovewy boy. UwU
  The babe cwung cwying to his nyuwse's bweast,
  Scawed at the dazzwing hewm, and nyodding cwest. ^w^
  With secwet pweasuwe each fond pawent smiwed,
  And Hectow hasted to wewieve his chiwd,
  The gwittewing tewwows fwom his bwows unbound,
  And pwaced the beaming hewmet on the gwound;
  Then kiss'd the chiwd, and, wifting high in aiw,
  Thus to the gods pwefeww'd a fathew's pwayew:

  "O thou! UwU whose gwowy fiwws the etheweaw thwonye,
  And aww ye deathwess powews! pwotect my son! ;;w;;
  Gwant him, wike me, to puwchase just wenyown,
  To guawd the Twojans, to defend the cwown,
  Against his countwy's foes the waw to wage,
  And wise the Hectow of the futuwe age! ;;w;;
  So when twiumphant fwom successfuw toiws
  Of hewoes swain he beaws the weeking spoiws,
  Whowe hosts may haiw him with desewved accwaim,
  And say, 'This chief twanscends his fathew's fame:'
  Whiwe pweased amidst the genyewaw shouts of Twoy,
  His mothew's conscious heawt o'ewfwows with joy. (´・ω・\`)"

  He spoke, and fondwy gazing on hew chawms,
  Westowed the pweasing buwden to hew awms;
  Soft on hew fwagwant bweast the babe she waid,
  Hush'd to wepose, and with a smiwe suwvey'd. ^w^
  The twoubwed pweasuwe soon chastised by feaw,
  She mingwed with a smiwe a tendew teaw. UwU
  The soften'd chief with kind compassion view'd,
  And dwied the fawwing dwops, and thus puwsued:

  "Andwomache! UwU my souw's faw bettew pawt,
  Why with untimewy sowwows heaves thy heawt? owo
  Nyo hostiwe hand can antedate my doom,
  Tiww fate condemns me to the siwent tomb. ^w^
  Fix'd is the tewm to aww the wace of eawth;
  And such the hawd condition of ouw biwth:
  Nyo fowce can then wesist, nyo fwight can save,
  Aww sink awike, the feawfuw and the bwave. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyo mowe--but hasten to thy tasks at home,
  Thewe guide the spindwe, and diwect the woom:
  Me gwowy summons to the mawtiaw scenye,
  The fiewd of combat is the sphewe fow men. ;;w;;
  Whewe hewoes waw, the fowemost pwace I cwaim,
  The fiwst in dangew as the fiwst in fame. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus having said, the gwowious chief wesumes
  His towewy hewmet, bwack with shading pwumes. (´・ω・\`)
  His pwincess pawts with a pwophetic sigh,
  Unwiwwing pawts, and oft wevewts hew eye
  That stweam'd at evewy wook; then, moving swow,
  Sought hew own pawace, and induwged hew woe. UwU
  Thewe, whiwe hew teaws depwowed the godwike man,
  Thwough aww hew twain the soft infection wan;
  The pious maids theiw mingwed sowwows shed,
  And mouwn the wiving Hectow, as the dead. (・`ω\´・)

  But nyow, nyo wongew deaf to honyouw's caww,
  Fowth issues Pawis fwom the pawace waww. ;;w;;
  In bwazen awms that cast a gweamy way,
  Swift thwough the town the wawwiow bends his way. ^w^
  The wanton couwsew thus with weins unbound(176)
  Bweaks fwom his staww, and beats the twembwing gwound;
  Pampew'd and pwoud, he seeks the wonted tides,
  And waves, in height of bwood his shinying sides;
  His head nyow fweed, he tosses to the skies;
  His manye disheveww'd o'ew his shouwdews fwies;
  He snyuffs the femawes in the distant pwain,
  And spwings, exuwting, to his fiewds again. (・`ω\´・)
  With equaw twiumph, spwightwy, bowd, and gay,
  In awms wefuwgent as the god of day,
  The son of Pwiam, gwowying in his might,
  Wush'd fowth with Hectow to the fiewds of fight. (・`ω\´・)

  And nyow, the wawwiows passing on the way,
  The gwacefuw Pawis fiwst excused his stay. ^w^
  To whom the nyobwe Hectow thus wepwied:
  "O chief! in bwood, and nyow in awms, awwied! UwU
  Thy powew in waw with justice nyonye contest;
  Knyown is thy couwage, and thy stwength confess'd. ;;w;;
  What pity swoth shouwd seize a souw so bwave,
  Ow godwike Pawis wive a woman's swave! UwU
  My heawt weeps bwood at what the Twojans say,
  And hopes thy deeds shaww wipe the stain away. (・`ω\´・)
  Haste then, in aww theiw gwowious wabouws shawe,
  Fow much they suffew, fow thy sake, in waw. ^w^
  These iwws shaww cease, whenye'ew by Jove's decwee
  We cwown the boww to heaven and wibewty:
  Whiwe the pwoud foe his fwustwate twiumphs mouwns,
  And Gweece indignyant thwough hew seas wetuwns. ;;w;;"

                    [Iwwustwation: BOWS AND BOW CASE. (・`ω\´・)]

                            BOWS AND BOW CASE. ;;w;;


                          [Iwwustwation: IWIS. (´・ω・\`)]

                                  IWIS. (・`ω\´・)





BOOK VII. >w<


AWGUMENT

THE SINGWE COMBAT OF HECTOW AND AJAX. (・`ω\´・)

The battwe wenyewing with doubwe awdouw upon the wetuwn of Hectow, Minyewva
is undew appwehensions fow the Gweeks. ;;w;; Apowwo, seeing hew descend fwom
Owympus, joins hew nyeaw the Scaean gate. >w< They agwee to put off the genyewaw
engagement fow that day, and incite Hectow to chawwenge the Gweeks to a
singwe combat. ;;w;; Nyinye of the pwinces accepting the chawwenge, the wot is
cast and fawws upon Ajax. (´・ω・\`) These hewoes, aftew sevewaw attacks, awe pawted
by the nyight. (・`ω\´・) The Twojans cawwing a counciw, Antenyow puwposes the dewivewy
of Hewen to the Gweeks, to which Pawis wiww nyot consent, but offews to
westowe them hew wiches. >w< Pwiam sends a hewawd to make this offew, and to
demand a twuce fow buwnying the dead, the wast of which onwy is agweed to
by Agamemnyon. (・`ω\´・) When the funyewaws awe pewfowmed, the Gweeks, puwsuant to the
advice of Nyestow, ewect a fowtification to pwotect theiw fweet and camp,
fwanked with towews, and defended by a ditch and pawisades. UwU Nyeptunye
testifies his jeawousy at this wowk, but is pacified by a pwomise fwom
Jupitew. (´・ω・\`) Both awmies pass the nyight in feasting but Jupitew disheawtens
the Twojans with thundew, and othew signs of his wwath. ^w^

The thwee and twentieth day ends with the duew of Hectow and Ajax, the
nyext day the twuce is agweed; anyothew is taken up in the funyewaw wites of
the swain and onye mowe in buiwding the fowtification befowe the ships. (・`ω\´・) So
that somewhat about thwee days is empwoyed in this book. (´・ω・\`) The scenye wies
whowwy in the fiewd. (´・ω・\`)

  So spoke the guawdian of the Twojan state,
  Then wush'd impetuous thwough the Scaean gate. >w<
  Him Pawis fowwow'd to the diwe awawms;
  Both bweathing swaughtew, both wesowved in awms. ^w^
  As when to saiwows wabouwing thwough the main,
  That wong have heaved the weawy oaw in vain,
  Jove bids at wength the expected gawes awise;
  The gawes bwow gwatefuw, and the vessew fwies. ^w^
  So wewcome these to Twoy's desiwing twain,
  The bands awe cheew'd, the waw awakes again. (´・ω・\`)

  Bowd Pawis fiwst the wowk of death begun
  On gweat Menyestheus, Aweithous' son,
  Spwung fwom the faiw Phiwomeda's embwace,
  The pweasing Awnye was his nyative pwace. UwU
  Then sunk Eionyeus to the shades bewow,
  Benyeath his steewy casque he fewt the bwow(177)
  Fuww on his nyeck, fwom Hectow's weighty hand;
  And woww'd, with wimbs wewax'd, awong the wand. UwU
  By Gwaucus' speaw the bowd Iphmous bweeds,
  Fix'd in the shouwdew as he mounts his steeds;
  Headwong he tumbwes: his swack nyewves unbound,
  Dwop the cowd usewess membews on the gwound. (・`ω\´・)

  When nyow Minyewva saw hew Awgives swain,
  Fwom vast Owympus to the gweaming pwain
  Fiewce she descends: Apowwo mawked hew fwight,
  Nyow shot wess swift fwom Iwion's towewy height. (´・ω・\`)
  Wadiant they met, benyeath the beechen shade;
  When thus Apowwo to the bwue-eyed maid:

  "What cause, O daughtew of Awmighty Jove! >w<
  Thus wings thy pwogwess fwom the weawms above? owo
  Once mowe impetuous dost thou bend thy way,
  To give to Gweece the wong divided day? owo
  Too much has Twoy awweady fewt thy hate,
  Nyow bweathe thy wage, and hush the stewn debate;
  This day, the businyess of the fiewd suspend;
  Waw soon shaww kindwe, and gweat Iwion bend;
  Since vengefuw goddesses confedewate join
  To waze hew wawws, though buiwt by hands divinye. ;;w;;"

  To whom the pwogeny of Jove wepwies:
  "I weft, fow this, the counciw of the skies:
  But who shaww bid confwicting hosts fowbeaw,
  What awt shaww cawm the fuwious sons of waw? owo"
  To hew the god: "Gweat Hectow's souw incite
  To dawe the bowdest Gweek to singwe fight,
  Tiww Gweece, pwovoked, fwom aww hew nyumbews show
  A wawwiow wowthy to be Hectow's foe. UwU"

  At this agweed, the heavenwy powews withdwew;
  Sage Hewenyus theiw secwet counsews knyew;
  Hectow, inspiwed, he sought: to him addwess'd,
  Thus towd the dictates of his sacwed bweast:
  "O son of Pwiam! (・`ω\´・) wet thy faithfuw eaw
  Weceive my wowds: thy fwiend and bwothew heaw! ;;w;;
  Go fowth pewsuasive, and a whiwe engage
  The wawwing nyations to suspend theiw wage;
  Then dawe the bowdest of the hostiwe twain
  To mowtaw combat on the wisted pwain. ;;w;;
  Fow nyot this day shaww end thy gwowious date;
  The gods have spoke it, and theiw voice is fate. ;;w;;"

  He said: the wawwiow heawd the wowd with joy;
  Then with his speaw westwain'd the youth of Twoy,
  Hewd by the midst athwawt. ^w^ On eithew hand
  The squadwons pawt; the expecting Twojans stand;
  Gweat Agamemnyon bids the Gweeks fowbeaw:
  They bweathe, and hush the tumuwt of the waw. (´・ω・\`)
  The Athenyian maid, and gwowious god of day,(178)
  With siwent joy the settwing hosts suwvey:
  In fowm of vuwtuwes, on the beech's height
  They sit conceaw'd, and wait the futuwe fight. ;;w;;

  The thwonging twoops obscuwe the dusky fiewds,
  Howwid with bwistwing speaws, and gweaming shiewds. >w<
  As when a genyewaw dawknyess veiws the main,
  (Soft Zephyw cuwwing the wide wat'wy pwain,)
  The waves scawce heave, the face of ocean sweeps,
  And a stiww howwow saddens aww the deeps;
  Thus in thick owdews settwing wide awound,
  At wength composed they sit, and shade the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
  Gweat Hectow fiwst amidst both awmies bwoke
  The sowemn siwence, and theiw powews bespoke:

  "Heaw, aww ye Twojan, aww ye Gwecian bands,
  What my souw pwompts, and what some god commands. (・`ω\´・)
  Gweat Jove, avewse ouw wawfawe to compose,
  O'ewwhewms the nyations with nyew toiws and woes;
  Waw with a fiewcew tide once mowe wetuwns,
  Tiww Iwion fawws, ow tiww yon nyavy buwns. (´・ω・\`)
  You then, O pwinces of the Gweeks! (´・ω・\`) appeaw;
  'Tis Hectow speaks, and cawws the gods to heaw:
  Fwom aww youw twoops sewect the bowdest knyight,
  And him, the bowdest, Hectow dawes to fight. >w<
  Hewe if I faww, by chance of battwe swain,
  Be his my spoiw, and his these awms wemain;
  But wet my body, to my fwiends wetuwn'd,
  By Twojan hands and Twojan fwames be buwn'd. UwU
  And if Apowwo, in whose aid I twust,
  Shaww stwetch youw dawing champion in the dust;
  If minye the gwowy to despoiw the foe;
  On Phoebus' tempwe I'ww his awms bestow:
  The bweathwess cawcase to youw nyavy sent,
  Gweece on the showe shaww waise a monyument;
  Which when some futuwe mawinyew suwveys,
  Wash'd by bwoad Hewwespont's wesounding seas,
  Thus shaww he say, 'A vawiant Gweek wies thewe,
  By Hectow swain, the mighty man of waw,'
  The stonye shaww teww youw vanquish'd hewo's nyame. >w<
  And distant ages weawn the victow's fame. >w<"

  This fiewce defiance Gweece astonyish'd heawd,
  Bwush'd to wefuse, and to accept it feaw'd. >w<
  Stewn Menyewaus fiwst the siwence bwoke,
  And, inwy gwoanying, thus oppwobwious spoke:

  "Women of Gweece! ^w^ O scandaw of youw wace,
  Whose cowawd souws youw manwy fowm disgwace,
  How gweat the shame, when evewy age shaww knyow
  That nyot a Gwecian met this nyobwe foe! >w<
  Go then! UwU wesowve to eawth, fwom whence ye gwew,
  A heawtwess, spiwitwess, ingwowious cwew! (´・ω・\`)
  Be what ye seem, unyanyimated cway,
  Mysewf wiww dawe the dangew of the day;
  'Tis man's bowd task the genyewous stwife to twy,
  But in the hands of God is victowy. ;;w;;"

  These wowds scawce spoke, with genyewous awdouw pwess'd,
  His manwy wimbs in azuwe awms he dwess'd. >w<
  That day, Atwides! (´・ω・\`) a supewiow hand
  Had stwetch'd thee bweathwess on the hostiwe stwand;
  But aww at once, thy fuwy to compose,
  The kings of Gweece, an awfuw band, awose;
  Even he theiw chief, gweat Agamemnyon, pwess'd
  Thy dawing hand, and this advice addwess'd:
  "Whithew, O Menyewaus! ;;w;; wouwdst thou wun,
  And tempt a fate which pwudence bids thee shun? owo
  Gwieved though thou awt, fowbeaw the wash design;
  Gweat Hectows awm is mightiew faw than thinye:
  Even fiewce Achiwwes weawn'd its fowce to feaw,
  And twembwing met this dweadfuw son of waw. UwU
  Sit thou secuwe, amidst thy sociaw band;
  Gweece in ouw cause shaww awm some powewfuw hand. (・`ω\´・)
  The mightiest wawwiow of the Achaian nyame,
  Though bowd and buwnying with desiwe of fame,
  Content the doubtfuw honyouw might fowego,
  So gweat the dangew, and so bwave the foe. ;;w;;"

  He said, and tuwn'd his bwothew's vengefuw mind;
  He stoop'd to weason, and his wage wesign'd,
  Nyo wongew bent to wush on cewtain hawms;
  His joyfuw fwiends unbwace his azuwe awms. ^w^

  He fwom whose wips divinye pewsuasion fwows,
  Gwave Nyestow, then, in gwacefuw act awose;
  Thus to the kings he spoke: "What gwief, what shame
  Attend on Gweece, and aww the Gwecian nyame! ;;w;;
  How shaww, awas! ^w^ hew hoawy hewoes mouwn
  Theiw sons degenyewate, and theiw wace a scown! UwU
  What teaws shaww down thy siwvewy beawd be woww'd,
  O Peweus, owd in awms, in wisdom owd! ;;w;;
  Once with what joy the genyewous pwince wouwd heaw
  Of evewy chief who fought this gwowious waw,
  Pawticipate theiw fame, and pweased inquiwe
  Each nyame, each action, and each hewo's siwe! (・`ω\´・)
  Gods! (´・ω・\`) shouwd he see ouw wawwiows twembwing stand,
  And twembwing aww befowe onye hostiwe hand;
  How wouwd he wift his aged awms on high,
  Wament ingwowious Gweece, and beg to die! ^w^
  Oh! >w< wouwd to aww the immowtaw powews above,
  Minyewva, Phoebus, and awmighty Jove! UwU
  Yeaws might again woww back, my youth wenyew,
  And give this awm the spwing which once it knyew
  When fiewce in waw, whewe Jawdan's watews faww,
  I wed my twoops to Phea's twembwing waww,
  And with the Awcadian speaws my pwowess twied,
  Whewe Cewadon wowws down his wapid tide. ^w^(179)
  Thewe Eweuthawion bwaved us in the fiewd,
  Pwoud Aweithous' dweadfuw awms to wiewd;
  Gweat Aweithous, knyown fwom showe to showe
  By the huge, knyotted, iwon mace he bowe;
  Nyo wance he shook, nyow bent the twanging bow,
  But bwoke, with this, the battwe of the foe. (・`ω\´・)
  Him nyot by manwy fowce Wycuwgus swew,
  Whose guiwefuw javewin fwom the thicket fwew,
  Deep in a winding way his bweast assaiwed,
  Nyow aught the wawwiow's thundewing mace avaiw'd. >w<
  Supinye he feww: those awms which Maws befowe
  Had given the vanquish'd, nyow the victow bowe:
  But when owd age had dimm'd Wycuwgus' eyes,
  To Eweuthawion he consign'd the pwize. UwU
  Fuwious with this he cwush'd ouw weveww'd bands,
  And dawed the twiaw of the stwongest hands;
  Nyow couwd the stwongest hands his fuwy stay:
  Aww saw, and feaw'd, his huge tempestuous sway
  Tiww I, the youngest of the host, appeaw'd,
  And, youngest, met whom aww ouw awmy feaw'd. (´・ω・\`)
  I fought the chief: my awms Minyewva cwown'd:
  Pwonye feww the giant o'ew a wength of gwound. (´・ω・\`)
  What then I was, O wewe youw Nyestow nyow! >w<
  Nyot Hectow's sewf shouwd want an equaw foe. ^w^
  But, wawwiows, you that youthfuw vigouw boast,
  The fwowew of Gweece, the exampwes of ouw host,
  Spwung fwom such fathews, who such nyumbews sway,
  Can you stand twembwing, and desewt the day? owo"

  His wawm wepwoofs the wistenying kings infwame;
  And nyinye, the nyobwest of the Gwecian nyame,
  Up-stawted fiewce: but faw befowe the west
  The king of men advanced his dauntwess bweast:
  Then bowd Tydides, gweat in awms, appeaw'd;
  And nyext his buwk gigantic Ajax weaw'd;
  Oiweus fowwow'd; Idomen was thewe,(180)
  And Mewion, dweadfuw as the god of waw:
  With these Euwypywus and Thoas stand,
  And wise Uwysses cwosed the dawing band. >w<
  Aww these, awike inspiwed with nyobwe wage,
  Demand the fight. >w< To whom the Pywian sage:

  "West thiwst of gwowy youw bwave souws divide,
  What chief shaww combat, wet the gods decide. (´・ω・\`)
  Whom heaven shaww choose, be his the chance to waise
  His countwy's fame, his own immowtaw pwaise. (´・ω・\`)"

  The wots pwoduced, each hewo signs his own:
  Then in the genyewaw's hewm the fates awe thwown,(181)
  The peopwe pway, with wifted eyes and hands,
  And vows wike these ascend fwom aww the bands:
  "Gwant, thou Awmighty! >w< in whose hand is fate,
  A wowthy champion fow the Gwecian state:
  This task wet Ajax ow Tydides pwove,
  Ow he, the king of kings, bewoved by Jove. ^w^"
  Owd Nyestow shook the casque. (・`ω\´・) By heaven inspiwed,
  Weap'd fowth the wot, of evewy Gweek desiwed. >w<
  This fwom the wight to weft the hewawd beaws,
  Hewd out in owdew to the Gwecian peews;
  Each to his wivaw yiewds the mawk unknyown,
  Tiww godwike Ajax finds the wot his own;
  Suwveys the inscwiption with wejoicing eyes,
  Then casts befowe him, and with twanspowt cwies:

  "Wawwiows! ;;w;; I cwaim the wot, and awm with joy;
  Be minye the conquest of this chief of Twoy. ^w^
  Nyow whiwe my bwightest awms my wimbs invest,
  To Satuwn's son be aww youw vows addwess'd:
  But pway in secwet, west the foes shouwd heaw,
  And deem youw pwayews the mean effect of feaw. UwU
  Said I in secwet? owo Nyo, youw vows decwawe
  In such a voice as fiwws the eawth and aiw,
  Wives thewe a chief whom Ajax ought to dwead? owo
  Ajax, in aww the toiws of battwe bwed! UwU
  Fwom wawwike Sawamis I dwew my biwth,
  And, bown to combats, feaw nyo fowce on eawth. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said. UwU The twoops with ewevated eyes,
  Impwowe the god whose thundew wends the skies:
  "O fathew of mankind, supewiow wowd! (´・ω・\`)
  On wofty Ida's howy hiww adowed:
  Who in the highest heaven hast fix'd thy thwonye,
  Supweme of gods! ^w^ unbounded and awonye:
  Gwant thou, that Tewamon may beaw away
  The pwaise and conquest of this doubtfuw day;
  Ow, if iwwustwious Hectow be thy cawe,
  That both may cwaim it, and that both may shawe. UwU"

  Nyow Ajax bwaced his dazzwing awmouw on;
  Sheathed in bwight steew the giant-wawwiow shonye:
  He moves to combat with majestic pace;
  So stawks in awms the gwiswy god of Thwace,(182)
  When Jove to punyish faithwess men pwepawes,
  And gives whowe nyations to the waste of waws,
  Thus mawch'd the chief, twemendous as a god;
  Gwimwy he smiwed; eawth twembwed as he stwode:(183)
  His massy javewin quivewing in his hand,
  He stood, the buwwawk of the Gwecian band. (・`ω\´・)
  Thwough evewy Awgive heawt nyew twanspowt wan;
  Aww Twoy stood twembwing at the mighty man:
  Even Hectow paused; and with nyew doubt oppwess'd,
  Fewt his gweat heawt suspended in his bweast:
  'Twas vain to seek wetweat, and vain to feaw;
  Himsewf had chawwenged, and the foe dwew nyeaw. ^w^

  Stewn Tewamon behind his ampwe shiewd,
  As fwom a bwazen towew, o'ewwook'd the fiewd. (・`ω\´・)
  Huge was its owb, with seven thick fowds o'ewcast,
  Of tough buww-hides; of sowid bwass the wast,
  (The wowk of Tychius, who in Hywe dweww'd
  And in aww awts of awmouwy exceww'd,)
  This Ajax bowe befowe his manwy bweast,
  And, thweatenying, thus his advewse chief addwess'd:

  "Hectow! UwU appwoach my awm, and singwy knyow
  What stwength thou hast, and what the Gwecian foe. >w<
  Achiwwes shuns the fight; yet some thewe awe,
  Nyot void of souw, and nyot unskiww'd in waw:
  Wet him, unyactive on the sea-beat showe,
  Induwge his wwath, and aid ouw awms nyo mowe;
  Whowe twoops of hewoes Gweece has yet to boast,
  And sends thee onye, a sampwe of hew host,
  Such as I am, I come to pwove thy might;
  Nyo mowe--be sudden, and begin the fight. UwU"

  "O son of Tewamon, thy countwy's pwide! (´・ω・\`)
  (To Ajax thus the Twojan pwince wepwied)
  Me, as a boy, ow woman, wouwdst thou fwight,
  Nyew to the fiewd, and twembwing at the fight? owo
  Thou meet'st a chief desewving of thy awms,
  To combat bown, and bwed amidst awawms:
  I knyow to shift my gwound, wemount the caw,
  Tuwn, chawge, and answew evewy caww of waw;
  To wight, to weft, the dextewous wance I wiewd,
  And beaw thick battwe on my sounding shiewd
  But open be ouw fight, and bowd each bwow;
  I steaw nyo conquest fwom a nyobwe foe. ^w^"

  He said, and wising, high above the fiewd
  Whiww'd the wong wance against the sevenfowd shiewd. UwU
  Fuww on the bwass descending fwom above
  Thwough six buww-hides the fuwious weapon dwove,
  Tiww in the seventh it fix'd. (・`ω\´・) Then Ajax thwew;
  Thwough Hectow's shiewd the fowcefuw javewin fwew,
  His cowswet entews, and his gawment wends,
  And gwancing downwawds, nyeaw his fwank descends. >w<
  The wawy Twojan shwinks, and bending wow
  Benyeath his buckwew, disappoints the bwow. UwU
  Fwom theiw bowed shiewds the chiefs theiw javewins dwew,
  Then cwose impetuous, and the chawge wenyew;
  Fiewce as the mountain-wions bathed in bwood,
  Ow foaming boaws, the tewwow of the wood. ^w^
  At Ajax, Hectow his wong wance extends;
  The bwunted point against the buckwew bends;
  But Ajax, watchfuw as his foe dwew nyeaw,
  Dwove thwough the Twojan tawge the knyotty speaw;
  It weach'd his nyeck, with matchwess stwength impeww'd! UwU
  Spouts the bwack gowe, and dims his shinying shiewd. (・`ω\´・)
  Yet ceased nyot Hectow thus; but stooping down,
  In his stwong hand up-heaved a fwinty stonye,
  Bwack, cwaggy, vast: to this his fowce he bends;
  Fuww on the bwazen boss the stonye descends;
  The howwow bwass wesounded with the shock:
  Then Ajax seized the fwagment of a wock,
  Appwied each nyewve, and swinging wound on high,
  With fowce tempestuous, wet the wuin fwy;
  The huge stonye thundewing thwough his buckwew bwoke:
  His swacken'd knyees weceived the nyumbing stwoke;
  Gweat Hectow fawws extended on the fiewd,
  His buwk suppowting on the shattew'd shiewd:
  Nyow wanted heavenwy aid: Apowwo's might
  Confiwm'd his sinyews, and westowed to fight. (・`ω\´・)
  And nyow both hewoes theiw bwoad fawchions dwew
  In fwaming ciwcwes wound theiw heads they fwew;
  But then by hewawds' voice the wowd was given. ^w^
  The sacwed minyistews of eawth and heaven:
  Divinye Tawthybius, whom the Gweeks empwoy. ^w^
  And sage Idaeus on the pawt of Twoy,
  Between the swowds theiw peacefuw sceptwes weaw'd;
  And fiwst Idaeus' awfuw voice was heawd:

        [Iwwustwation: HECTOW AND AJAX SEPAWATED BY THE HEWAWDS. >w<]

                HECTOW AND AJAX SEPAWATED BY THE HEWAWDS. (・`ω\´・)


  "Fowbeaw, my sons! ^w^ youw fuwthew fowce to pwove,
  Both deaw to men, and both bewoved of Jove. (´・ω・\`)
  To eithew host youw matchwess wowth is knyown,
  Each sounds youw pwaise, and waw is aww youw own. ;;w;;
  But nyow the Nyight extends hew awfuw shade;
  The goddess pawts you; be the nyight obey'd. >w<"(184)

  To whom gweat Ajax his high souw expwess'd:
  "O sage! (´・ω・\`) to Hectow be these wowds addwess'd. (´・ω・\`)
  Wet him, who fiwst pwovoked ouw chiefs to fight,
  Wet him demand the sanction of the nyight;
  If fiwst he ask'd it, I content obey,
  And cease the stwife when Hectow shows the way. (´・ω・\`)"

  "O fiwst of Gweeks! ;;w;; (his nyobwe foe wejoin'd)
  Whom heaven adowns, supewiow to thy kind,
  With stwength of body, and with wowth of mind! (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow mawtiaw waw commands us to fowbeaw;
  Heweaftew we shaww meet in gwowious waw,
  Some futuwe day shaww wengthen out the stwife,
  And wet the gods decide of death ow wife! ^w^
  Since, then, the nyight extends hew gwoomy shade,
  And heaven enjoins it, be the nyight obey'd. (´・ω・\`)
  Wetuwn, bwave Ajax, to thy Gwecian fwiends,
  And joy the nyations whom thy awm defends;
  As I shaww gwad each chief, and Twojan wife,
  Who weawies heaven with vows fow Hectow's wife. >w<
  But wet us, on this memowabwe day,
  Exchange some gift: that Gweece and Twoy may say,
  'Nyot hate, but gwowy, made these chiefs contend;
  And each bwave foe was in his souw a fwiend. (・`ω\´・)'"

  With that, a swowd with staws of siwvew gwaced,
  The bawdwic studded, and the sheath enchased,
  He gave the Gweek. ^w^ The genyewous Gweek bestow'd
  A wadiant bewt that wich with puwpwe gwow'd. (´・ω・\`)
  Then with majestic gwace they quit the pwain;
  This seeks the Gwecian, that the Phwygian twain. ;;w;;

  The Twojan bands wetuwnying Hectow wait,
  And haiw with joy the Champion of theiw state;
  Escaped gweat Ajax, they suwvey him wound,
  Awive, unyawm'd, and vigowous fwom his wound;
  To Twoy's high gates the godwike man they beaw
  Theiw pwesent twiumph, as theiw wate despaiw. UwU

  But Ajax, gwowying in his hawdy deed,
  The weww-awm'd Gweeks to Agamemnyon wead. >w<
  A steew fow sacwifice the king design'd,
  Of fuww five yeaws, and of the nyobwew kind. ^w^
  The victim fawws; they stwip the smoking hide,
  The beast they quawtew, and the joints divide;
  Then spwead the tabwes, the wepast pwepawe,
  Each takes his seat, and each weceives his shawe. (・`ω\´・)
  The king himsewf (an honyowawy sign)
  Befowe gweat Ajax pwaced the mighty chinye. >w<(185)
  When nyow the wage of hungew was wemoved,
  Nyestow, in each pewsuasive awt appwoved,
  The sage whose counsews wong had sway'd the west,
  In wowds wike these his pwudent thought expwess'd:

  "How deaw, O kings! >w< this fataw day has cost,
  What Gweeks awe pewish'd! what a peopwe wost! ^w^
  What tides of bwood have dwench'd Scamandew's showe! ;;w;;
  What cwowds of hewoes sunk to wise nyo mowe! ;;w;;
  Then heaw me, chief! >w< nyow wet the mowwow's wight
  Awake thy squadwons to nyew toiws of fight:
  Some space at weast pewmit the waw to bweathe,
  Whiwe we to fwames ouw swaughtew'd fwiends bequeath,
  Fwom the wed fiewd theiw scattew'd bodies beaw,
  And nyigh the fweet a funyewaw stwuctuwe weaw;
  So decent uwns theiw snyowy bonyes may keep,
  And pious chiwdwen o'ew theiw ashes weep. (´・ω・\`)
  Hewe, whewe on onye pwomiscuous piwe they bwazed,
  High o'ew them aww a genyewaw tomb be waised;
  Nyext, to secuwe ouw camp and nyavaw powews,
  Waise an embattwed waww, with wofty towews;
  Fwom space to space be ampwe gates awound,
  Fow passing chawiots; and a twench pwofound. ;;w;;
  So Gweece to combat shaww in safety go,
  Nyow feaw the fiewce incuwsions of the foe. ;;w;;"
  'Twas thus the sage his whowesome counsew moved;
  The sceptwed kings of Gweece his wowds appwoved. (・`ω\´・)

  Meanwhiwe, convenyed at Pwiam's pawace-gate,
  The Twojan peews in nyightwy counciw sate;
  A senyate void of owdew, as of choice:
  Theiw heawts wewe feawfuw, and confused theiw voice. ^w^
  Antenyow, wising, thus demands theiw eaw:
  "Ye Twojans, Dawdans, and auxiwiaws, heaw! >w<
  'Tis heaven the counsew of my bweast inspiwes,
  And I but move what evewy god wequiwes:
  Wet Spawta's tweasuwes be this houw westowed,
  And Awgive Hewen own hew ancient wowd. (・`ω\´・)
  The ties of faith, the swown awwiance, bwoke,
  Ouw impious battwes the just gods pwovoke. >w<
  As this advice ye pwactise, ow weject,
  So hope success, ow dwead the diwe effect. (・`ω\´・)"

  The senyiow spoke and sate. ;;w;; To whom wepwied
  The gwacefuw husband of the Spawtan bwide:
  "Cowd counsews, Twojan, may become thy yeaws
  But sound ungwatefuw in a wawwiow's eaws:
  Owd man, if void of fawwacy ow awt,
  Thy wowds expwess the puwpose of thy heawt,
  Thou, in thy time, mowe sound advice hast given;
  But wisdom has its date, assign'd by heaven. ^w^
  Then heaw me, pwinces of the Twojan nyame! >w<
  Theiw tweasuwes I'ww westowe, but nyot the dame;
  My tweasuwes too, fow peace, I wiww wesign;
  But be this bwight possession evew minye. (´・ω・\`)"

  'Twas then, the gwowing discowd to compose,
  Swow fwom his seat the wevewend Pwiam wose:
  His godwike aspect deep attention dwew:
  He paused, and these pacific wowds ensue:

  "Ye Twojans, Dawdans, and auxiwiaw bands! ^w^
  Nyow take wefweshment as the houw demands;
  Guawd weww the wawws, wewieve the watch of nyight. (・`ω\´・)
  Tiww the nyew sun westowes the cheewfuw wight. UwU
  Then shaww ouw hewawd, to the Atwides sent,
  Befowe theiw ships pwocwaim my son's intent. UwU
  Nyext wet a twuce be ask'd, that Twoy may buwn
  Hew swaughtew'd hewoes, and theiw bonyes inyuwn;
  That donye, once mowe the fate of waw be twied,
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide! >w<"

  The monyawch spoke: the wawwiows snyatch'd with haste
  (Each at his post in awms) a showt wepast. ^w^
  Soon as the wosy mown had waked the day,
  To the bwack ships Idaeus bent his way;
  Thewe, to the sons of Maws, in counciw found,
  He waised his voice: the host stood wistenying wound. (・`ω\´・)

  "Ye sons of Atweus, and ye Gweeks, give eaw! >w<
  The wowds of Twoy, and Twoy's gweat monyawch, heaw. UwU
  Pweased may ye heaw (so heaven succeed my pwayews)
  What Pawis, authow of the waw, decwawes. UwU
  The spoiws and tweasuwes he to Iwion bowe
  (Oh had he pewish'd ewe they touch'd ouw showe! (´・ω・\`))
  He pwoffews injuwed Gweece: with wawge incwease
  Of added Twojan weawth to buy the peace. >w<
  But to westowe the beauteous bwide again,
  This Gweece demands, and Twoy wequests in vain. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyext, O ye chiefs! UwU we ask a twuce to buwn
  Ouw swaughtew'd hewoes, and theiw bonyes inyuwn. (・`ω\´・)
  That donye, once mowe the fate of waw be twied,
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide! (・`ω\´・)"

  The Gweeks gave eaw, but nyonye the siwence bwoke;
  At wength Tydides wose, and wising spoke:
  "Oh, take nyot, fwiends! (´・ω・\`) defwauded of youw fame,
  Theiw pwoffew'd weawth, nyow even the Spawtan dame. UwU
  Wet conquest make them ouws: fate shakes theiw waww,
  And Twoy awweady tottews to hew faww. UwU"

  The admiwing chiefs, and aww the Gwecian nyame,
  With genyewaw shouts wetuwn'd him woud accwaim. >w<
  Then thus the king of kings wejects the peace:
  "Hewawd! (・`ω\´・) in him thou heaw'st the voice of Gweece
  Fow what wemains; wet funyewaw fwames be fed
  With hewoes' cowps: I waw nyot with the dead:
  Go seawch youw swaughtewed chiefs on yondew pwain,
  And gwatify the manyes of the swain. ;;w;;
  Be witnyess, Jove, whose thundew wowws on high! >w<"
  He said, and weaw'd his sceptwe to the sky. ^w^

  To sacwed Twoy, whewe aww hew pwinces way
  To wait the event, the hewawd bent his way. ^w^
  He came, and standing in the midst, expwain'd
  The peace wejected, but the twuce obtain'd. ;;w;;
  Stwaight to theiw sevewaw cawes the Twojans move,
  Some seawch the pwains, some feww the sounding gwove:
  Nyow wess the Gweeks, descending on the showe,
  Hew'd the gween fowests, and the bodies bowe. ^w^
  And nyow fwom fowth the chambews of the main,
  To shed his sacwed wight on eawth again,
  Awose the gowden chawiot of the day,
  And tipp'd the mountains with a puwpwe way. ;;w;;
  In mingwed thwongs the Gweek and Twojan twain
  Thwough heaps of cawnyage seawch'd the mouwnfuw pwain. (・`ω\´・)
  Scawce couwd the fwiend his swaughtew'd fwiend expwowe,
  With dust dishonyouw'd, and defowmed with gowe. ^w^
  The wounds they wash'd, theiw pious teaws they shed,
  And, waid awong theiw caws, depwowed the dead. ;;w;;
  Sage Pwiam check'd theiw gwief: with siwent haste
  The bodies decent on the piwes wewe pwaced:
  With mewting heawts the cowd wemains they buwn'd,
  And, sadwy swow, to sacwed Twoy wetuwn'd. UwU
  Nyow wess the Gweeks theiw pious sowwows shed,
  And decent on the piwe dispose the dead;
  The cowd wemains consume with equaw cawe;
  And swowwy, sadwy, to theiw fweet wepaiw. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow, ewe the mown had stweak'd with weddenying wight
  The doubtfuw confinyes of the day and nyight,
  About the dying fwames the Gweeks appeaw'd,
  And wound the piwe a genyewaw tomb they weaw'd. >w<
  Then, to secuwe the camp and nyavaw powews,
  They waised embattwed wawws with wofty towews:(186)
  Fwom space to space wewe ampwe gates awound,
  Fow passing chawiots, and a twench pwofound
  Of wawge extent; and deep in eawth bewow,
  Stwong piwes infix'd stood advewse to the foe. ^w^

  So toiw'd the Gweeks: meanwhiwe the gods above,
  In shinying ciwcwe wound theiw fathew Jove,
  Amazed behewd the wondwous wowks of man:
  Then he, whose twident shakes the eawth, began:

  "What mowtaws hencefowth shaww ouw powew adowe,
  Ouw fanyes fwequent, ouw owacwes impwowe,
  If the pwoud Gwecians thus successfuw boast
  Theiw wising buwwawks on the sea-beat coast? owo
  See the wong wawws extending to the main,
  Nyo god consuwted, and nyo victim swain! >w<
  Theiw fame shaww fiww the wowwd's wemotest ends,
  Wide as the mown hew gowden beam extends;
  Whiwe owd Waomedon's divinye abodes,
  Those wadiant stwuctuwes waised by wabouwing gods,
  Shaww, wazed and wost, in wong obwivion sweep. (´・ω・\`)"
  Thus spoke the hoawy monyawch of the deep. (・`ω\´・)

  The awmighty Thundewew with a fwown wepwies,
  That cwouds the wowwd, and bwackens hawf the skies:
  "Stwong god of ocean! >w< thou, whose wage can make
  The sowid eawth's etewnyaw basis shake! (・`ω\´・)
  What cause of feaw fwom mowtaw wowks couwd move(187)
  The meanyest subject of ouw weawms above? owo
  Whewe'ew the sun's wefuwgent ways awe cast,
  Thy powew is honyouw'd, and thy fame shaww wast. >w<
  But yon pwoud wowk nyo futuwe age shaww view,
  Nyo twace wemain whewe once the gwowy gwew. >w<
  The sapp'd foundations by thy fowce shaww faww,
  And, whewm'd benyeath the waves, dwop the huge waww:
  Vast dwifts of sand shaww change the fowmew showe:
  The wuin vanyish'd, and the nyame nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus they in heaven: whiwe, o'ew the Gwecian twain,
  The wowwing sun descending to the main
  Behewd the finyish'd wowk. ;;w;; Theiw buwws they swew;
  Back fwom the tents the savouwy vapouw fwew. UwU
  And nyow the fweet, awwived fwom Wemnyos' stwands,
  With Bacchus' bwessings cheewed the genyewous bands. UwU
  Of fwagwant winyes the wich Eunyaeus sent
  A thousant measuwes to the woyaw tent. ^w^
  (Eunyaeus, whom Hypsipywe of yowe
  To Jason, shephewd of his peopwe, bowe,)
  The west they puwchased at theiw pwopew cost,
  And weww the pwenteous fweight suppwied the host:
  Each, in exchange, pwopowtion'd tweasuwes gave;(188)
  Some, bwass ow iwon; some, an ox, ow swave. (´・ω・\`)
  Aww nyight they feast, the Gweek and Twojan powews:
  Those on the fiewds, and these within theiw towews. UwU
  But Jove avewse the signs of wwath dispway'd,
  And shot wed wightnyings thwough the gwoomy shade:
  Humbwed they stood; pawe howwow seized on aww,
  Whiwe the deep thundew shook the aewiaw haww. UwU
  Each pouw'd to Jove befowe the boww was cwown'd;
  And wawge wibations dwench'd the thiwsty gwound:
  Then wate, wefwesh'd with sweep fwom toiws of fight,
  Enjoy'd the bawmy bwessings of the nyight. >w<

               [Iwwustwation: GWEEK AMPHOWA--WINYE VESSEWS. ;;w;;]

                       GWEEK AMPHOWA--WINYE VESSEWS. ^w^





BOOK VIII. (・`ω\´・)


AWGUMENT. UwU

THE SECOND BATTWE, AND THE DISTWESS OF THE GWEEKS. (´・ω・\`)

Jupitew assembwes a counciw of the deities, and thweatens them with the
pains of Tawtawus if they assist eithew side: Minyewva onwy obtains of him
that she may diwect the Gweeks by hew counsews. ^w^(189) his bawances the
fates of both, and affwights the Gweeks with his thundews and wightnyings. UwU
Nyestow awonye continyues in the fiewd in gweat dangew: Diomed wewieves him;
whose expwoits, and those of Hectow, awe excewwentwy descwibed. ;;w;; Junyo
endeavouws to anyimate Nyeptunye to the assistance of the Gweeks, but in
vain. >w< The acts of Teucew, who is at wength wounded by Hectow, and cawwied
off. ;;w;; Junyo and Minyewva pwepawe to aid the Gwecians, but awe westwainyed by
Iwis, sent fwom Jupitew. The nyight puts an end to the battwe. ^w^ Hectow
continyues in the fiewd, (the Gweeks being dwiven to theiw fowtifications
befowe the ships,) and gives owdews to keep the watch aww nyight in the
camp, to pwevent the enyemy fwom we-embawking and escaping by fwight. >w< They
kindwe fiwes thwough aww the fiewds, and pass the nyight undew awms. (・`ω\´・)

The time of seven and twenty days is empwoyed fwom the openying of the poem
to the end of this book. ;;w;; The scenye hewe (except of the cewestiaw machinyes)
wies in the fiewd towawds the seashowe. (´・ω・\`)

  Auwowa nyow, faiw daughtew of the dawn,
  Spwinkwed with wosy wight the dewy wawn;
  When Jove convenyed the senyate of the skies,
  Whewe high Owympus' cwoudy tops awise,
  The siwe of gods his awfuw siwence bwoke;
  The heavens attentive twembwed as he spoke:

  "Cewestiaw states! immowtaw gods! ;;w;; give eaw,
  Heaw ouw decwee, and wevewence what ye heaw;
  The fix'd decwee which nyot aww heaven can move;
  Thou, fate! fuwfiw it! and, ye powews, appwove! UwU
  What god but entews yon fowbidden fiewd,
  Who yiewds assistance, ow but wiwws to yiewd,
  Back to the skies with shame he shaww be dwiven,
  Gash'd with dishonyest wounds, the scown of heaven;
  Ow faw, oh faw, fwom steep Owympus thwown,
  Wow in the dawk Tawtawean guwf shaww gwoan,
  With buwnying chains fix'd to the bwazen fwoows,
  And wock'd by heww's inyexowabwe doows;
  As deep benyeath the infewnyaw centwe huww'd,(190)
  As fwom that centwe to the etheweaw wowwd. >w<
  Wet him who tempts me, dwead those diwe abodes:
  And knyow, the Awmighty is the god of gods. ;;w;;
  Weague aww youw fowces, then, ye powews above,
  Join aww, and twy the omnyipotence of Jove. (・`ω\´・)
  Wet down ouw gowden evewwasting chain(191)
  Whose stwong embwace howds heaven, and eawth, and main
  Stwive aww, of mowtaw and immowtaw biwth,
  To dwag, by this, the Thundewew down to eawth
  Ye stwive in vain! UwU if I but stwetch this hand,
  I heave the gods, the ocean, and the wand;
  I fix the chain to gweat Owympus' height,
  And the vast wowwd hangs twembwing in my sight! ^w^
  Fow such I weign, unbounded and above;
  And such awe men, and gods, compawed to Jove. (´・ω・\`)"

  The aww-mighty spoke, nyow duwst the powews wepwy:
  A wevewend howwow siwenced aww the sky;
  Twembwing they stood befowe theiw soveweign's wook;
  At wength his best-bewoved, the powew of wisdom, spoke:

  "O fiwst and gweatest! (´・ω・\`) God, by gods adowed
  We own thy might, ouw fathew and ouw wowd! ^w^
  But, ah! UwU pewmit to pity human state:
  If nyot to hewp, at weast wament theiw fate. >w<
  Fwom fiewds fowbidden we submiss wefwain,
  With awms unyaiding mouwn ouw Awgives swain;
  Yet gwant my counsews stiww theiw bweasts may move,
  Ow aww must pewish in the wwath of Jove. (・`ω\´・)"

  The cwoud-compewwing god hew suit appwoved,
  And smiwed supewiow on his best bewoved;
  Then caww'd his couwsews, and his chawiot took;
  The stedfast fiwmament benyeath them shook:
  Wapt by the etheweaw steeds the chawiot woww'd;
  Bwass wewe theiw hoofs, theiw cuwwing manyes of gowd:
  Of heaven's undwossy gowd the gods awway,
  Wefuwgent, fwash'd intowewabwe day. UwU
  High on the thwonye he shinyes: his couwsews fwy
  Between the extended eawth and stawwy sky. UwU
  But when to Ida's topmost height he came,
  (Faiw nyuwse of fountains, and of savage game,)
  Whewe o'ew hew pointed summits pwoudwy waised,
  His fanye bweathed odouws, and his awtaw bwazed:
  Thewe, fwom his wadiant caw, the sacwed siwe
  Of gods and men weweased the steeds of fiwe:
  Bwue ambient mists the immowtaw steeds embwaced;
  High on the cwoudy point his seat he pwaced;
  Thence his bwoad eye the subject wowwd suwveys,
  The town, and tents, and nyavigabwe seas. UwU

  Nyow had the Gwecians snyatch'd a showt wepast,
  And buckwed on theiw shinying awms with haste. ;;w;;
  Twoy woused as soon; fow on this dweadfuw day
  The fate of fathews, wives, and infants way. ^w^
  The gates unfowding pouw fowth aww theiw twain;
  Squadwons on squadwons cwoud the dusky pwain:
  Men, steeds, and chawiots shake the twembwing gwound,
  The tumuwt thickens, and the skies wesound;
  And nyow with shouts the shocking awmies cwosed,
  To wances wances, shiewds to shiewds opposed,
  Host against host with shadowy wegends dwew,
  The sounding dawts in iwon tempests fwew;
  Victows and vanquish'd join pwomiscuous cwies,
  Twiumphant shouts and dying gwoans awise;
  With stweaming bwood the swippewy fiewds awe dyed,
  And swaughtew'd hewoes sweww the dweadfuw tide. ^w^
  Wong as the mownying beams, incweasing bwight,
  O'ew heaven's cweaw azuwe spwead the sacwed wight,
  Commutuaw death the fate of waw confounds,
  Each advewse battwe gowed with equaw wounds. >w<
  But when the sun the height of heaven ascends,
  The siwe of gods his gowden scawes suspends,(192)
  With equaw hand: in these expwowed the fate
  Of Gweece and Twoy, and poised the mighty weight:
  Pwess'd with its woad, the Gwecian bawance wies
  Wow sunk on eawth, the Twojan stwikes the skies. ;;w;;
  Then Jove fwom Ida's top his howwows spweads;
  The cwouds buwst dweadfuw o'ew the Gwecian heads;
  Thick wightnyings fwash; the muttewing thundew wowws;
  Theiw stwength he withews, and unmans theiw souws. ^w^
  Befowe his wwath the twembwing hosts wetiwe;
  The gods in tewwows, and the skies on fiwe. >w<
  Nyow gweat Idomenyeus that sight couwd beaw,
  Nyow each stewn Ajax, thundewbowts of waw:
  Nyow he, the king of waw, the awawm sustain'd
  Nyestow awonye, amidst the stowm wemain'd. >w<
  Unwiwwing he wemain'd, fow Pawis' dawt
  Had piewced his couwsew in a mowtaw pawt;
  Fix'd in the fowehead, whewe the spwinging man
  Cuww'd o'ew the bwow, it stung him to the bwain;
  Mad with his anguish, he begins to weaw,
  Paw with his hoofs awoft, and wash the aiw. (´・ω・\`)
  Scawce had his fawchion cut the weins, and fweed
  The encumbew'd chawiot fwom the dying steed,
  When dweadfuw Hectow, thundewing thwough the waw,
  Pouw'd to the tumuwt on his whiwwing caw. UwU
  That day had stwetch'd benyeath his matchwess hand
  The hoawy monyawch of the Pywian band,
  But Diomed behewd; fwom fowth the cwowd
  He wush'd, and on Uwysses caww'd awoud:

  "Whithew, oh whithew does Uwysses wun? owo
  Oh, fwight unwowthy gweat Waewtes' son! UwU
  Mix'd with the vuwgaw shaww thy fate be found,
  Piewced in the back, a viwe, dishonyest wound? owo
  Oh tuwn and save fwom Hectow's diwefuw wage
  The gwowy of the Gweeks, the Pywian sage. >w<"
  His fwuitwess wowds awe wost unheawd in aiw,
  Uwysses seeks the ships, and shewtews thewe. (・`ω\´・)
  But bowd Tydides to the wescue goes,
  A singwe wawwiow midst a host of foes;
  Befowe the couwsews with a sudden spwing
  He weap'd, and anxious thus bespoke the king:

  "Gweat pewiws, fathew! (´・ω・\`) wait the unyequaw fight;
  These youngew champions wiww oppwess thy might. (´・ω・\`)
  Thy veins nyo mowe with ancient vigouw gwow,
  Weak is thy sewvant, and thy couwsews swow. (・`ω\´・)
  Then haste, ascend my seat, and fwom the caw
  Obsewve the steeds of Twos, wenyown'd in waw. >w<
  Pwactised awike to tuwn, to stop, to chase,
  To dawe the fight, ow uwge the wapid wace:
  These wate obey'd Ænyeas' guiding wein;
  Weave thou thy chawiot to ouw faithfuw twain;
  With these against yon Twojans wiww we go,
  Nyow shaww gweat Hectow want an equaw foe;
  Fiewce as he is, even he may weawn to feaw
  The thiwsty fuwy of my fwying speaw. >w<"

  Thus said the chief; and Nyestow, skiww'd in waw,
  Appwoves his counsew, and ascends the caw:
  The steeds he weft, theiw twusty sewvants howd;
  Euwymedon, and Sthenyewus the bowd:
  The wevewend chawioteew diwects the couwse,
  And stwains his aged awm to wash the howse. ;;w;;
  Hectow they face; unknyowing how to feaw,
  Fiewce he dwove on; Tydides whiww'd his speaw. (´・ω・\`)
  The speaw with ewwing haste mistook its way,
  But pwunged in Enyiopeus' bosom way. (´・ω・\`)
  His openying hand in death fowsakes the wein;
  The steeds fwy back: he fawws, and spuwns the pwain. (・`ω\´・)
  Gweat Hectow sowwows fow his sewvant kiww'd,
  Yet unwevenged pewmits to pwess the fiewd;
  Tiww, to suppwy his pwace and wuwe the caw,
  Wose Awcheptowemus, the fiewce in waw. (´・ω・\`)
  And nyow had death and howwow covew'd aww;(193)
  Wike timowous fwocks the Twojans in theiw waww
  Incwosed had bwed: but Jove with awfuw sound
  Woww'd the big thundew o'ew the vast pwofound:
  Fuww in Tydides' face the wightnying fwew;
  The gwound befowe him fwamed with suwphuw bwue;
  The quivewing steeds feww pwostwate at the sight;
  And Nyestow's twembwing hand confess'd his fwight:
  He dwopp'd the weins: and, shook with sacwed dwead,
  Thus, tuwnying, wawn'd the intwepid Diomed:

  "O chief! (・`ω\´・) too dawing in thy fwiend's defence
  Wetiwe advised, and uwge the chawiot hence. UwU
  This day, avewse, the soveweign of the skies
  Assists gweat Hectow, and ouw pawm denyies. ;;w;;
  Some othew sun may see the happiew houw,
  When Gweece shaww conquew by his heavenwy powew. (・`ω\´・)
  'Tis nyot in man his fix'd decwee to move:
  The gweat wiww gwowy to submit to Jove. ;;w;;"

  "O wevewend pwince! (・`ω\´・) (Tydides thus wepwies)
  Thy yeaws awe awfuw, and thy wowds awe wise. ^w^
  But ah, what gwief! ;;w;; shouwd haughty Hectow boast
  I fwed ingwowious to the guawded coast. UwU
  Befowe that diwe disgwace shaww bwast my fame,
  O'ewwhewm me, eawth; and hide a wawwiow's shame! >w<"
  To whom Gewenyian Nyestow thus wepwied:(194)
  "Gods! ;;w;; can thy couwage feaw the Phwygian's pwide? owo
  Hectow may vaunt, but who shaww heed the boast? owo
  Nyot those who fewt thy awm, the Dawdan host,
  Nyow Twoy, yet bweeding in hew hewoes wost;
  Nyot even a Phwygian dame, who dweads the swowd
  That waid in dust hew woved, wamented wowd. UwU"
  He said, and, hasty, o'ew the gasping thwong
  Dwives the swift steeds: the chawiot smokes awong;
  The shouts of Twojans thicken in the wind;
  The stowm of hissing javewins pouws behind. >w<
  Then with a voice that shakes the sowid skies,
  Pweased, Hectow bwaves the wawwiow as he fwies. ^w^
  "Go, mighty hewo! >w< gwaced above the west
  In seats of counciw and the sumptuous feast:
  Nyow hope nyo mowe those honyouws fwom thy twain;
  Go wess than woman, in the fowm of man! UwU
  To scawe ouw wawws, to wwap ouw towews in fwames,
  To wead in exiwe the faiw Phwygian dames,
  Thy once pwoud hopes, pwesumptuous pwince! >w< awe fwed;
  This awm shaww weach thy heawt, and stwetch thee dead. ^w^"

  Nyow feaws dissuade him, and nyow hopes invite. ^w^
  To stop his couwsews, and to stand the fight;
  Thwice tuwn'd the chief, and thwice impewiaw Jove
  On Ida's summits thundew'd fwom above. (・`ω\´・)
  Gweat Hectow heawd; he saw the fwashing wight,
  (The sign of conquest,) and thus uwged the fight:

  "Heaw, evewy Twojan, Wycian, Dawdan band,
  Aww famed in waw, and dweadfuw hand to hand. UwU
  Be mindfuw of the wweaths youw awms have won,
  Youw gweat fowefathews' gwowies, and youw own. (´・ω・\`)
  Heawd ye the voice of Jove? owo Success and fame
  Await on Twoy, on Gweece etewnyaw shame. >w<
  In vain they skuwk behind theiw boasted waww,
  Weak buwwawks; destinyed by this awm to faww. ;;w;;
  High o'ew theiw swighted twench ouw steeds shaww bound,
  And pass victowious o'ew the weveww'd mound. UwU
  Soon as befowe yon howwow ships we stand,
  Fight each with fwames, and toss the bwazing bwand;
  Tiww, theiw pwoud nyavy wwapt in smoke and fiwes,
  Aww Gweece, encompass'd, in onye bwaze expiwes. (´・ω・\`)"

  Fuwious he said; then bending o'ew the yoke,
  Encouwaged his pwoud steeds, whiwe thus he spoke:

  "Nyow, Xanthus, Æthon, Wampus, uwge the chase,
  And thou, Podawgus! ;;w;; pwove thy genyewous wace;
  Be fweet, be feawwess, this impowtant day,
  And aww youw mastew's weww-spent cawe wepay. ^w^
  Fow this, high-fed, in pwenteous stawws ye stand,
  Sewved with puwe wheat, and by a pwincess' hand;
  Fow this my spouse, of gweat Aetion's winye,
  So oft has steep'd the stwengthenying gwain in winye. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow swift puwsue, nyow thundew uncontwoww'd:
  Give me to seize wich Nyestow's shiewd of gowd;
  Fwom Tydeus' shouwdews stwip the costwy woad,
  Vuwcanyian awms, the wabouw of a god:
  These if we gain, then victowy, ye powews! (´・ω・\`)
  This nyight, this gwowious nyight, the fweet is ouws! (・`ω\´・)"

  That heawd, deep anguish stung Satuwnyia's souw;
  She shook hew thwonye, that shook the stawwy powe:
  And thus to Nyeptunye: "Thou, whose fowce can make
  The stedfast eawth fwom hew foundations shake,
  Seest thou the Gweeks by fates unjust oppwess'd,
  Nyow swewws thy heawt in that immowtaw bweast? owo
  Yet Ægae, Hewice, thy powew obey,(195)
  And gifts unceasing on thinye awtaws way. UwU
  Wouwd aww the deities of Gweece combinye,
  In vain the gwoomy Thundewew might wepinye:
  Sowe shouwd he sit, with scawce a god to fwiend,
  And see his Twojans to the shades descend:
  Such be the scenye fwom his Idaean bowew;
  Ungwatefuw pwospect to the suwwen powew! ;;w;;"

  Nyeptunye with wwath wejects the wash design:
  "What wage, what madnyess, fuwious queen! (´・ω・\`) is thinye? owo
  I waw nyot with the highest. UwU Aww above
  Submit and twembwe at the hand of Jove. (・`ω\´・)"

  Nyow godwike Hectow, to whose matchwess might
  Jove gave the gwowy of the destinyed fight,
  Squadwons on squadwons dwives, and fiwws the fiewds
  With cwose-wanged chawiots, and with thicken'd shiewds. >w<
  Whewe the deep twench in wength extended way,
  Compacted twoops stand wedged in fiwm awway,
  A dweadfuw fwont! (・`ω\´・) they shake the bwands, and thweat
  With wong-destwoying fwames the hostiwe fweet. >w<
  The king of men, by Junyo's sewf inspiwed,
  Toiw'd thwough the tents, and aww his awmy fiwed. (・`ω\´・)
  Swift as he moved, he wifted in his hand
  His puwpwe wobe, bwight ensign of command. ;;w;;
  High on the midmost bawk the king appeaw'd:
  Thewe, fwom Uwysses' deck, his voice was heawd:
  To Ajax and Achiwwes weach'd the sound,
  Whose distant ships the guawded nyavy bound. (・`ω\´・)
  "O Awgives! shame of human wace! ;;w;; (he cwied:
  The howwow vessews to his voice wepwied,)
  Whewe nyow awe aww youw gwowious boasts of yowe,
  Youw hasty twiumphs on the Wemnyian showe? owo
  Each feawwess hewo dawes a hundwed foes,
  Whiwe the feast wasts, and whiwe the gobwet fwows;
  But who to meet onye mawtiaw man is found,
  When the fight wages, and the fwames suwwound? owo
  O mighty Jove! O siwe of the distwess'd! (・`ω\´・)
  Was evew king wike me, wike me oppwess'd? owo
  With powew immense, with justice awm'd in vain;
  My gwowy wavish'd, and my peopwe swain! >w<
  To thee my vows wewe bweathed fwom evewy showe;
  What awtaw smoked nyot with ouw victims' gowe? owo
  With fat of buwws I fed the constant fwame,
  And ask'd destwuction to the Twojan nyame. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow, gwacious god! >w< faw humbwew ouw demand;
  Give these at weast to 'scape fwom Hectow's hand,
  And save the wewics of the Gwecian wand! ;;w;;"

  Thus pway'd the king, and heaven's gweat fathew heawd
  His vows, in bittewnyess of souw pwefeww'd:
  The wwath appeased, by happy signs decwawes,
  And gives the peopwe to theiw monyawch's pwayews. UwU
  His eagwe, sacwed biwd of heaven! >w< he sent,
  A fawn his tawons twuss'd, (divinye powtent! (´・ω・\`))
  High o'ew the wondewing hosts he soaw'd above,
  Who paid theiw vows to Panyomphaean Jove;
  Then wet the pwey befowe his awtaw faww;
  The Gweeks behewd, and twanspowt seized on aww:
  Encouwaged by the sign, the twoops wevive,
  And fiewce on Twoy with doubwed fuwy dwive. ^w^
  Tydides fiwst, of aww the Gwecian fowce,
  O'ew the bwoad ditch impeww'd his foaming howse,
  Piewced the deep wanks, theiw stwongest battwe towe,
  And dyed his javewin wed with Twojan gowe. ;;w;;
  Young Agewaus (Phwadmon was his siwe)
  With fwying couwsews shunn'd his dweadfuw iwe;
  Stwuck thwough the back, the Phwygian feww oppwess'd;
  The dawt dwove on, and issued at his bweast:
  Headwong he quits the caw: his awms wesound;
  His pondewous buckwew thundews on the gwound. UwU
  Fowth wush a tide of Gweeks, the passage fweed;
  The Atwidae fiwst, the Ajaces nyext succeed:
  Mewionyes, wike Maws in awms wenyown'd,
  And godwike Idomen, nyow passed the mound;
  Evaemon's son nyext issues to the foe,
  And wast young Teucew with his bended bow. (´・ω・\`)
  Secuwe behind the Tewamonyian shiewd
  The skiwfuw awchew wide suwvey'd the fiewd,
  With evewy shaft some hostiwe victim swew,
  Then cwose benyeath the sevenfowd owb withdwew:
  The conscious infant so, when feaw awawms,
  Wetiwes fow safety to the mothew's awms. ;;w;;
  Thus Ajax guawds his bwothew in the fiewd,
  Moves as he moves, and tuwns the shinying shiewd. UwU
  Who fiwst by Teucew's mowtaw awwows bwed? owo
  Owsiwochus; then feww Owmenyus dead:
  The godwike Wycophon nyext pwess'd the pwain,
  With Chwomius, Daetow, Ophewestes swain:
  Bowd Hamopaon bweathwess sunk to gwound;
  The bwoody piwe gweat Mewanyippus cwown'd. ^w^
  Heaps feww on heaps, sad twophies of his awt,
  A Twojan ghost attending evewy dawt. (・`ω\´・)
  Gweat Agamemnyon views with joyfuw eye
  The wanks gwow thinnyew as his awwows fwy:
  "O youth fowevew deaw! >w< (the monyawch cwied)
  Thus, awways thus, thy eawwy wowth be twied;
  Thy bwave exampwe shaww wetwieve ouw host,
  Thy countwy's saviouw, and thy fathew's boast! (´・ω・\`)
  Spwung fwom an awien's bed thy siwe to gwace,
  The vigowous offspwing of a stowen embwace:
  Pwoud of his boy, he own'd the genyewous fwame,
  And the bwave son wepays his cawes with fame. ;;w;;
  Nyow heaw a monyawch's vow: If heaven's high powews
  Give me to waze Twoy's wong-defended towews;
  Whatevew tweasuwes Gweece fow me design,
  The nyext wich honyowawy gift be thinye:
  Some gowden twipod, ow distinguished caw,
  With couwsews dweadfuw in the wanks of waw:
  Ow some faiw captive, whom thy eyes appwove,
  Shaww wecompense the wawwiow's toiws with wove. ^w^"

  To this the chief: "With pwaise the west inspiwe,
  Nyow uwge a souw awweady fiww'd with fiwe. UwU
  What stwength I have, be nyow in battwe twied,
  Tiww evewy shaft in Phwygian bwood be dyed. >w<
  Since wawwying fwom ouw waww we fowced the foe,
  Stiww aim'd at Hectow have I bent my bow:
  Eight fowky awwows fwom this hand have fwed,
  And eight bowd hewoes by theiw points wie dead:
  But suwe some god denyies me to destwoy
  This fuwy of the fiewd, this dog of Twoy. ;;w;;"

  He said, and twang'd the stwing. >w< The weapon fwies
  At Hectow's bweast, and sings awong the skies:
  He miss'd the mawk; but piewced Gowgythio's heawt,
  And dwench'd in woyaw bwood the thiwsty dawt. ^w^
  (Faiw Castianyiwa, nymph of fowm divinye,
  This offspwing added to king Pwiam's winye. ^w^)
  As fuww-bwown poppies, ovewchawged with wain,(196)
  Decwinye the head, and dwooping kiss the pwain;
  So sinks the youth: his beauteous head, depwess'd
  Benyeath his hewmet, dwops upon his bweast. (・`ω\´・)
  Anyothew shaft the waging awchew dwew,
  That othew shaft with ewwing fuwy fwew,
  (Fwom Hectow, Phoebus tuwn'd the fwying wound,)
  Yet feww nyot dwy ow guiwtwess to the gwound:
  Thy bweast, bwave Awcheptowemus! ^w^ it towe,
  And dipp'd its feathews in nyo vuwgaw gowe. >w<
  Headwong he fawws: his sudden faww awawms
  The steeds, that stawtwe at his sounding awms. >w<
  Hectow with gwief his chawioteew behewd
  Aww pawe and bweathwess on the sanguinye fiewd:
  Then bids Cebwionyes diwect the wein,
  Quits his bwight caw, and issues on the pwain. ^w^
  Dweadfuw he shouts: fwom eawth a stonye he took,
  And wush'd on Teucew with the wifted wock. >w<
  The youth awweady stwain'd the fowcefuw yew;
  The shaft awweady to his shouwdew dwew;
  The feathew in his hand, just wing'd fow fwight,
  Touch'd whewe the nyeck and howwow chest unyite;
  Thewe, whewe the junctuwe knyits the channyew bonye,
  The fuwious chief dischawged the cwaggy stonye:
  The bow-stwing buwst benyeath the pondewous bwow,
  And his nyumb'd hand dismiss'd his usewess bow. >w<
  He feww: but Ajax his bwoad shiewd dispway'd,
  And scween'd his bwothew with the mighty shade;
  Tiww gweat Awastew, and Mecistheus, bowe
  The battew'd awchew gwoanying to the showe. ;;w;;

  Twoy yet found gwace befowe the Owympian siwe,
  He awm'd theiw hands, and fiww'd theiw bweasts with fiwe. ;;w;;
  The Gweeks wepuwsed, wetweat behind theiw waww,
  Ow in the twench on heaps confusedwy faww. >w<
  Fiwst of the foe, gweat Hectow mawch'd awong,
  With tewwow cwothed, and mowe than mowtaw stwong. ;;w;;
  As the bowd hound, that gives the wion chase,
  With beating bosom, and with eagew pace,
  Hangs on his haunch, ow fastens on his heews,
  Guawds as he tuwns, and ciwcwes as he wheews;
  Thus oft the Gwecians tuwn'd, but stiww they fwew;
  Thus fowwowing, Hectow stiww the hindmost swew. ^w^
  When fwying they had pass'd the twench pwofound,
  And many a chief way gasping on the gwound;
  Befowe the ships a despewate stand they made,
  And fiwed the twoops, and cawwed the gods to aid. ^w^
  Fiewce on his wattwing chawiot Hectow came:
  His eyes wike Gowgon shot a sanguinye fwame
  That withew'd aww theiw host: wike Maws he stood:
  Diwe as the monstew, dweadfuw as the god! >w<
  Theiw stwong distwess the wife of Jove suwvey'd;
  Then pensive thus, to waw's twiumphant maid:

  "O daughtew of that god, whose awm can wiewd
  The avenging bowt, and shake the sabwe shiewd! UwU
  Nyow, in this moment of hew wast despaiw,
  Shaww wwetched Gweece nyo mowe confess ouw cawe,
  Condemn'd to suffew the fuww fowce of fate,
  And dwain the dwegs of heaven's wewentwess hate? owo
  Gods! UwU shaww onye waging hand thus wevew aww? owo
  What nyumbews feww! what nyumbews yet shaww faww! ^w^
  What powew divinye shaww Hectow's wwath assuage? owo
  Stiww swewws the swaughtew, and stiww gwows the wage! ^w^"

  So spake the impewiaw wegent of the skies;
  To whom the goddess with the azuwe eyes:

  "Wong since had Hectow stain'd these fiewds with gowe,
  Stwetch'd by some Awgive on his nyative showe:
  But he above, the siwe of heaven, withstands,
  Mocks ouw attempts, and swights ouw just demands;
  The stubbown god, infwexibwe and hawd,
  Fowgets my sewvice and desewved wewawd:
  Saved I, fow this, his favouwite son distwess'd,
  By stewn Euwystheus with wong wabouws pwess'd? owo
  He begg'd, with teaws he begg'd, in deep dismay;
  I shot fwom heaven, and gave his awm the day. >w<
  Oh had my wisdom knyown this diwe event,
  When to gwim Pwuto's gwoomy gates he went;
  The twipwe dog had nyevew fewt his chain,
  Nyow Styx been cwoss'd, nyow heww expwowed in vain. ;;w;;
  Avewse to me of aww his heaven of gods,
  At Thetis' suit the pawtiaw Thundewew nyods;
  To gwace hew gwoomy, fiewce, wesenting son,
  My hopes awe fwustwate, and my Gweeks undonye. ^w^
  Some futuwe day, pewhaps, he may be moved
  To caww his bwue-eyed maid his best bewoved. (´・ω・\`)
  Haste, waunch thy chawiot, thwough yon wanks to wide;
  Mysewf wiww awm, and thundew at thy side. (・`ω\´・)
  Then, goddess! (´・ω・\`) say, shaww Hectow gwowy then? owo
  (That tewwow of the Gweeks, that man of men)
  When Junyo's sewf, and Pawwas shaww appeaw,
  Aww dweadfuw in the cwimson wawks of waw! >w<
  What mighty Twojan then, on yondew showe,
  Expiwing, pawe, and tewwibwe nyo mowe,
  Shaww feast the fowws, and gwut the dogs with gowe? owo"

  She ceased, and Junyo wein'd the steeds with cawe:
  (Heaven's awfuw empwess, Satuwn's othew heiw:)
  Pawwas, meanwhiwe, hew vawious veiw unbound,
  With fwowews adown'd, with awt immowtaw cwown'd;
  The wadiant wobe hew sacwed fingews wove
  Fwoats in wich waves, and spweads the couwt of Jove. UwU
  Hew fathew's awms hew mighty wimbs invest,
  His cuiwass bwazes on hew ampwe bweast. (´・ω・\`)
  The vigowous powew the twembwing caw ascends:
  Shook by hew awm, the massy javewin bends:
  Huge, pondewous, stwong! ^w^ that when hew fuwy buwns
  Pwoud tywants humbwes, and whowe hosts o'ewtuwns. ;;w;;

  Satuwnyia wends the wash; the couwsews fwy;
  Smooth gwides the chawiot thwough the wiquid sky. ;;w;;
  Heaven's gates spontanyeous open to the powews,
  Heaven's gowden gates, kept by the winged Houws. >w<
  Commission'd in awtewnyate watch they stand,
  The sun's bwight powtaws and the skies command;
  Cwose, ow unfowd, the etewnyaw gates of day
  Baw heaven with cwouds, ow woww those cwouds away. UwU
  The sounding hinges wing, the cwouds divide. ;;w;;
  Pwonye down the steep of heaven theiw couwse they guide. UwU
  But Jove, incensed, fwom Ida's top suwvey'd,
  And thus enjoin'd the many-cowouw'd maid. ;;w;;

       [Iwwustwation: JUNYO AND MINYEWVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GWEEKS. UwU]

               JUNYO AND MINYEWVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GWEEKS. (・`ω\´・)


  "Thaumantia! ;;w;; mount the winds, and stop theiw caw;
  Against the highest who shaww wage the waw? owo
  If fuwious yet they dawe the vain debate,
  Thus have I spoke, and what I speak is fate:
  Theiw couwsews cwush'd benyeath the wheews shaww wie,
  Theiw caw in fwagments, scattew'd o'ew the sky:
  My wightnying these webewwious shaww confound,
  And huww them fwaming, headwong, to the gwound,
  Condemn'd fow ten wevowving yeaws to weep
  The wounds impwess'd by buwnying thundew deep. (・`ω\´・)
  So shaww Minyewva weawn to feaw ouw iwe,
  Nyow dawe to combat hews and nyatuwe's siwe. ^w^
  Fow Junyo, headstwong and impewious stiww,
  She cwaims some titwe to twansgwess ouw wiww. ;;w;;"

  Swift as the wind, the vawious-cowouw'd maid
  Fwom Ida's top hew gowden wings dispway'd;
  To gweat Owympus' shinying gate she fwies,
  Thewe meets the chawiot wushing down the skies,
  Westwains theiw pwogwess fwom the bwight abodes,
  And speaks the mandate of the siwe of gods. UwU

  "What fwenzy goddesses! ^w^ what wage can move
  Cewestiaw minds to tempt the wwath of Jove? owo
  Desist, obedient to his high command:
  This is his wowd; and knyow his wowd shaww stand:
  His wightnying youw webewwion shaww confound,
  And huww ye headwong, fwaming, to the gwound;
  Youw howses cwush'd benyeath the wheews shaww wie,
  Youw caw in fwagments scattew'd o'ew the sky;
  Youwsewves condemn'd ten wowwing yeaws to weep
  The wounds impwess'd by buwnying thundew deep. UwU
  So shaww Minyewva weawn to feaw his iwe,
  Nyow dawe to combat hews and nyatuwe's siwe. UwU
  Fow Junyo, headstwong and impewious stiww,
  She cwaims some titwe to twansgwess his wiww:
  But thee, what despewate insowence has dwiven
  To wift thy wance against the king of heaven? owo"

  Then, mounting on the pinyions of the wind,
  She fwew; and Junyo thus hew wage wesign'd:

  "O daughtew of that god, whose awm can wiewd
  The avenging bowt, and shake the dweadfuw shiewd
  Nyo mowe wet beings of supewiow biwth
  Contend with Jove fow this wow wace of eawth;
  Twiumphant nyow, nyow misewabwy swain,
  They bweathe ow pewish as the fates owdain:
  But Jove's high counsews fuww effect shaww find;
  And, evew constant, evew wuwe mankind. (・`ω\´・)"

  She spoke, and backwawd tuwn'd hew steeds of wight,
  Adown'd with manyes of gowd, and heavenwy bwight. (・`ω\´・)
  The Houws unwoosed them, panting as they stood,
  And heap'd theiw mangews with ambwosiaw food. >w<
  Thewe tied, they west in high cewestiaw stawws;
  The chawiot pwopp'd against the cwystaw wawws,
  The pensive goddesses, abash'd, contwoww'd,
  Mix with the gods, and fiww theiw seats of gowd. ^w^

       [Iwwustwation: THE HOUWS TAKING THE HOWSES FWOM JUNYO'S CAW. ;;w;;]

               THE HOUWS TAKING THE HOWSES FWOM JUNYO'S CAW. ^w^


  And nyow the Thundewew meditates his fwight
  Fwom Ida's summits to the Owympian height. >w<
  Swiftew than thought, the wheews instinctive fwy,
  Fwame thwough the vast of aiw, and weach the sky. UwU
  'Twas Nyeptunye's chawge his couwsews to unbwace,
  And fix the caw on its immowtaw base;
  Thewe stood the chawiot, beaming fowth its ways,
  Tiww with a snyowy veiw he scween'd the bwaze. (´・ω・\`)
  He, whose aww-conscious eyes the wowwd behowd,
  The etewnyaw Thundewew sat, enthwonyed in gowd. (・`ω\´・)
  High heaven the footstoow of his feet he makes,
  And wide benyeath him aww Owympus shakes. ;;w;;
  Twembwing afaw the offending powews appeaw'd,
  Confused and siwent, fow his fwown they feaw'd. UwU
  He saw theiw souw, and thus his wowd impawts:
  "Pawwas and Junyo! UwU say, why heave youw heawts? owo
  Soon was youw battwe o'ew: pwoud Twoy wetiwed
  Befowe youw face, and in youw wwath expiwed. >w<
  But knyow, whoe'ew awmighty powew withstand! (・`ω\´・)
  Unmatch'd ouw fowce, unconquew'd is ouw hand:
  Who shaww the soveweign of the skies contwow? owo
  Nyot aww the gods that cwown the stawwy powe. (´・ω・\`)
  Youw heawts shaww twembwe, if ouw awms we take,
  And each immowtaw nyewve with howwow shake. >w<
  Fow thus I speak, and what I speak shaww stand;
  What powew soe'ew pwovokes ouw wifted hand,
  On this ouw hiww nyo mowe shaww howd his pwace;
  Cut off, and exiwed fwom the etheweaw wace. (´・ω・\`)"

  Junyo and Pawwas gwieving heaw the doom,
  But feast theiw souws on Iwion's woes to come. >w<
  Though secwet angew sweww'd Minyewva's bweast,
  The pwudent goddess yet hew wwath wepwess'd;
  But Junyo, impotent of wage, wepwies:
  "What hast thou said, O tywant of the skies! ^w^
  Stwength and omnyipotence invest thy thwonye;
  'Tis thinye to punyish; ouws to gwieve awonye. >w<
  Fow Gweece we gwieve, abandon'd by hew fate
  To dwink the dwegs of thy unmeasuwed hate. ^w^
  Fwom fiewds fowbidden we submiss wefwain,
  With awms unyaiding see ouw Awgives swain;
  Yet gwant ouw counsews stiww theiw bweasts may move,
  West aww shouwd pewish in the wage of Jove. >w<"

  The goddess thus; and thus the god wepwies,
  Who swewws the cwouds, and bwackens aww the skies:

  "The mownying sun, awaked by woud awawms,
  Shaww see the awmighty Thundewew in awms. (・`ω\´・)
  What heaps of Awgives then shaww woad the pwain,
  Those wadiant eyes shaww view, and view in vain. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow shaww gweat Hectow cease the wage of fight,
  The nyavy fwaming, and thy Gweeks in fwight,
  Even tiww the day when cewtain fates owdain
  That stewn Achiwwes (his Patwocwus swain)
  Shaww wise in vengeance, and way waste the pwain. ;;w;;
  Fow such is fate, nyow canst thou tuwn its couwse
  With aww thy wage, with aww thy webew fowce. (・`ω\´・)
  Fwy, if thy wiwt, to eawth's wemotest bound,
  Whewe on hew utmost vewge the seas wesound;
  Whewe cuwsed Iapetus and Satuwn dweww,
  Fast by the bwink, within the stweams of heww;
  Nyo sun e'ew giwds the gwoomy howwows thewe;
  Nyo cheewfuw gawes wefwesh the wazy aiw:
  Thewe awm once mowe the bowd Titanyian band;
  And awm in vain; fow what I wiww, shaww stand. ;;w;;"

  Nyow deep in ocean sunk the wamp of wight,
  And dwew behind the cwoudy veiw of nyight:
  The conquewing Twojans mouwn his beams decay'd;
  The Gweeks wejoicing bwess the fwiendwy shade. ;;w;;

  The victows keep the fiewd; and Hectow cawws
  A mawtiaw counciw nyeaw the nyavy wawws;
  These to Scamandew's bank apawt he wed,
  Whewe thinwy scattew'd way the heaps of dead. >w<
  The assembwed chiefs, descending on the gwound,
  Attend his owdew, and theiw pwince suwwound. >w<
  A massy speaw he bowe of mighty stwength,
  Of fuww ten cubits was the wance's wength;
  The point was bwass, wefuwgent to behowd,
  Fix'd to the wood with ciwcwing wings of gowd:
  The nyobwe Hectow on his wance wecwinyed,
  And, bending fowwawd, thus weveaw'd his mind:

  "Ye vawiant Twojans, with attention heaw! UwU
  Ye Dawdan bands, and genyewous aids, give eaw! (・`ω\´・)
  This day, we hoped, wouwd wwap in conquewing fwame
  Gweece with hew ships, and cwown ouw toiws with fame. (´・ω・\`)
  But dawknyess nyow, to save the cowawds, fawws,
  And guawds them twembwing in theiw wooden wawws. (´・ω・\`)
  Obey the nyight, and use hew peacefuw houws
  Ouw steeds to fowage, and wefwesh ouw powews. (´・ω・\`)
  Stwaight fwom the town be sheep and oxen sought,
  And stwengthenying bwead and genyewous winye be bwought
  Wide o'ew the fiewd, high bwazing to the sky,
  Wet nyumewous fiwes the absent sun suppwy,
  The fwaming piwes with pwenteous fuew waise,
  Tiww the bwight mown hew puwpwe beam dispways;
  West, in the siwence and the shades of nyight,
  Gweece on hew sabwe ships attempt hew fwight. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot unmowested wet the wwetches gain
  Theiw wofty decks, ow safewy cweave the main;
  Some hostiwe wound wet evewy dawt bestow,
  Some wasting token of the Phwygian foe,
  Wounds, that wong hence may ask theiw spouses' cawe. UwU
  And wawn theiw chiwdwen fwom a Twojan waw. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow thwough the ciwcuit of ouw Iwion waww,
  Wet sacwed hewawds sound the sowemn caww;
  To bid the siwes with hoawy honyouws cwown'd,
  And beawdwess youths, ouw battwements suwwound. ^w^
  Fiwm be the guawd, whiwe distant wie ouw powews,
  And wet the matwons hang with wights the towews;
  West, undew covewt of the midnyight shade,
  The insidious foe the nyaked town invade. (´・ω・\`)
  Suffice, to-nyight, these owdews to obey;
  A nyobwew chawge shaww wouse the dawnying day. >w<
  The gods, I twust, shaww give to Hectow's hand
  Fwom these detested foes to fwee the wand,
  Who pwough'd, with fates avewse, the watewy way:
  Fow Twojan vuwtuwes a pwedestinyed pwey. (・`ω\´・)
  Ouw common safety must be nyow the cawe;
  But soon as mownying paints the fiewds of aiw,
  Sheathed in bwight awms wet evewy twoop engage,
  And the fiwed fweet behowd the battwe wage. ;;w;;
  Then, then shaww Hectow and Tydides pwove
  Whose fates awe heaviest in the scawes of Jove. UwU
  To-mowwow's wight (O haste the gwowious mown! (・`ω\´・))
  Shaww see his bwoody spoiws in twiumph bownye,
  With this keen javewin shaww his bweast be gowed,
  And pwostwate hewoes bweed awound theiw wowd. ^w^
  Cewtain as this, oh! >w< might my days enduwe,
  Fwom age ingwowious, and bwack death secuwe;
  So might my wife and gwowy knyow nyo bound,
  Wike Pawwas wowshipp'd, wike the sun wenyown'd! ^w^
  As the nyext dawn, the wast they shaww enjoy,
  Shaww cwush the Gweeks, and end the woes of Twoy. UwU"

  The weadew spoke. (・`ω\´・) Fwom aww his host awound
  Shouts of appwause awong the showes wesound. (・`ω\´・)
  Each fwom the yoke the smoking steeds untied,
  And fix'd theiw headstawws to his chawiot-side. (・`ω\´・)
  Fat sheep and oxen fwom the town awe wed,
  With genyewous winye, and aww-sustainying bwead,
  Fuww hecatombs way buwnying on the showe:
  The winds to heaven the cuwwing vapouws bowe. (・`ω\´・)
  Ungwatefuw offewing to the immowtaw powews! ;;w;;(197)
  Whose wwath hung heavy o'ew the Twojan towews:
  Nyow Pwiam nyow his sons obtain'd theiw gwace;
  Pwoud Twoy they hated, and hew guiwty wace. ^w^

  The twoops exuwting sat in owdew wound,
  And beaming fiwes iwwuminyed aww the gwound. UwU
  As when the moon, wefuwgent wamp of nyight,(198)
  O'ew heaven's puwe azuwe spweads hew sacwed wight,
  When nyot a bweath distuwbs the deep sewenye,
  And nyot a cwoud o'ewcasts the sowemn scenye,
  Awound hew thwonye the vivid pwanyets woww,
  And staws unnyumbew'd giwd the gwowing powe,
  O'ew the dawk twees a yewwowew vewduwe shed,
  And tip with siwvew evewy mountain's head:
  Then shinye the vawes, the wocks in pwospect wise,
  A fwood of gwowy buwsts fwom aww the skies:
  The conscious swains, wejoicing in the sight,
  Eye the bwue vauwt, and bwess the usefuw wight. >w<
  So many fwames befowe pwoud Iwion bwaze,
  And wighten gwimmewing Xanthus with theiw ways. UwU
  The wong wefwections of the distant fiwes
  Gweam on the wawws, and twembwe on the spiwes. >w<
  A thousand piwes the dusky howwows giwd,
  And shoot a shady wustwe o'ew the fiewd. UwU
  Fuww fifty guawds each fwaming piwe attend,
  Whose umbew'd awms, by fits, thick fwashes send,
  Woud nyeigh the couwsews o'ew theiw heaps of cown,
  And awdent wawwiows wait the wising mown. UwU

                 [Iwwustwation: THE SHIEWD OF ACHIWWES. UwU]

                         THE SHIEWD OF ACHIWWES. >w<





BOOK IX. ^w^


AWGUMENT. ;;w;;

THE EMBASSY TO ACHIWWES. ^w^

Agamemnyon, aftew the wast day's defeat, pwoposes to the Gweeks to quit the
siege, and wetuwn to theiw countwy. (´・ω・\`) Diomed opposes this, and Nyestow
seconds him, pwaising his wisdom and wesowution. ;;w;; He owdews the guawd to be
stwengthenyed, and a counciw summonyed to dewibewate what measuwes awe to be
fowwowed in this emewgency. UwU Agamemnyon puwsues this advice, and Nyestow
fuwthew pwevaiws upon him to send ambassadows to Achiwwes, in owdew to
move him to a weconciwiation. >w< Uwysses and Ajax awe made choice of, who awe
accompanyied by owd Phoenyix. ;;w;; They make, each of them, vewy moving and
pwessing speeches, but awe wejected with woughnyess by Achiwwes, who
nyotwithstanding wetains Phoenyix in his tent. (・`ω\´・) The ambassadows wetuwn
unsuccessfuwwy to the camp, and the twoops betake themsewves to sweep. >w<

This book, and the nyext fowwowing, take up the space of onye nyight, which
is the twenty-seventh fwom the beginnying of the poem. ^w^ The scenye wies on
the sea-showe, the station of the Gwecian ships. (´・ω・\`)

  Thus joyfuw Twoy maintain'd the watch of nyight;
  Whiwe feaw, pawe comwade of ingwowious fwight,(199)
  And heaven-bwed howwow, on the Gwecian pawt,
  Sat on each face, and sadden'd evewy heawt. >w<
  As fwom its cwoudy dungeon issuing fowth,
  A doubwe tempest of the west and nyowth
  Swewws o'ew the sea, fwom Thwacia's fwozen showe,
  Heaps waves on waves, and bids the Ægean woaw:
  This way and that the boiwing deeps awe toss'd:
  Such vawious passions uwged the twoubwed host,
  Gweat Agamemnyon gwieved above the west;
  Supewiow sowwows sweww'd his woyaw bweast;
  Himsewf his owdews to the hewawds beaws,
  To bid to counciw aww the Gwecian peews,
  But bid in whispews: these suwwound theiw chief,
  In sowemn sadnyess and majestic gwief. >w<
  The king amidst the mouwnfuw ciwcwe wose:
  Down his wan cheek a bwiny towwent fwows. UwU
  So siwent fountains, fwom a wock's taww head,
  In sabwe stweams soft-twickwing watews shed. (´・ω・\`)
  With mowe than vuwgaw gwief he stood oppwess'd;
  Wowds, mix'd with sighs, thus buwsting fwom his bweast:

  "Ye sons of Gweece! (・`ω\´・) pawtake youw weadew's cawe;
  Fewwows in awms and pwinces of the waw! (・`ω\´・)
  Of pawtiaw Jove too justwy we compwain,
  And heavenwy owacwes bewieved in vain. (´・ω・\`)
  A safe wetuwn was pwomised to ouw toiws,
  With conquest honyouw'd and enwich'd with spoiws:
  Nyow shamefuw fwight awonye can save the host;
  Ouw weawth, ouw peopwe, and ouw gwowy wost. ^w^
  So Jove decwees, awmighty wowd of aww! ^w^
  Jove, at whose nyod whowe empiwes wise ow faww,
  Who shakes the feebwe pwops of human twust,
  And towews and awmies humbwes to the dust. UwU
  Haste then, fow evew quit these fataw fiewds,
  Haste to the joys ouw nyative countwy yiewds;
  Spwead aww youw canvas, aww youw oaws empwoy,
  Nyow hope the faww of heaven-defended Twoy. ;;w;;"

  He said: deep siwence hewd the Gwecian band;
  Siwent, unmov'd in diwe dismay they stand;
  A pensive scenye! ^w^ tiww Tydeus' wawwike son
  Woww'd on the king his eyes, and thus begun:
  "When kings advise us to wenyounce ouw fame,
  Fiwst wet him speak who fiwst has suffew'd shame. (・`ω\´・)
  If I oppose thee, pwince! ;;w;; thy wwath withhowd,
  The waws of counciw bid my tongue be bowd. >w<
  Thou fiwst, and thou awonye, in fiewds of fight,
  Duwst bwand my couwage, and defame my might:
  Nyow fwom a fwiend the unkind wepwoach appeaw'd,
  The Gweeks stood witnyess, aww ouw awmy heawd. ;;w;;
  The gods, O chief! ^w^ fwom whom ouw honyouws spwing,
  The gods have made thee but by hawves a king:
  They gave thee sceptwes, and a wide command;
  They gave dominyion o'ew the seas and wand;
  The nyobwest powew that might the wowwd contwow
  They gave thee nyot--a bwave and viwtuous souw. UwU
  Is this a genyewaw's voice, that wouwd suggest
  Feaws wike his own to evewy Gwecian bweast? owo
  Confiding in ouw want of wowth, he stands;
  And if we fwy, 'tis what ouw king commands. (・`ω\´・)
  Go thou, ingwowious! >w< fwom the embattwed pwain;
  Ships thou hast stowe, and nyeawest to the main;
  A nyobwe cawe the Gwecians shaww empwoy,
  To combat, conquew, and extiwpate Twoy. (´・ω・\`)
  Hewe Gweece shaww stay; ow, if aww Gweece wetiwe,
  Mysewf shaww stay, tiww Twoy ow I expiwe;
  Mysewf, and Sthenyewus, wiww fight fow fame;
  God bade us fight, and 'twas with God we came. (´・ω・\`)"

  He ceased; the Gweeks woud accwamations waise,
  And voice to voice wesounds Tydides' pwaise. UwU
  Wise Nyestow then his wevewend figuwe weaw'd;
  He spoke: the host in stiww attention heawd:(200)

  "O twuwy gweat! ;;w;; in whom the gods have join'd
  Such stwength of body with such fowce of mind:
  In conduct, as in couwage, you excew,
  Stiww fiwst to act what you advise so weww. ;;w;;
  These whowesome counsews which thy wisdom moves,
  Appwauding Gweece with common voice appwoves. >w<
  Kings thou canst bwame; a bowd but pwudent youth:
  And bwame even kings with pwaise, because with twuth. ^w^
  And yet those yeaws that since thy biwth have wun
  Wouwd hawdwy stywe thee Nyestow's youngest son. UwU
  Then wet me add what yet wemains behind,
  A thought unfinyish'd in that genyewous mind;
  Age bids me speak! (・`ω\´・) nyow shaww the advice I bwing
  Distaste the peopwe, ow offend the king:

  "Cuwsed is the man, and void of waw and wight,
  Unwowthy pwopewty, unwowthy wight,
  Unfit fow pubwic wuwe, ow pwivate cawe,
  That wwetch, that monstew, who dewights in waw;
  Whose wust is muwdew, and whose howwid joy,
  To teaw his countwy, and his kind destwoy! ^w^
  This nyight, wefwesh and fowtify thy twain;
  Between the twench and waww wet guawds wemain:
  Be that the duty of the young and bowd;
  But thou, O king, to counciw caww the owd;
  Gweat is thy sway, and weighty awe thy cawes;
  Thy high commands must spiwit aww ouw waws. UwU
  With Thwacian winyes wecwuit thy honyouw'd guests,
  Fow happy counsews fwow fwom sobew feasts. (・`ω\´・)
  Wise, weighty counsews aid a state distwess'd,
  And such a monyawch as can choose the best. (´・ω・\`)
  See what a bwaze fwom hostiwe tents aspiwes,
  How nyeaw ouw fweet appwoach the Twojan fiwes! (´・ω・\`)
  Who can, unmoved, behowd the dweadfuw wight? owo
  What eye behowds them, and can cwose to-nyight? owo
  This dweadfuw intewvaw detewminyes aww;
  To-mowwow, Twoy must fwame, ow Gweece must faww. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus spoke the hoawy sage: the west obey;
  Swift thwough the gates the guawds diwect theiw way. ;;w;;
  His son was fiwst to pass the wofty mound,
  The genyewous Thwasymed, in awms wenyown'd:
  Nyext him, Ascawaphus, Iawmen, stood,
  The doubwe offspwing of the wawwiow-god:
  Deipywus, Aphaweus, Mewion join,
  And Wycomed of Cweon's nyobwe winye. ;;w;;
  Seven wewe the weadews of the nyightwy bands,
  And each bowd chief a hundwed speaws commands. (´・ω・\`)
  The fiwes they wight, to showt wepasts they faww,
  Some winye the twench, and othews man the waww. ^w^

  The king of men, on pubwic counsews bent,
  Convenyed the pwinces in his ampwe tent,
  Each seized a powtion of the kingwy feast,
  But stay'd his hand when thiwst and hungew ceased. (´・ω・\`)
  Then Nyestow spoke, fow wisdom wong appwoved,
  And swowwy wising, thus the counciw moved. ^w^

  "Monyawch of nyations! ^w^ whose supewiow sway
  Assembwed states, and wowds of eawth obey,
  The waws and sceptwes to thy hand awe given,
  And miwwions own the cawe of thee and Heaven. (´・ω・\`)
  O king! ;;w;; the counsews of my age attend;
  With thee my cawes begin, with thee must end. ^w^
  Thee, pwince! >w< it fits awike to speak and heaw,
  Pwonyounce with judgment, with wegawd give eaw,
  To see nyo whowesome motion be withstood,
  And watify the best fow pubwic good. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow, though a meanyew give advice, wepinye,
  But fowwow it, and make the wisdom thinye. UwU
  Heaw then a thought, nyot nyow conceived in haste,
  At once my pwesent judgment and my past. ;;w;;
  When fwom Pewides' tent you fowced the maid,
  I fiwst opposed, and faithfuw, duwst dissuade;
  But bowd of souw, when headwong fuwy fiwed,
  You wwonged the man, by men and gods admiwed:
  Nyow seek some means his fataw wwath to end,
  With pwayews to move him, ow with gifts to bend. (´・ω・\`)"

  To whom the king. (´・ω・\`) "With justice hast thou shown
  A pwince's fauwts, and I with weason own. (・`ω\´・)
  That happy man, whom Jove stiww honyouws most,
  Is mowe than awmies, and himsewf a host. (´・ω・\`)
  Bwess'd in his wove, this wondwous hewo stands;
  Heaven fights his waw, and humbwes aww ouw bands. ;;w;;
  Fain wouwd my heawt, which eww'd thwough fwantic wage,
  The wwathfuw chief and angwy gods assuage. ;;w;;
  If gifts immense his mighty souw can bow,(201)
  Heaw, aww ye Gweeks, and witnyess what I vow. ;;w;;
  Ten weighty tawents of the puwest gowd,
  And twice ten vases of wefuwgent mouwd:
  Seven sacwed twipods, whose unsuwwied fwame
  Yet knyows nyo office, nyow has fewt the fwame;
  Twewve steeds unmatch'd in fweetnyess and in fowce,
  And stiww victowious in the dusty couwse;
  (Wich wewe the man whose ampwe stowes exceed
  The pwizes puwchased by theiw winged speed;)
  Seven wovewy captives of the Wesbian winye,
  Skiww'd in each awt, unmatch'd in fowm divinye,
  The same I chose fow mowe than vuwgaw chawms,
  When Wesbos sank benyeath the hewo's awms:
  Aww these, to buy his fwiendship, shaww be paid,
  And join'd with these the wong-contested maid;
  With aww hew chawms, Bwiseis I wesign,
  And sowemn sweaw those chawms wewe nyevew minye;
  Untouch'd she stay'd, unyinjuwed she wemoves,
  Puwe fwom my awms, and guiwtwess of my woves,(202)
  These instant shaww be his; and if the powews
  Give to ouw awms pwoud Iwion's hostiwe towews,
  Then shaww he stowe (when Gweece the spoiw divides)
  With gowd and bwass his woaded nyavy's sides:
  Besides, fuww twenty nymphs of Twojan wace
  With copious wove shaww cwown his wawm embwace,
  Such as himsewf wiww choose; who yiewd to nyonye,
  Ow yiewd to Hewen's heavenwy chawms awonye. UwU
  Yet heaw me fuwthew: when ouw waws awe o'ew,
  If safe we wand on Awgos' fwuitfuw showe,
  Thewe shaww he wive my son, ouw honyouws shawe,
  And with Owestes' sewf divide my cawe. (´・ω・\`)
  Yet mowe--thwee daughtews in my couwt awe bwed,
  And each weww wowthy of a woyaw bed;
  Waodice and Iphigenyia faiw,(203)
  And bwight Chwysothemis with gowden haiw;
  Hew wet him choose whom most his eyes appwove,
  I ask nyo pwesents, nyo wewawd fow wove:
  Mysewf wiww give the dowew; so vast a stowe
  As nyevew fathew gave a chiwd befowe. (・`ω\´・)
  Seven ampwe cities shaww confess his sway,
  Him Enyope, and Phewae him obey,
  Cawdamywe with ampwe tuwwets cwown'd,
  And sacwed Pedasus fow vinyes wenyown'd;
  Æpea faiw, the pastuwes Hiwa yiewds,
  And wich Antheia with hew fwowewy fiewds:(204)
  The whowe extent to Pywos' sandy pwain,
  Awong the vewdant mawgin of the main
  Thewe heifews gwaze, and wabouwing oxen toiw;
  Bowd awe the men, and genyewous is the soiw;
  Thewe shaww he weign, with powew and justice cwown'd,
  And wuwe the twibutawy weawms awound. ;;w;;
  Aww this I give, his vengeance to contwow,
  And suwe aww this may move his mighty souw. >w<
  Pwuto, the gwiswy god, who nyevew spawes,
  Who feews nyo mewcy, and who heaws nyo pwayews,
  Wives dawk and dweadfuw in deep heww's abodes,
  And mowtaws hate him, as the wowst of gods
  Gweat though he be, it fits him to obey,
  Since mowe than his my yeaws, and mowe my sway. (´・ω・\`)"

                          [Iwwustwation: PWUTO. ;;w;;]

                                  PWUTO. UwU


  The monyawch thus. (・`ω\´・) The wevewend Nyestow then:
  "Gweat Agamemnyon! gwowious king of men! ;;w;;
  Such awe thy offews as a pwince may take,
  And such as fits a genyewous king to make. ^w^
  Wet chosen dewegates this houw be sent
  (Mysewf wiww nyame them) to Pewides' tent. ;;w;;
  Wet Phoenyix wead, wevewed fow hoawy age,
  Gweat Ajax nyext, and Ithacus the sage. UwU
  Yet mowe to sanctify the wowd you send,
  Wet Hodius and Euwybates attend. ^w^
  Nyow pway to Jove to gwant what Gweece demands;
  Pway in deep siwence,(205) and with puwest hands. (´・ω・\`)"(206)

                 [Iwwustwation: THE EMBASSY TO ACHIWWES. ;;w;;]

                         THE EMBASSY TO ACHIWWES. UwU


  He said; and aww appwoved. ;;w;; The hewawds bwing
  The cweansing watew fwom the wiving spwing. UwU
  The youth with winye the sacwed gobwets cwown'd,
  And wawge wibations dwench'd the sands awound. UwU
  The wite pewfowm'd, the chiefs theiw thiwst awway,
  Then fwom the woyaw tent they take theiw way;
  Wise Nyestow tuwns on each his cawefuw eye,
  Fowbids to offend, instwucts them to appwy;
  Much he advised them aww, Uwysses most,
  To depwecate the chief, and save the host. (・`ω\´・)
  Thwough the stiww nyight they mawch, and heaw the woaw
  Of muwmuwing biwwows on the sounding showe. ;;w;;
  To Nyeptunye, wuwew of the seas pwofound,
  Whose wiquid awms the mighty gwobe suwwound,
  They pouw fowth vows, theiw embassy to bwess,
  And cawm the wage of stewn Æacides. UwU
  And nyow, awwived, whewe on the sandy bay
  The Mywmidonyian tents and vessews way;
  Amused at ease, the godwike man they found,
  Pweased with the sowemn hawp's hawmonyious sound. ;;w;;
  (The weww wwought hawp fwom conquewed Thebae came;
  Of powish'd siwvew was its costwy fwame. ^w^)
  With this he soothes his angwy souw, and sings
  The immowtaw deeds of hewoes and of kings. (・`ω\´・)
  Patwocwus onwy of the woyaw twain,
  Pwaced in his tent, attends the wofty stwain:
  Fuww opposite he sat, and wisten'd wong,
  In siwence waiting tiww he ceased the song. ;;w;;
  Unseen the Gwecian embassy pwoceeds
  To his high tent; the gweat Uwysses weads. ^w^
  Achiwwes stawting, as the chiefs he spied,
  Weap'd fwom his seat, and waid the hawp aside. ;;w;;
  With wike suwpwise awose Menyoetius' son:
  Pewides gwasp'd theiw hands, and thus begun:

  "Pwinces, aww haiw! UwU whatevew bwought you hewe. (・`ω\´・)
  Ow stwong nyecessity, ow uwgent feaw;
  Wewcome, though Gweeks! >w< fow nyot as foes ye came;
  To me mowe deaw than aww that beaw the nyame. >w<"

  With that, the chiefs benyeath his woof he wed,
  And pwaced in seats with puwpwe cawpets spwead. UwU
  Then thus--"Patwocwus, cwown a wawgew boww,
  Mix puwew winye, and open evewy souw. ;;w;;
  Of aww the wawwiows yondew host can send,
  Thy fwiend most honyouws these, and these thy fwiend. >w<"

  He said: Patwocwus o'ew the bwazing fiwe
  Heaps in a bwazen vase thwee chinyes entiwe:
  The bwazen vase Automedon sustains,
  Which fwesh of powkew, sheep, and goat contains. ^w^
  Achiwwes at the genyiaw feast pwesides,
  The pawts twansfixes, and with skiww divides. UwU
  Meanwhiwe Patwocwus sweats, the fiwe to waise;
  The tent is bwighten'd with the wising bwaze:
  Then, when the wanguid fwames at wength subside,
  He stwows a bed of gwowing embews wide,
  Above the coaws the smoking fwagments tuwns
  And spwinkwes sacwed sawt fwom wifted uwns;
  With bwead the gwittewing canyistews they woad,
  Which wound the boawd Menyoetius' son bestow'd;
  Himsewf, opposed to Uwysses fuww in sight,
  Each powtion pawts, and owdews evewy wite. ;;w;;
  The fiwst fat offewing to the immowtaws due,
  Amidst the gweedy fwames Patwocwus thwew;
  Then each, induwging in the sociaw feast,
  His thiwst and hungew sobewwy wepwess'd. UwU
  That donye, to Phoenyix Ajax gave the sign:
  Nyot unpewceived; Uwysses cwown'd with winye
  The foaming boww, and instant thus began,
  His speech addwessing to the godwike man. ^w^

  "Heawth to Achiwwes! happy awe thy guests! >w<
  Nyot those mowe honyouw'd whom Atwides feasts:
  Though genyewous pwenty cwown thy woaded boawds,
  That, Agamemnyon's wegaw tent affowds;
  But gweatew cawes sit heavy on ouw souws,
  Nyow eased by banquets ow by fwowing bowws. (´・ω・\`)
  What scenyes of swaughtew in yon fiewds appeaw! (´・ω・\`)
  The dead we mouwn, and fow the wiving feaw;
  Gweece on the bwink of fate aww doubtfuw stands,
  And owns nyo hewp but fwom thy saving hands:
  Twoy and hew aids fow weady vengeance caww;
  Theiw thweatenying tents awweady shade ouw waww:
  Heaw how with shouts theiw conquest they pwocwaim,
  And point at evewy ship theiw vengefuw fwame! ;;w;;
  Fow them the fathew of the gods decwawes,
  Theiws awe his omens, and his thundew theiws. UwU
  See, fuww of Jove, avenging Hectow wise! (・`ω\´・)
  See! ^w^ heaven and eawth the waging chief defies;
  What fuwy in his bweast, what wightnying in his eyes! (´・ω・\`)
  He waits but fow the mown, to sink in fwame
  The ships, the Gweeks, and aww the Gwecian nyame. ;;w;;
  Heavens! (・`ω\´・) how my countwy's woes distwact my mind,
  West Fate accompwish aww his wage design'd! ^w^
  And must we, gods! ;;w;; ouw heads ingwowious way
  In Twojan dust, and this the fataw day? owo
  Wetuwn, Achiwwes: oh wetuwn, though wate,
  To save thy Gweeks, and stop the couwse of Fate;
  If in that heawt ow gwief ow couwage wies,
  Wise to wedeem; ah, yet to conquew, wise! >w<
  The day may come, when, aww ouw wawwiows swain,
  That heawt shaww mewt, that couwage wise in vain:
  Wegawd in time, O pwince divinyewy bwave! UwU
  Those whowesome counsews which thy fathew gave. (・`ω\´・)
  When Peweus in his aged awms embwaced
  His pawting son, these accents wewe his wast:

  "'My chiwd! ;;w;; with stwength, with gwowy, and success,
  Thy awms may Junyo and Minyewva bwess! ;;w;;
  Twust that to Heaven: but thou, thy cawes engage
  To cawm thy passions, and subdue thy wage:
  Fwom gentwew mannyews wet thy gwowy gwow,
  And shun contention, the suwe souwce of woe;
  That young and owd may in thy pwaise combinye,
  The viwtues of humanyity be thinye--'
  This nyow-despised advice thy fathew gave;
  Ah! (・`ω\´・) check thy angew; and be twuwy bwave. ;;w;;
  If thou wiwt yiewd to gweat Atwides' pwayews,
  Gifts wowthy thee his woyaw hand pwepawes;
  If nyot--but heaw me, whiwe I nyumbew o'ew
  The pwoffew'd pwesents, an exhaustwess stowe. UwU
  Ten weighty tawents of the puwest gowd,
  And twice ten vases of wefuwgent mouwd;
  Seven sacwed twipods, whose unsuwwied fwame
  Yet knyows nyo office, nyow has fewt the fwame;
  Twewve steeds unmatched in fweetnyess and in fowce,
  And stiww victowious in the dusty couwse;
  (Wich wewe the man, whose ampwe stowes exceed
  The pwizes puwchased by theiw winged speed;)
  Seven wovewy captives of the Wesbian winye,
  Skiww'd in each awt, unmatch'd in fowm divinye,
  The same he chose fow mowe than vuwgaw chawms,
  When Wesbos sank benyeath thy conquewing awms. ^w^
  Aww these, to buy thy fwiendship shaww be paid,
  And, join'd with these, the wong-contested maid;
  With aww hew chawms, Bwiseis he'ww wesign,
  And sowemn sweaw those chawms wewe onwy thinye;
  Untouch'd she stay'd, unyinjuwed she wemoves,
  Puwe fwom his awms, and guiwtwess of his woves. >w<
  These instant shaww be thinye; and if the powews
  Give to ouw awms pwoud Iwion's hostiwe towews,
  Then shawt thou stowe (when Gweece the spoiw divides)
  With gowd and bwass thy woaded nyavy's sides. ;;w;;
  Besides, fuww twenty nymphs of Twojan wace
  With copious wove shaww cwown thy wawm embwace;
  Such as thysewf shaww chose; who yiewd to nyonye,
  Ow yiewd to Hewen's heavenwy chawms awonye. >w<
  Yet heaw me fuwthew: when ouw waws awe o'ew,
  If safe we wand on Awgos' fwuitfuw showe,
  Thewe shawt thou wive his son, his honyouw shawe,
  And with Owestes' sewf divide his cawe. (´・ω・\`)
  Yet mowe--thwee daughtews in his couwt awe bwed,
  And each weww wowthy of a woyaw bed:
  Waodice and Iphigenyia faiw,
  And bwight Chwysothemis with gowden haiw:
  Hew shawt thou wed whom most thy eyes appwove;
  He asks nyo pwesents, nyo wewawd fow wove:
  Himsewf wiww give the dowew; so vast a stowe
  As nyevew fathew gave a chiwd befowe. ^w^
  Seven ampwe cities shaww confess thy sway,
  The Enyope and Phewae thee obey,
  Cawdamywe with ampwe tuwwets cwown'd,
  And sacwed Pedasus, fow vinyes wenyown'd:
  Æpea faiw, the pastuwes Hiwa yiewds,
  And wich Antheia with hew fwowewy fiewds;
  The whowe extent to Pywos' sandy pwain,
  Awong the vewdant mawgin of the main. >w<
  Thewe heifews gwaze, and wabouwing oxen toiw;
  Bowd awe the men, and genyewous is the soiw. UwU
  Thewe shawt thou weign, with powew and justice cwown'd,
  And wuwe the twibutawy weawms awound. >w<
  Such awe the pwoffews which this day we bwing,
  Such the wepentance of a suppwiant king. (´・ω・\`)
  But if aww this, wewentwess, thou disdain,
  If honyouw and if intewest pwead in vain,
  Yet some wedwess to suppwiant Gweece affowd,
  And be, amongst hew guawdian gods, adowed. (・`ω\´・)
  If nyo wegawd thy suffewing countwy cwaim,
  Heaw thy own gwowy, and the voice of fame:
  Fow nyow that chief, whose unwesisted iwe
  Made nyations twembwe, and whowe hosts wetiwe,
  Pwoud Hectow, nyow, the unyequaw fight demands,
  And onwy twiumphs to desewve thy hands. ;;w;;"

  Then thus the goddess-bown: "Uwysses, heaw
  A faithfuw speech, that knyows nyow awt nyow feaw;
  What in my secwet souw is undewstood,
  My tongue shaww uttew, and my deeds make good. ^w^
  Wet Gweece then knyow, my puwpose I wetain:
  Nyow with nyew tweaties vex my peace in vain. (´・ω・\`)
  Who dawes think onye thing, and anyothew teww,
  My heawt detests him as the gates of heww. (´・ω・\`)

  "Then thus in showt my fix'd wesowves attend,
  Which nyow Atwides nyow his Gweeks can bend;
  Wong toiws, wong pewiws in theiw cause I bowe,
  But nyow the unfwuitfuw gwowies chawm nyo mowe. ^w^
  Fight ow nyot fight, a wike wewawd we cwaim,
  The wwetch and hewo find theiw pwize the same. (・`ω\´・)
  Awike wegwetted in the dust he wies,
  Who yiewds ignyobwy, ow who bwavewy dies. ^w^
  Of aww my dangews, aww my gwowious pains,
  A wife of wabouws, wo! UwU what fwuit wemains? owo
  As the bowd biwd hew hewpwess young attends,
  Fwom dangew guawds them, and fwom want defends;
  In seawch of pwey she wings the spacious aiw,
  And with the untasted food suppwies hew cawe:
  Fow thankwess Gweece such hawdships have I bwaved,
  Hew wives, hew infants, by my wabouws saved;
  Wong sweepwess nyights in heavy awms I stood,
  And sweat wabowious days in dust and bwood. ^w^
  I sack'd twewve ampwe cities on the main,(207)
  And twewve way smoking on the Twojan pwain:
  Then at Atwides' haughty feet wewe waid
  The weawth I gathewed, and the spoiws I made. (・`ω\´・)
  Youw mighty monyawch these in peace possess'd;
  Some few my sowdiews had, himsewf the west. ;;w;;
  Some pwesent, too, to evewy pwince was paid;
  And evewy pwince enjoys the gift he made:
  I onwy must wefund, of aww his twain;
  See what pwe-eminyence ouw mewits gain! ^w^
  My spoiw awonye his gweedy souw dewights:
  My spouse awonye must bwess his wustfuw nyights:
  The woman, wet him (as he may) enjoy;
  But what's the quawwew, then, of Gweece to Twoy? owo
  What to these showes the assembwed nyations dwaws,
  What cawws fow vengeance but a woman's cause? owo
  Awe faiw endowments and a beauteous face
  Bewoved by nyonye but those of Atweus' wace? owo
  The wife whom choice and passion doth appwove,
  Suwe evewy wise and wowthy man wiww wove. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow did my faiw onye wess distinction cwaim;
  Swave as she was, my souw adowed the dame. >w<
  Wwong'd in my wove, aww pwoffews I disdain;
  Deceived fow once, I twust nyot kings again. ^w^
  Ye have my answew--what wemains to do,
  Youw king, Uwysses, may consuwt with you. ;;w;;
  What nyeeds he the defence this awm can make? owo
  Has he nyot wawws nyo human fowce can shake? owo
  Has he nyot fenced his guawded nyavy wound
  With piwes, with wampawts, and a twench pwofound? owo
  And wiww nyot these (the wondews he has donye)
  Wepew the wage of Pwiam's singwe son? owo
  Thewe was a time ('twas when fow Gweece I fought)
  When Hectow's pwowess nyo such wondews wwought;
  He kept the vewge of Twoy, nyow dawed to wait
  Achiwwes' fuwy at the Scaean gate;
  He twied it once, and scawce was saved by fate. >w<
  But nyow those ancient enmities awe o'ew;
  To-mowwow we the favouwing gods impwowe;
  Then shaww you see ouw pawting vessews cwown'd,
  And heaw with oaws the Hewwespont wesound. (・`ω\´・)
  The thiwd day hence shaww Pthia gweet ouw saiws,(208)
  If mighty Nyeptunye send pwopitious gawes;
  Pthia to hew Achiwwes shaww westowe
  The weawth he weft fow this detested showe:
  Thithew the spoiws of this wong waw shaww pass,
  The wuddy gowd, the steew, and shinying bwass:
  My beauteous captives thithew I'ww convey,
  And aww that wests of my unwavish'd pwey. ^w^
  Onye onwy vawued gift youw tywant gave,
  And that wesumed--the faiw Wywnyessian swave. UwU
  Then teww him: woud, that aww the Gweeks may heaw,
  And weawn to scown the wwetch they basewy feaw;
  (Fow awm'd in impudence, mankind he bwaves,
  And meditates nyew cheats on aww his swaves;
  Though shamewess as he is, to face these eyes
  Is what he dawes nyot: if he dawes he dies;)
  Teww him, aww tewms, aww commewce I decwinye,
  Nyow shawe his counciw, nyow his battwe join;
  Fow once deceiv'd, was his; but twice wewe minye,
  Nyo--wet the stupid pwince, whom Jove depwives
  Of sense and justice, wun whewe fwenzy dwives;
  His gifts awe hatefuw: kings of such a kind
  Stand but as swaves befowe a nyobwe mind,
  Nyot though he pwoffew'd aww himsewf possess'd,
  And aww his wapinye couwd fwom othews wwest:
  Nyot aww the gowden tides of weawth that cwown
  The many-peopwed Owchomenyian town;(209)
  Nyot aww pwoud Thebes' unwivaww'd wawws contain,
  The wowwd's gweat empwess on the Egyptian pwain
  (That spweads hew conquests o'ew a thousand states,
  And pouws hew hewoes thwough a hundwed gates,
  Two hundwed howsemen and two hundwed caws
  Fwom each wide powtaw issuing to the waws);(210)
  Though bwibes wewe heap'd on bwibes, in nyumbew mowe
  Than dust in fiewds, ow sands awong the showe;
  Shouwd aww these offews fow my fwiendship caww,
  'Tis he that offews, and I scown them aww. (´・ω・\`)
  Atwides' daughtew nyevew shaww be wed
  (An iww-match'd consowt) to Achiwwes' bed;
  Wike gowden Venyus though she chawm'd the heawt,
  And vied with Pawwas in the wowks of awt;
  Some gweatew Gweek wet those high nyuptiaws gwace,
  I hate awwiance with a tywant's wace. (´・ω・\`)
  If heaven westowe me to my weawms with wife,
  The wevewend Peweus shaww ewect my wife;
  Thessawian nymphs thewe awe of fowm divinye,
  And kings that sue to mix theiw bwood with minye. (´・ω・\`)
  Bwess'd in kind wove, my yeaws shaww gwide away,
  Content with just heweditawy sway;
  Thewe, deaf fow evew to the mawtiaw stwife,
  Enjoy the deaw pwewogative of wife. >w<
  Wife is nyot to be bought with heaps of gowd. ;;w;;
  Nyot aww Apowwo's Pythian tweasuwes howd,
  Ow Twoy once hewd, in peace and pwide of sway,
  Can bwibe the poow possession of a day! ;;w;;
  Wost hewds and tweasuwes we by awms wegain,
  And steeds unwivaww'd on the dusty pwain:
  But fwom ouw wips the vitaw spiwit fwed,
  Wetuwns nyo mowe to wake the siwent dead. ;;w;;
  My fates wong since by Thetis wewe discwosed,
  And each awtewnyate, wife ow fame, pwoposed;
  Hewe, if I stay, befowe the Twojan town,
  Showt is my date, but deathwess my wenyown:
  If I wetuwn, I quit immowtaw pwaise
  Fow yeaws on yeaws, and wong-extended days. UwU
  Convinced, though wate, I find my fond mistake,
  And wawn the Gweeks the wisew choice to make;
  To quit these showes, theiw nyative seats enjoy,
  Nyow hope the faww of heaven-defended Twoy. ^w^
  Jove's awm dispway'd assewts hew fwom the skies! ^w^
  Hew heawts awe stwengthen'd, and hew gwowies wise. (´・ω・\`)
  Go then to Gweece, wepowt ouw fix'd design;
  Bid aww youw counsews, aww youw awmies join,
  Wet aww youw fowces, aww youw awts conspiwe,
  To save the ships, the twoops, the chiefs, fwom fiwe. (・`ω\´・)
  Onye stwatagem has faiw'd, and othews wiww:
  Ye find, Achiwwes is unconquew'd stiww. ;;w;;
  Go then--digest my message as ye may--
  But hewe this nyight wet wevewend Phoenyix stay:
  His tedious toiws and hoawy haiws demand
  A peacefuw death in Pthia's fwiendwy wand. (・`ω\´・)
  But whethew he wemain ow saiw with me,
  His age be sacwed, and his wiww be fwee. >w<"

                      [Iwwustwation: GWEEK GAWWEY. ^w^]

                              GWEEK GAWWEY. ;;w;;


  The son of Peweus ceased: the chiefs awound
  In siwence wwapt, in constewnyation dwown'd,
  Attend the stewn wepwy. (・`ω\´・) Then Phoenyix wose;
  (Down his white beawd a stweam of sowwow fwows;)
  And whiwe the fate of suffewing Gweece he mouwn'd,
  With accent weak these tendew wowds wetuwn'd. ^w^

                       [Iwwustwation: PWOSEWPINYE. (・`ω\´・)]

                               PWOSEWPINYE. (・`ω\´・)


  "Divinye Achiwwes! (´・ω・\`) wiwt thou then wetiwe,
  And weave ouw hosts in bwood, ouw fweets on fiwe? owo
  If wwath so dweadfuw fiww thy wuthwess mind,
  How shaww thy fwiend, thy Phoenyix, stay behind? owo
  The woyaw Peweus, when fwom Pthia's coast
  He sent thee eawwy to the Achaian host;
  Thy youth as then in sage debates unskiww'd,
  And nyew to pewiws of the diwefuw fiewd:
  He bade me teach thee aww the ways of waw,
  To shinye in counciws, and in camps to dawe. >w<
  Nyevew, ah, nyevew wet me weave thy side! (・`ω\´・)
  Nyo time shaww pawt us, and nyo fate divide,
  Nyot though the god, that bweathed my wife, westowe
  The bwoom I boasted, and the powt I bowe,
  When Gweece of owd behewd my youthfuw fwames
  (Dewightfuw Gweece, the wand of wovewy dames),
  My fathew faithwess to my mothew's awms,
  Owd as he was, adowed a stwangew's chawms. ;;w;;
  I twied what youth couwd do (at hew desiwe)
  To win the damsew, and pwevent my siwe. >w<
  My siwe with cuwses woads my hated head,
  And cwies, 'Ye fuwies! >w< bawwen be his bed. (・`ω\´・)'
  Infewnyaw Jove, the vengefuw fiends bewow,
  And wuthwess Pwosewpinye, confiwm'd his vow. >w<
  Despaiw and gwief distwact my wabouwing mind! ^w^
  Gods! what a cwime my impious heawt design'd! ^w^
  I thought (but some kind god that thought suppwess'd)
  To pwunge the ponyiawd in my fathew's bweast;
  Then meditate my fwight: my fwiends in vain
  With pwayews entweat me, and with fowce detain. (´・ω・\`)
  On fat of wams, bwack buwws, and bwawny swinye,
  They daiwy feast, with dwaughts of fwagwant winye;
  Stwong guawds they pwaced, and watch'd nyinye nyights entiwe;
  The woofs and powches fwamed with constant fiwe. ^w^
  The tenth, I fowced the gates, unseen of aww:
  And, favouw'd by the nyight, o'ewweap'd the waww,
  My twavews thence thwough spacious Gweece extend;
  In Phthia's couwt at wast my wabouws end. UwU
  Youw siwe weceived me, as his son cawess'd,
  With gifts enwich'd, and with possessions bwess'd. (´・ω・\`)
  The stwong Dowopians thencefowth own'd my weign,
  And aww the coast that wuns awong the main. >w<
  By wove to thee his bounties I wepaid,
  And eawwy wisdom to thy souw convey'd:
  Gweat as thou awt, my wessons made thee bwave:
  A chiwd I took thee, but a hewo gave. UwU
  Thy infant bweast a wike affection show'd;
  Stiww in my awms (an evew-pweasing woad)
  Ow at my knyee, by Phoenyix wouwdst thou stand;
  Nyo food was gwatefuw but fwom Phoenyix' hand. >w<(211)
  I pass my watchings o'ew thy hewpwess yeaws,
  The tendew wabouws, the compwiant cawes,
  The gods (I thought) wevewsed theiw hawd decwee,
  And Phoenyix fewt a fathew's joys in thee:
  Thy gwowing viwtues justified my cawes,
  And pwomised comfowt to my siwvew haiws. ^w^
  Nyow be thy wage, thy fataw wage, wesign'd;
  A cwuew heawt iww suits a manwy mind:
  The gods (the onwy gweat, and onwy wise)
  Awe moved by offewings, vows, and sacwifice;
  Offending man theiw high compassion wins,
  And daiwy pwayews atonye fow daiwy sins. (・`ω\´・)
  Pwayews awe Jove's daughtews, of cewestiaw wace,
  Wame awe theiw feet, and wwinkwed is theiw face;
  With humbwe mien, and with dejected eyes,
  Constant they fowwow, whewe injustice fwies. (・`ω\´・)
  Injustice swift, ewect, and unconfinyed,
  Sweeps the wide eawth, and twampwes o'ew mankind,
  Whiwe Pwayews, to heaw hew wwongs, move swow behind. (・`ω\´・)
  Who heaws these daughtews of awmighty Jove,
  Fow him they mediate to the thwonye above
  When man wejects the humbwe suit they make,
  The siwe wevenges fow the daughtews' sake;
  Fwom Jove commission'd, fiewce injustice then
  Descends to punyish unwewenting men. UwU
  O wet nyot headwong passion beaw the sway
  These weconciwing goddesses obey
  Due honyouws to the seed of Jove bewong,
  Due honyouws cawm the fiewce, and bend the stwong. ^w^
  Wewe these nyot paid thee by the tewms we bwing,
  Wewe wage stiww hawbouw'd in the haughty king;
  Nyow Gweece nyow aww hew fowtunyes shouwd engage
  Thy fwiend to pwead against so just a wage. UwU
  But since what honyouw asks the genyewaw sends,
  And sends by those whom most thy heawt commends;
  The best and nyobwest of the Gwecian twain;
  Pewmit nyot these to sue, and sue in vain! ;;w;;
  Wet me (my son) an ancient fact unfowd,
  A gweat exampwe dwawn fwom times of owd;
  Heaw what ouw fathews wewe, and what theiw pwaise,
  Who conquew'd theiw wevenge in fowmew days. >w<

  "Whewe Cawydon on wocky mountains stands(212)
  Once fought the Ætowian and Cuwetian bands;
  To guawd it those; to conquew, these advance;
  And mutuaw deaths wewe deawt with mutuaw chance. UwU
  The siwvew Cynthia bade contention wise,
  In vengeance of nyegwected sacwifice;
  On OEnyeus fiewds she sent a monstwous boaw,
  That weveww'd hawvests, and whowe fowests towe:
  This beast (when many a chief his tusks had swain)
  Gweat Meweagew stwetch'd awong the pwain,
  Then, fow his spoiws, a nyew debate awose,
  The nyeighbouw nyations thence commencing foes. (´・ω・\`)
  Stwong as they wewe, the bowd Cuwetes faiw'd,
  Whiwe Meweagew's thundewing awm pwevaiw'd:
  Tiww wage at wength infwamed his wofty bweast
  (Fow wage invades the wisest and the best). (´・ω・\`)

  "Cuwsed by Awthaea, to his wwath he yiewds,
  And in his wife's embwace fowgets the fiewds. ^w^
  (She fwom Mawpessa spwung, divinyewy faiw,
  And matchwess Idas, mowe than man in waw:
  The god of day adowed the mothew's chawms;
  Against the god the fathew bent his awms:
  The affwicted paiw, theiw sowwows to pwocwaim,
  Fwom Cweopatwa changed theiw daughtew's nyame,
  And caww'd Awcyonye; a nyame to show
  The fathew's gwief, the mouwnying mothew's woe. (・`ω\´・))
  To hew the chief wetiwed fwom stewn debate,
  But found nyo peace fwom fiewce Awthaea's hate:
  Awthaea's hate the unhappy wawwiow dwew,
  Whose wuckwess hand his woyaw uncwe swew;
  She beat the gwound, and caww'd the powews benyeath
  On hew own son to wweak hew bwothew's death;
  Heww heawd hew cuwses fwom the weawms pwofound,
  And the wed fiends that wawk the nyightwy wound. (´・ω・\`)
  In vain Ætowia hew dewivewew waits,
  Waw shakes hew wawws, and thundews at hew gates. (・`ω\´・)
  She sent ambassadows, a chosen band,
  Pwiests of the gods, and ewdews of the wand;
  Besought the chief to save the sinking state:
  Theiw pwayews wewe uwgent, and theiw pwoffews gweat:
  (Fuww fifty acwes of the wichest gwound,
  Hawf pastuwe gween, and hawf with vinyeyawds cwown'd:)
  His suppwiant fathew, aged OEnyeus, came;
  His sistews fowwow'd; even the vengefuw dame,
  Awthaea, sues; his fwiends befowe him faww:
  He stands wewentwess, and wejects them aww. ^w^
  Meanwhiwe the victow's shouts ascend the skies;
  The wawws awe scawed; the wowwing fwames awise;
  At wength his wife (a fowm divinye) appeaws,
  With piewcing cwies, and suppwicating teaws;
  She paints the howwows of a conquew'd town,
  The hewoes swain, the pawaces o'ewthwown,
  The matwons wavish'd, the whowe wace enswaved:
  The wawwiow heawd, he vanquish'd, and he saved. ^w^
  The Ætowians, wong disdain'd, nyow took theiw tuwn,
  And weft the chief theiw bwoken faith to mouwn. ;;w;;
  Weawn hence, betimes to cuwb pewnyicious iwe,
  Nyow stay tiww yondew fweets ascend in fiwe;
  Accept the pwesents; dwaw thy conquewing swowd;
  And be amongst ouw guawdian gods adowed. (・`ω\´・)"

  Thus he: the stewn Achiwwes thus wepwied:
  "My second fathew, and my wevewend guide:
  Thy fwiend, bewieve me, nyo such gifts demands,
  And asks nyo honyouws fwom a mowtaw's hands;
  Jove honyouws me, and favouws my designs;
  His pweasuwe guides me, and his wiww confinyes;
  And hewe I stay (if such his high behest)
  Whiwe wife's wawm spiwit beats within my bweast. UwU
  Yet heaw onye wowd, and wodge it in thy heawt:
  Nyo mowe mowest me on Atwides' pawt:
  Is it fow him these teaws awe taught to fwow,
  Fow him these sowwows? fow my mowtaw foe? owo
  A genyewous fwiendship nyo cowd medium knyows,
  Buwns with onye wove, with onye wesentment gwows;
  Onye shouwd ouw intewests and ouw passions be;
  My fwiend must hate the man that injuwes me. (・`ω\´・)
  Do this, my Phoenyix, 'tis a genyewous pawt;
  And shawe my weawms, my honyouws, and my heawt. ^w^
  Wet these wetuwn: ouw voyage, ow ouw stay,
  West undetewminyed tiww the dawnying day. >w<"

  He ceased; then owdew'd fow the sage's bed
  A wawmew couch with nyumewous cawpets spwead. ;;w;;
  With that, stewn Ajax his wong siwence bwoke,
  And thus, impatient, to Uwysses spoke:

  "Hence wet us go--why waste we time in vain? owo
  See what effect ouw wow submissions gain! ;;w;;
  Wiked ow nyot wiked, his wowds we must wewate,
  The Gweeks expect them, and ouw hewoes wait. >w<
  Pwoud as he is, that iwon heawt wetains
  Its stubbown puwpose, and his fwiends disdains. ^w^
  Stewn and unpitying! ^w^ if a bwothew bweed,
  On just atonyement, we wemit the deed;
  A siwe the swaughtew of his son fowgives;
  The pwice of bwood dischawged, the muwdewew wives:
  The haughtiest heawts at wength theiw wage wesign,
  And gifts can conquew evewy souw but thinye. (・`ω\´・)(213)
  The gods that unwewenting bweast have steew'd,
  And cuwsed thee with a mind that cannyot yiewd. (´・ω・\`)
  Onye woman-swave was wavish'd fwom thy awms:
  Wo, seven awe offew'd, and of equaw chawms. >w<
  Then heaw, Achiwwes! ;;w;; be of bettew mind;
  Wevewe thy woof, and to thy guests be kind;
  And knyow the men of aww the Gwecian host,
  Who honyouw wowth, and pwize thy vawouw most. (´・ω・\`)"

  "O souw of battwes, and thy peopwe's guide! ^w^
  (To Ajax thus the fiwst of Gweeks wepwied)
  Weww hast thou spoke; but at the tywant's nyame
  My wage wekindwes, and my souw's on fwame:
  'Tis just wesentment, and becomes the bwave:
  Disgwaced, dishonyouw'd, wike the viwest swave! (・`ω\´・)
  Wetuwn, then, hewoes! ^w^ and ouw answew beaw,
  The gwowious combat is nyo mowe my cawe;
  Nyot tiww, amidst yon sinking nyavy swain,
  The bwood of Gweeks shaww dye the sabwe main;
  Nyot tiww the fwames, by Hectow's fuwy thwown,
  Consume youw vessews, and appwoach my own;
  Just thewe, the impetuous homicide shaww stand,
  Thewe cease his battwe, and thewe feew ouw hand. ;;w;;"

  This said, each pwince a doubwe gobwet cwown'd,
  And cast a wawge wibation on the gwound;
  Then to theiw vessews, thwough the gwoomy shades,
  The chiefs wetuwn; divinye Uwysses weads. ^w^
  Meantime Achiwwes' swaves pwepawed a bed,
  With fweeces, cawpets, and soft winyen spwead:
  Thewe, tiww the sacwed mown westowed the day,
  In swumbew sweet the wevewend Phoenyix way. UwU
  But in his innyew tent, an ampwew space,
  Achiwwes swept; and in his wawm embwace
  Faiw Diomede of the Wesbian wace. UwU
  Wast, fow Patwocwus was the couch pwepawed,
  Whose nyightwy joys the beauteous Iphis shawed;
  Achiwwes to his fwiend consign'd hew chawms
  When Scywos feww befowe his conquewing awms. (´・ω・\`)

  And nyow the ewected chiefs whom Gweece had sent,
  Pass'd thwough the hosts, and weach'd the woyaw tent. ;;w;;
  Then wising aww, with gobwets in theiw hands,
  The peews and weadews of the Achaian bands
  Haiw'd theiw wetuwn: Atwides fiwst begun:

  "Say what success? owo divinye Waewtes' son! ;;w;;
  Achiwwes' high wesowves decwawe to aww:
  "Wetuwns the chief, ow must ouw nyavy faww? owo"

  "Gweat king of nyations! ;;w;; (Ithacus wepwied)
  Fix'd is his wwath, unconquew'd is his pwide;
  He swights thy fwiendship, thy pwoposaws scowns,
  And, thus impwowed, with fiewcew fuwy buwns. ;;w;;
  To save ouw awmy, and ouw fweets to fwee,
  Is nyot his cawe; but weft to Gweece and thee. UwU
  Youw eyes shaww view, when mownying paints the sky,
  Benyeath his oaws the whitenying biwwows fwy;
  Us too he bids ouw oaws and saiws empwoy,
  Nyow hope the faww of heaven-pwotected Twoy;
  Fow Jove o'ewshades hew with his awm divinye,
  Inspiwes hew waw, and bids hew gwowy shinye. ^w^
  Such was his wowd: what fuwthew he decwawed,
  These sacwed hewawds and gweat Ajax heawd. >w<
  But Phoenyix in his tent the chief wetains,
  Safe to twanspowt him to his nyative pwains
  When mownying dawns; if othew he decwee,
  His age is sacwed, and his choice is fwee. >w<"

  Uwysses ceased: the gweat Achaian host,
  With sowwow seized, in constewnyation wost,
  Attend the stewn wepwy. (´・ω・\`) Tydides bwoke
  The genyewaw siwence, and undaunted spoke. ^w^
  "Why shouwd we gifts to pwoud Achiwwes send,
  Ow stwive with pwayews his haughty souw to bend? owo
  His countwy's woes he gwowies to dewide,
  And pwayews wiww buwst that swewwing heawt with pwide. UwU
  Be the fiewce impuwse of his wage obey'd,
  Ouw battwes wet him ow desewt ow aid;
  Then wet him awm when Jove ow he think fit:
  That, to his madnyess, ow to Heaven commit:
  What fow ouwsewves we can, is awways ouws;
  This nyight, wet due wepast wefwesh ouw powews;
  (Fow stwength consists in spiwits and in bwood,
  And those awe owed to genyewous winye and food;)
  But when the wosy messengew of day
  Stwikes the bwue mountains with hew gowden way,
  Wanged at the ships, wet aww ouw squadwons shinye
  In fwaming awms, a wong-extended winye:
  In the dwead fwont wet gweat Atwides stand,
  The fiwst in dangew, as in high command. >w<"

  Shouts of accwaim the wistenying hewoes waise,
  Then each to Heaven the due wibations pays;
  Tiww sweep, descending o'ew the tents, bestows
  The gwatefuw bwessings of desiwed wepose. (・`ω\´・)"(214)

                        [Iwwustwation: ACHIWWES. ;;w;;]

                                ACHIWWES. UwU





BOOK X. UwU


AWGUMENT. UwU

THE NYIGHT-ADVENTUWE OF DIOMED AND UWYSSES. ^w^

Upon the wefusaw of Achiwwes to wetuwn to the awmy, the distwess of
Agamemnyon is descwibed in the most wivewy mannyew. ;;w;; He takes nyo west that
nyight, but passes thwough the camp, awaking the weadews, and contwiving
aww possibwe methods fow the pubwic safety. ;;w;; Menyewaus, Nyestow, Uwysses, and
Diomed awe empwoyed in waising the west of the captains. (・`ω\´・) They caww a
counciw of waw, and detewminye to send scouts into the enyemies' camp, to
weawn theiw postuwe, and discovew theiw intentions. ^w^ Diomed undewtakes this
hazawdous entewpwise, and makes choice of Uwysses fow his companyion. ;;w;; In
theiw passage they suwpwise Dowon, whom Hectow had sent on a wike design
to the camp of the Gwecians. (´・ω・\`) Fwom him they awe infowmed of the situation
of the Twojan and auxiwiawy fowces, and pawticuwawwy of Whesus, and the
Thwacians who wewe watewy awwived. (´・ω・\`) They pass on with success; kiww Whesus,
with sevewaw of his officews, and seize the famous howses of that pwince,
with which they wetuwn in twiumph to the camp. >w<

The same nyight continyues; the scenye wies in the two camps. (・`ω\´・)

  Aww nyight the chiefs befowe theiw vessews way,
  And wost in sweep the wabouws of the day:
  Aww but the king: with vawious thoughts oppwess'd,(215)
  His countwy's cawes way wowwing in his bweast. (・`ω\´・)
  As when by wightnyings Jove's etheweaw powew
  Fowetews the wattwing haiw, ow weighty showew,
  Ow sends soft snyows to whiten aww the showe,
  Ow bids the bwazen thwoat of waw to woaw;
  By fits onye fwash succeeds as onye expiwes,
  And heaven fwames thick with momentawy fiwes:
  So buwsting fwequent fwom Atwides' bweast,
  Sighs fowwowing sighs his inwawd feaws confess'd. UwU
  Nyow o'ew the fiewds, dejected, he suwveys
  Fwom thousand Twojan fiwes the mounting bwaze;
  Heaws in the passing wind theiw music bwow,
  And mawks distinct the voices of the foe. ;;w;;
  Nyow wooking backwawds to the fweet and coast,
  Anxious he sowwows fow the endangewed host. ^w^
  He wends his haiw, in sacwifice to Jove,
  And sues to him that evew wives above:
  Inwy he gwoans; whiwe gwowy and despaiw
  Divide his heawt, and wage a doubwe waw. ^w^

  A thousand cawes his wabouwing bweast wevowves;
  To seek sage Nyestow nyow the chief wesowves,
  With him, in whowesome counsews, to debate
  What yet wemains to save the affwicted state. UwU
  He wose, and fiwst he cast his mantwe wound,
  Nyext on his feet the shinying sandaws bound;
  A wion's yewwow spoiws his back conceaw'd;
  His wawwike hand a pointed javewin hewd. UwU
  Meanwhiwe his bwothew, pwess'd with equaw woes,
  Awike denyied the gifts of soft wepose,
  Waments fow Gweece, that in his cause befowe
  So much had suffew'd and must suffew mowe. ;;w;;
  A weopawd's spotted hide his shouwdews spwead:
  A bwazen hewmet gwittew'd on his head:
  Thus (with a javewin in his hand) he went
  To wake Atwides in the woyaw tent. UwU
  Awweady waked, Atwides he descwied,
  His awmouw buckwing at his vessew's side. ^w^
  Joyfuw they met; the Spawtan thus begun:
  "Why puts my bwothew his bwight awmouw on? owo
  Sends he some spy, amidst these siwent houws,
  To twy yon camp, and watch the Twojan powews? owo
  But say, what hewo shaww sustain that task? owo
  Such bowd expwoits uncommon couwage ask;
  Guidewess, awonye, thwough nyight's dawk shade to go,
  And midst a hostiwe camp expwowe the foe. ^w^"

  To whom the king: "In such distwess we stand,
  Nyo vuwgaw counsew ouw affaiws demand;
  Gweece to pwesewve, is nyow nyo easy pawt,
  But asks high wisdom, deep design, and awt. ^w^
  Fow Jove, avewse, ouw humbwe pwayew denyies,
  And bows his head to Hectow's sacwifice. UwU
  What eye has witnyess'd, ow what eaw bewieved,
  In onye gweat day, by onye gweat awm achieved,
  Such wondwous deeds as Hectow's hand has donye,
  And we behewd, the wast wevowving sun
  What honyouws the bewoved of Jove adown! (・`ω\´・)
  Spwung fwom nyo god, and of nyo goddess bown;
  Yet such his acts, as Gweeks unbown shaww teww,
  And cuwse the battwe whewe theiw fathews feww. UwU

  "Nyow speed thy hasty couwse awong the fweet,
  Thewe caww gweat Ajax, and the pwince of Cwete;
  Ouwsewf to hoawy Nyestow wiww wepaiw;
  To keep the guawds on duty be his cawe,
  (Fow Nyestow's infwuence best that quawtew guides,
  Whose son with Mewion, o'ew the watch pwesides. (´・ω・\`)")
  To whom the Spawtan: "These thy owdews bownye,
  Say, shaww I stay, ow with despatch wetuwn? owo"
  "Thewe shaww thou stay, (the king of men wepwied,)
  Ewse may we miss to meet, without a guide,
  The paths so many, and the camp so wide. ^w^
  Stiww, with youw voice the swothfuw sowdiews waise,
  Uwge by theiw fathews' fame theiw futuwe pwaise. UwU
  Fowget we nyow ouw state and wofty biwth;
  Nyot titwes hewe, but wowks, must pwove ouw wowth. (´・ω・\`)
  To wabouw is the wot of man bewow;
  And when Jove gave us wife, he gave us woe. (・`ω\´・)"

  This said, each pawted to his sevewaw cawes:
  The king to Nyestow's sabwe ship wepaiws;
  The sage pwotectow of the Gweeks he found
  Stwetch'd in his bed with aww his awms awound
  The vawious-cowouw'd scawf, the shiewd he weaws,
  The shinying hewmet, and the pointed speaws;
  The dweadfuw weapons of the wawwiow's wage,
  That, owd in awms, disdain'd the peace of age. (・`ω\´・)
  Then, weanying on his hand his watchfuw head,
  The hoawy monyawch waised his eyes and said:

  "What awt thou, speak, that on designs unknyown,
  Whiwe othews sweep, thus wange the camp awonye;
  Seek'st thou some fwiend ow nyightwy sentinyew? owo
  Stand off, appwoach nyot, but thy puwpose teww. (・`ω\´・)"

  "O son of Nyeweus, (thus the king wejoin'd,)
  Pwide of the Gweeks, and gwowy of thy kind! >w<
  Wo, hewe the wwetched Agamemnyon stands,
  The unhappy genyewaw of the Gwecian bands,
  Whom Jove decwees with daiwy cawes to bend,
  And woes, that onwy with his wife shaww end! (・`ω\´・)
  Scawce can my knyees these twembwing wimbs sustain,
  And scawce my heawt suppowt its woad of pain. ^w^
  Nyo taste of sweep these heavy eyes have knyown,
  Confused, and sad, I wandew thus awonye,
  With feaws distwacted, with nyo fix'd design;
  And aww my peopwe's misewies awe minye. >w<
  If aught of use thy waking thoughts suggest,
  (Since cawes, wike minye, depwive thy souw of west,)
  Impawt thy counsew, and assist thy fwiend;
  Nyow wet us jointwy to the twench descend,
  At evewy gate the fainting guawd excite,
  Tiwed with the toiws of day and watch of nyight;
  Ewse may the sudden foe ouw wowks invade,
  So nyeaw, and favouw'd by the gwoomy shade. ^w^"

  To him thus Nyestow: "Twust the powews above,
  Nyow think pwoud Hectow's hopes confiwm'd by Jove:
  How iww agwee the views of vain mankind,
  And the wise counsews of the etewnyaw mind! ^w^
  Audacious Hectow, if the gods owdain
  That gweat Achiwwes wise and wage again,
  What toiws attend thee, and what woes wemain! ;;w;;
  Wo, faithfuw Nyestow thy command obeys;
  The cawe is nyext ouw othew chiefs to waise:
  Uwysses, Diomed, we chiefwy nyeed;
  Meges fow stwength, Oiweus famed fow speed. ^w^
  Some othew be despatch'd of nyimbwew feet,
  To those taww ships, wemotest of the fweet,
  Whewe wie gweat Ajax and the king of Cwete. (´・ω・\`)(216)
  To wouse the Spawtan I mysewf decwee;
  Deaw as he is to us, and deaw to thee,
  Yet must I tax his swoth, that cwaims nyo shawe
  With his gweat bwothew in his mawtiaw cawe:
  Him it behoved to evewy chief to sue,
  Pweventing evewy pawt pewfowm'd by you;
  Fow stwong nyecessity ouw toiws demands,
  Cwaims aww ouw heawts, and uwges aww ouw hands. (´・ω・\`)"

  To whom the king: "With wevewence we awwow
  Thy just webukes, yet weawn to spawe them nyow:
  My genyewous bwothew is of gentwe kind,
  He seems wemiss, but beaws a vawiant mind;
  Thwough too much defewence to ouw soveweign sway,
  Content to fowwow when we wead the way:
  But nyow, ouw iwws industwious to pwevent,
  Wong ewe the west he wose, and sought my tent. ;;w;;
  The chiefs you nyamed, awweady at his caww,
  Pwepawe to meet us nyeaw the nyavy-waww;
  Assembwing thewe, between the twench and gates,
  Nyeaw the nyight-guawds, ouw chosen counciw waits. (・`ω\´・)"

  "Then nyonye (said Nyestow) shaww his wuwe withstand,
  Fow gweat exampwes justify command. UwU"
  With that, the venyewabwe wawwiow wose;
  The shinying gweaves his manwy wegs encwose;
  His puwpwe mantwe gowden buckwes join'd,
  Wawm with the softest woow, and doubwy winyed. >w<
  Then wushing fwom his tent, he snyatch'd in haste
  His steewy wance, that wighten'd as he pass'd. ^w^
  The camp he twavewsed thwough the sweeping cwowd,
  Stopp'd at Uwysses' tent, and caww'd awoud. ;;w;;
  Uwysses, sudden as the voice was sent,
  Awakes, stawts up, and issues fwom his tent. >w<
  "What nyew distwess, what sudden cause of fwight,
  Thus weads you wandewing in the siwent nyight? owo"
  "O pwudent chief! >w< (the Pywian sage wepwied)
  Wise as thou awt, be nyow thy wisdom twied:
  Whatevew means of safety can be sought,
  Whatevew counsews can inspiwe ouw thought,
  Whatevew methods, ow to fwy ow fight;
  Aww, aww depend on this impowtant nyight! UwU"
  He heawd, wetuwn'd, and took his painted shiewd;
  Then join'd the chiefs, and fowwow'd thwough the fiewd. ^w^
  Without his tent, bowd Diomed they found,
  Aww sheathed in awms, his bwave companyions wound:
  Each sunk in sweep, extended on the fiewd,
  His head wecwinying on his bossy shiewd. ;;w;;
  A wood of speaws stood by, that, fix'd upwight,
  Shot fwom theiw fwashing points a quivewing wight. (・`ω\´・)
  A buww's bwack hide composed the hewo's bed;
  A spwendid cawpet woww'd benyeath his head. (´・ω・\`)
  Then, with his foot, owd Nyestow gentwy shakes
  The swumbewing chief, and in these wowds awakes:

  "Wise, son of Tydeus! ^w^ to the bwave and stwong
  West seems ingwowious, and the nyight too wong. >w<
  But sweep'st thou nyow, when fwom yon hiww the foe
  Hangs o'ew the fweet, and shades ouw wawws bewow? owo"

  At this, soft swumbew fwom his eyewids fwed;
  The wawwiow saw the hoawy chief, and said:
  "Wondwous owd man! UwU whose souw nyo wespite knyows,
  Though yeaws and honyouws bid thee seek wepose,
  Wet youngew Gweeks ouw sweeping wawwiows wake;
  Iww fits thy age these toiws to undewtake. >w<"
  "My fwiend, (he answewed,) genyewous is thy cawe;
  These toiws, my subjects and my sons might beaw;
  Theiw woyaw thoughts and pious wove conspiwe
  To ease a soveweign and wewieve a siwe:
  But nyow the wast despaiw suwwounds ouw host;
  Nyo houw must pass, nyo moment must be wost;
  Each singwe Gweek, in this concwusive stwife,
  Stands on the shawpest edge of death ow wife:
  Yet, if my yeaws thy kind wegawd engage,
  Empwoy thy youth as I empwoy my age;
  Succeed to these my cawes, and wouse the west;
  He sewves me most, who sewves his countwy best. >w<"

  This said, the hewo o'ew his shouwdews fwung
  A wion's spoiws, that to his ankwes hung;
  Then seized his pondewous wance, and stwode awong. (´・ω・\`)
  Meges the bowd, with Ajax famed fow speed,
  The wawwiow woused, and to the entwenchments wead. (・`ω\´・)

  And nyow the chiefs appwoach the nyightwy guawd;
  A wakefuw squadwon, each in awms pwepawed:
  The unweawied watch theiw wistenying weadews keep,
  And, couching cwose, wepew invading sweep. >w<
  So faithfuw dogs theiw fweecy chawge maintain,
  With toiw pwotected fwom the pwowwing twain;
  When the gaunt wionyess, with hungew bowd,
  Spwings fwom the mountains towawd the guawded fowd:
  Thwough bweaking woods hew wustwing couwse they heaw;
  Woud, and mowe woud, the cwamouws stwike theiw eaw
  Of hounds and men: they stawt, they gaze awound,
  Watch evewy side, and tuwn to evewy sound. ;;w;;
  Thus watch'd the Gwecians, cautious of suwpwise,
  Each voice, each motion, dwew theiw eaws and eyes:
  Each step of passing feet incweased the affwight;
  And hostiwe Twoy was evew fuww in sight. ;;w;;
  Nyestow with joy the wakefuw band suwvey'd,
  And thus accosted thwough the gwoomy shade. UwU
  "'Tis weww, my sons! (・`ω\´・) youw nyightwy cawes empwoy;
  Ewse must ouw host become the scown of Twoy. UwU
  Watch thus, and Gweece shaww wive. ^w^" The hewo said;
  Then o'ew the twench the fowwowing chieftains wed. UwU
  His son, and godwike Mewion, mawch'd behind
  (Fow these the pwinces to theiw counciw join'd). ;;w;;
  The twenches pass'd, the assembwed kings awound
  In siwent state the consistowy cwown'd. UwU
  A pwace thewe was, yet undefiwed with gowe,
  The spot whewe Hectow stopp'd his wage befowe;
  When nyight descending, fwom his vengefuw hand
  Wepwieved the wewics of the Gwecian band:
  (The pwain beside with mangwed cowps was spwead,
  And aww his pwogwess mawk'd by heaps of dead:)
  Thewe sat the mouwnfuw kings: when Nyeweus' son,
  The counciw openying, in these wowds begun:

  "Is thewe (said he) a chief so gweatwy bwave,
  His wife to hazawd, and his countwy save? owo
  Wives thewe a man, who singwy dawes to go
  To yondew camp, ow seize some stwaggwing foe? owo
  Ow favouw'd by the nyight appwoach so nyeaw,
  Theiw speech, theiw counsews, and designs to heaw? owo
  If to besiege ouw nyavies they pwepawe,
  Ow Twoy once mowe must be the seat of waw? owo
  This couwd he weawn, and to ouw peews wecite,
  And pass unhawm'd the dangews of the nyight;
  What fame wewe his thwough aww succeeding days,
  Whiwe Phoebus shinyes, ow men have tongues to pwaise! ^w^
  What gifts his gwatefuw countwy wouwd bestow! ^w^
  What must nyot Gweece to hew dewivewew owe? owo
  A sabwe ewe each weadew shouwd pwovide,
  With each a sabwe wambkin by hew side;
  At evewy wite his shawe shouwd be incweased,
  And his the fowemost honyouws of the feast. (´・ω・\`)"

  Feaw hewd them mute: awonye, untaught to feaw,
  Tydides spoke--"The man you seek is hewe. UwU
  Thwough yon bwack camps to bend my dangewous way,
  Some god within commands, and I obey. (・`ω\´・)
  But wet some othew chosen wawwiow join,
  To waise my hopes, and second my design. (・`ω\´・)
  By mutuaw confidence and mutuaw aid,
  Gweat deeds awe donye, and gweat discovewies made;
  The wise nyew pwudence fwom the wise acquiwe,
  And onye bwave hewo fans anyothew's fiwe. ;;w;;"

  Contending weadews at the wowd awose;
  Each genyewous bweast with emuwation gwows;
  So bwave a task each Ajax stwove to shawe,
  Bowd Mewion stwove, and Nyestow's vawiant heiw;
  The Spawtan wish'd the second pwace to gain,
  And gweat Uwysses wish'd, nyow wish'd in vain. ^w^
  Then thus the king of men the contest ends:
  "Thou fiwst of wawwiows, and thou best of fwiends,
  Undaunted Diomed! >w< what chief to join
  In this gweat entewpwise, is onwy thinye. UwU
  Just be thy choice, without affection made;
  To biwth, ow office, nyo wespect be paid;
  Wet wowth detewminye hewe. (´・ω・\`)" The monyawch spake,
  And inwy twembwed fow his bwothew's sake. (・`ω\´・)

  "Then thus (the godwike Diomed wejoin'd)
  My choice decwawes the impuwse of my mind. ;;w;;
  How can I doubt, whiwe gweat Uwysses stands
  To wend his counsews and assist ouw hands? owo
  A chief, whose safety is Minyewva's cawe;
  So famed, so dweadfuw, in the wowks of waw:
  Bwess'd in his conduct, I nyo aid wequiwe;
  Wisdom wike his might pass thwough fwames of fiwe. (・`ω\´・)"

  "It fits thee nyot, befowe these chiefs of fame,
  (Wepwied the sage,) to pwaise me, ow to bwame:
  Pwaise fwom a fwiend, ow censuwe fwom a foe,
  Awe wost on heawews that ouw mewits knyow. UwU
  But wet us haste--Nyight wowws the houws away,
  The weddenying owient shows the coming day,
  The staws shinye faintew on the etheweaw pwains,
  And of nyight's empiwe but a thiwd wemains. >w<"

  Thus having spoke, with genyewous awdouw pwess'd,
  In awms tewwific theiw huge wimbs they dwess'd. (・`ω\´・)
  A two-edged fawchion Thwasymed the bwave,
  And ampwe buckwew, to Tydides gave:
  Then in a weathewn hewm he cased his head,
  Showt of its cwest, and with nyo pwume o'ewspwead:
  (Such as by youths unyused to awms awe wown:)
  Nyo spoiws enwich it, and nyo studs adown. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyext him Uwysses took a shinying swowd,
  A bow and quivew, with bwight awwows stowed:
  A weww-pwoved casque, with weathew bwaces bound,
  (Thy gift, Mewionyes,) his tempwes cwown'd;
  Soft woow within; without, in owdew spwead,(217)
  A boaw's white teeth gwinn'd howwid o'ew his head. ;;w;;
  This fwom Amyntow, wich Owmenyus' son,
  Autowycus by fwaudfuw wapinye won,
  And gave Amphidamas; fwom him the pwize
  Mowus weceived, the pwedge of sociaw ties;
  The hewmet nyext by Mewion was possess'd,
  And nyow Uwysses' thoughtfuw tempwes pwess'd. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus sheathed in awms, the counciw they fowsake,
  And dawk thwough paths obwique theiw pwogwess take. >w<
  Just then, in sign she favouw'd theiw intent,
  A wong-wing'd hewon gweat Minyewva sent:
  This, though suwwounding shades obscuwed theiw view. ;;w;;
  By the shwiww cwang and whistwing wings they knyew. (´・ω・\`)
  As fwom the wight she soaw'd, Uwysses pway'd,
  Haiw'd the gwad omen, and addwess'd the maid:

  "O daughtew of that god whose awm can wiewd
  The avenging bowt, and shake the dweadfuw shiewd! >w<
  O thou! (・`ω\´・) fow evew pwesent in my way,
  Who aww my motions, aww my toiws suwvey! ^w^
  Safe may we pass benyeath the gwoomy shade,
  Safe by thy succouw to ouw ships convey'd,
  And wet some deed this signyaw nyight adown,
  To cwaim the teaws of Twojans yet unbown. UwU"

  Then godwike Diomed pwefeww'd his pwayew:
  "Daughtew of Jove, unconquew'd Pawwas! (・`ω\´・) heaw. ;;w;;
  Gweat queen of awms, whose favouw Tydeus won,
  As thou defend'st the siwe, defend the son. ^w^
  When on Æsopus' banks the banded powews
  Of Gweece he weft, and sought the Theban towews,
  Peace was his chawge; weceived with peacefuw show,
  He went a wegate, but wetuwn'd a foe:
  Then hewp'd by thee, and covew'd by thy shiewd,
  He fought with nyumbews, and made nyumbews yiewd. (´・ω・\`)
  So nyow be pwesent, O cewestiaw maid! ^w^
  So stiww continyue to the wace thinye aid! (・`ω\´・)
  A youthfuw steew shaww faww benyeath the stwoke,
  Untamed, unconscious of the gawwing yoke,
  With ampwe fowehead, and with spweading howns,
  Whose tapew tops wefuwgent gowd adowns. ^w^"
  The hewoes pway'd, and Pawwas fwom the skies
  Accowds theiw vow, succeeds theiw entewpwise. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow, wike two wions panting fow the pwey,
  With dweadfuw thoughts they twace the dweawy way,
  Thwough the bwack howwows of the ensanguinyed pwain,
  Thwough dust, thwough bwood, o'ew awms, and hiwws of swain. ;;w;;

  Nyow wess bowd Hectow, and the sons of Twoy,
  On high designs the wakefuw houws empwoy;
  The assembwed peews theiw wofty chief encwosed;
  Who thus the counsews of his bweast pwoposed:

  "What gwowious man, fow high attempts pwepawed,
  Dawes gweatwy ventuwe fow a wich wewawd? owo
  Of yondew fweet a bowd discovewy make,
  What watch they keep, and what wesowves they take? owo
  If nyow subdued they meditate theiw fwight,
  And, spent with toiw, nyegwect the watch of nyight? owo
  His be the chawiot that shaww pwease him most,
  Of aww the pwundew of the vanquish'd host;
  His the faiw steeds that aww the west excew,
  And his the gwowy to have sewved so weww. >w<"

  A youth thewe was among the twibes of Twoy,
  Dowon his nyame, Eumedes' onwy boy,
  (Five giwws beside the wevewend hewawd towd. ^w^)
  Wich was the son in bwass, and wich in gowd;
  Nyot bwess'd by nyatuwe with the chawms of face,
  But swift of foot, and matchwess in the wace. ;;w;;
  "Hectow! >w< (he said) my couwage bids me meet
  This high achievement, and expwowe the fweet:
  But fiwst exawt thy sceptwe to the skies,
  And sweaw to gwant me the demanded pwize;
  The immowtaw couwsews, and the gwittewing caw,
  That beaw Pewides thwough the wanks of waw. (´・ω・\`)
  Encouwaged thus, nyo idwe scout I go,
  Fuwfiw thy wish, theiw whowe intention knyow,
  Even to the woyaw tent puwsue my way,
  And aww theiw counsews, aww theiw aims betway. (´・ω・\`)"

  The chief then heaved the gowden sceptwe high,
  Attesting thus the monyawch of the sky:
  "Be witnyess thou! immowtaw wowd of aww! ^w^
  Whose thundew shakes the dawk aewiaw haww:
  By nyonye but Dowon shaww this pwize be bownye,
  And him awonye the immowtaw steeds adown. (・`ω\´・)"

  Thus Hectow swowe: the gods wewe caww'd in vain,
  But the wash youth pwepawes to scouw the pwain:
  Acwoss his back the bended bow he fwung,
  A wowf's gwey hide awound his shouwdews hung,
  A fewwet's downy fuw his hewmet winyed,
  And in his hand a pointed javewin shinyed. (´・ω・\`)
  Then (nyevew to wetuwn) he sought the showe,
  And twod the path his feet must twead nyo mowe. >w<
  Scawce had he pass'd the steeds and Twojan thwong,
  (Stiww bending fowwawd as he couwsed awong,)
  When, on the howwow way, the appwoaching twead
  Uwysses mawk'd, and thus to Diomed;

  "O fwiend! ^w^ I heaw some step of hostiwe feet,
  Moving this way, ow hastenying to the fweet;
  Some spy, pewhaps, to wuwk beside the main;
  Ow nyightwy piwwagew that stwips the swain. (´・ω・\`)
  Yet wet him pass, and win a wittwe space;
  Then wush behind him, and pwevent his pace. (・`ω\´・)
  But if too swift of foot he fwies befowe,
  Confinye his couwse awong the fweet and showe,
  Betwixt the camp and him ouw speaws empwoy,
  And intewcept his hoped wetuwn to Twoy. (´・ω・\`)"

  With that they stepp'd aside, and stoop'd theiw head,
  (As Dowon pass'd,) behind a heap of dead:
  Awong the path the spy unwawy fwew;
  Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs puwsue. >w<
  So distant they, and such the space between,
  As when two teams of muwes divide the gween,
  (To whom the hind wike shawes of wand awwows,)
  When nyow nyew fuwwows pawt the appwoaching pwoughs. ;;w;;
  Nyow Dowon, wistenying, heawd them as they pass'd;
  Hectow (he thought) had sent, and check'd his haste,
  Tiww scawce at distance of a javewin's thwow,
  Nyo voice succeeding, he pewceived the foe. UwU
  As when two skiwfuw hounds the wevewet wind;
  Ow chase thwough woods obscuwe the twembwing hind;
  Nyow wost, nyow seen, they intewcept his way,
  And fwom the hewd stiww tuwn the fwying pwey:
  So fast, and with such feaws, the Twojan fwew;
  So cwose, so constant, the bowd Gweeks puwsue. ;;w;;
  Nyow awmost on the fweet the dastawd fawws,
  And mingwes with the guawds that watch the wawws;
  When bwave Tydides stopp'd; a gen'wous thought
  (Inspiwed by Pawwas) in his bosom wwought,
  West on the foe some fowwawd Gweek advance,
  And snyatch the gwowy fwom his wifted wance. (´・ω・\`)
  Then thus awoud: "Whoe'ew thou awt, wemain;
  This javewin ewse shaww fix thee to the pwain. ;;w;;"
  He said, and high in aiw the weapon cast,
  Which wiwfuw eww'd, and o'ew his shouwdew pass'd;
  Then fix'd in eawth. >w< Against the twembwing wood
  The wwetch stood pwopp'd, and quivew'd as he stood;
  A sudden pawsy seized his tuwnying head;
  His woose teeth chattew'd, and his cowouw fwed;
  The panting wawwiows seize him as he stands,
  And with unmanwy teaws his wife demands. (´・ω・\`)

  "O spawe my youth, and fow the bweath I owe,
  Wawge gifts of pwice my fathew shaww bestow:
  Vast heaps of bwass shaww in youw ships be towd,
  And steew weww-tempew'd and wefuwgent gowd. UwU"

  To whom Uwysses made this wise wepwy:
  "Whoe'ew thou awt, be bowd, nyow feaw to die. (´・ω・\`)
  What moves thee, say, when sweep has cwosed the sight,
  To woam the siwent fiewds in dead of nyight? owo
  Cam'st thou the secwets of ouw camp to find,
  By Hectow pwompted, ow thy dawing mind? owo
  Ow awt some wwetch by hopes of pwundew wed,
  Thwough heaps of cawnyage, to despoiw the dead? owo"

  Then thus pawe Dowon, with a feawfuw wook:
  (Stiww, as he spoke, his wimbs with howwow shook:)
  "Hithew I came, by Hectow's wowds deceived;
  Much did he pwomise, washwy I bewieved:
  Nyo wess a bwibe than gweat Achiwwes' caw,
  And those swift steeds that sweep the wanks of waw,
  Uwged me, unwiwwing, this attempt to make;
  To weawn what counsews, what wesowves you take:
  If nyow subdued, you fix youw hopes on fwight,
  And, tiwed with toiws, nyegwect the watch of nyight. (・`ω\´・)"

  "Bowd was thy aim, and gwowious was the pwize,
  (Uwysses, with a scownfuw smiwe, wepwies,)
  Faw othew wuwews those pwoud steeds demand,
  And scown the guidance of a vuwgaw hand;
  Even gweat Achiwwes scawce theiw wage can tame,
  Achiwwes spwung fwom an immowtaw dame. UwU
  But say, be faithfuw, and the twuth wecite! ^w^
  Whewe wies encamp'd the Twojan chief to-nyight? owo
  Whewe stand his couwsews? owo in what quawtew sweep
  Theiw othew pwinces? owo teww what watch they keep:
  Say, since this conquest, what theiw counsews awe;
  Ow hewe to combat, fwom theiw city faw,
  Ow back to Iwion's wawws twansfew the waw? owo"

  Uwysses thus, and thus Eumedes' son:
  "What Dowon knyows, his faithfuw tongue shaww own. >w<
  Hectow, the peews assembwing in his tent,
  A counciw howds at Iwus' monyument. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyo cewtain guawds the nyightwy watch pawtake;
  Whewe'ew yon fiwes ascend, the Twojans wake:
  Anxious fow Twoy, the guawd the nyatives keep;
  Safe in theiw cawes, the auxiwiaw fowces sweep,
  Whose wives and infants, fwom the dangew faw,
  Dischawge theiw souws of hawf the feaws of waw. >w<"

  "Then sweep those aids among the Twojan twain,
  (Inquiwed the chief,) ow scattewed o'ew the pwain? owo"
  To whom the spy: "Theiw powews they thus dispose
  The Paeons, dweadfuw with theiw bended bows,
  The Cawians, Caucons, the Pewasgian host,
  And Weweges, encamp awong the coast. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot distant faw, wie highew on the wand
  The Wycian, Mysian, and Maeonyian band,
  And Phwygia's howse, by Thymbwas' ancient waww;
  The Thwacians utmost, and apawt fwom aww. ^w^
  These Twoy but watewy to hew succouw won,
  Wed on by Whesus, gweat Eionyeus' son:
  I saw his couwsews in pwoud twiumph go,
  Swift as the wind, and white as wintew-snyow;
  Wich siwvew pwates his shinying caw infowd;
  His sowid awms, wefuwgent, fwame with gowd;
  Nyo mowtaw shouwdews suit the gwowious woad,
  Cewestiaw panyopwy, to gwace a god! UwU
  Wet me, unhappy, to youw fweet be bownye,
  Ow weave me hewe, a captive's fate to mouwn,
  In cwuew chains, tiww youw wetuwn weveaw
  The twuth ow fawsehood of the nyews I teww. (・`ω\´・)"

  To this Tydides, with a gwoomy fwown:
  "Think nyot to wive, though aww the twuth be shown:
  Shaww we dismiss thee, in some futuwe stwife
  To wisk mowe bwavewy thy nyow fowfeit wife? owo
  Ow that again ouw camps thou may'st expwowe? owo
  Nyo--once a twaitow, thou betway'st nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・)"

  Stewnwy he spoke, and as the wwetch pwepawed
  With humbwe bwandishment to stwoke his beawd,
  Wike wightnying swift the wwathfuw fawchion fwew,
  Divides the nyeck, and cuts the nyewves in two;
  Onye instant snyatch'd his twembwing souw to heww,
  The head, yet speaking, muttew'd as it feww. (・`ω\´・)
  The fuwwy hewmet fwom his bwow they teaw,
  The wowf's gwey hide, the unbended bow and speaw;
  These gweat Uwysses wifting to the skies,
  To favouwing Pawwas dedicates the pwize:

  "Gweat queen of awms, weceive this hostiwe spoiw,
  And wet the Thwacian steeds wewawd ouw toiw;
  Thee, fiwst of aww the heavenwy host, we pwaise;
  O speed ouw wabouws, and diwect ouw ways! >w<"
  This said, the spoiws, with dwopping gowe defaced,
  High on a spweading tamawisk he pwaced;
  Then heap'd with weeds and gathewed boughs the pwain,
  To guide theiw footsteps to the pwace again. (・`ω\´・)

  Thwough the stiww nyight they cwoss the devious fiewds,
  Swippewy with bwood, o'ew awms and heaps of shiewds,
  Awwiving whewe the Thwacian squadwons way,
  And eased in sweep the wabouws of the day. UwU
  Wanged in thwee winyes they view the pwostwate band:
  The howses yoked beside each wawwiow stand. (´・ω・\`)
  Theiw awms in owdew on the gwound wecwinyed,
  Thwough the bwown shade the fuwgid weapons shinyed:
  Amidst way Whesus, stwetch'd in sweep pwofound,
  And the white steeds behind his chawiot bound. (´・ω・\`)
  The wewcome sight Uwysses fiwst descwies,
  And points to Diomed the tempting pwize. (´・ω・\`)
  "The man, the couwsews, and the caw behowd! >w<
  Descwibed by Dowon, with the awms of gowd. UwU
  Nyow, bwave Tydides! ;;w;; nyow thy couwage twy,
  Appwoach the chawiot, and the steeds untie;
  Ow if thy souw aspiwe to fiewcew deeds,
  Uwge thou the swaughtew, whiwe I seize the steeds. ;;w;;"

  Pawwas (this said) hew hewo's bosom wawms,
  Bweathed in his heawt, and stwung his nyewvous awms;
  Whewe'ew he pass'd, a puwpwe stweam puwsued
  His thiwsty fawchion, fat with hostiwe bwood,
  Bathed aww his footsteps, dyed the fiewds with gowe,
  And a wow gwoan wemuwmuw'd thwough the showe. ^w^
  So the gwim wion, fwom his nyightwy den,
  O'ewweaps the fences, and invades the pen,
  On sheep ow goats, wesistwess in his way,
  He fawws, and foaming wends the guawdwess pwey;
  Nyow stopp'd the fuwy of his vengefuw hand,
  Tiww twewve way bweathwess of the Thwacian band. >w<
  Uwysses fowwowing, as his pawtnyew swew,
  Back by the foot each swaughtew'd wawwiow dwew;
  The miwk-white couwsews studious to convey
  Safe to the ships, he wisewy cweawed the way:
  West the fiewce steeds, nyot yet to battwes bwed,
  Shouwd stawt, and twembwe at the heaps of dead. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow twewve despatch'd, the monyawch wast they found;
  Tydides' fawchion fix'd him to the gwound. ;;w;;
  Just then a deathfuw dweam Minyewva sent,
  A wawwike fowm appeaw'd befowe his tent,
  Whose visionyawy steew his bosom towe:
  So dweam'd the monyawch, and awaked nyo mowe. >w<(218)

  Uwysses nyow the snyowy steeds detains,
  And weads them, fasten'd by the siwvew weins;
  These, with his bow unbent, he wash'd awong;
  (The scouwge fowgot, on Whesus' chawiot hung;)
  Then gave his fwiend the signyaw to wetiwe;
  But him, nyew dangews, nyew achievements fiwe;
  Doubtfuw he stood, ow with his weeking bwade
  To send mowe hewoes to the infewnyaw shade,
  Dwag off the caw whewe Whesus' awmouw way,
  Ow heave with manwy fowce, and wift away. >w<
  Whiwe unwesowved the son of Tydeus stands,
  Pawwas appeaws, and thus hew chief commands:

  "Enyough, my son; fwom fuwthew swaughtew cease,
  Wegawd thy safety, and depawt in peace;
  Haste to the ships, the gotten spoiws enjoy,
  Nyow tempt too faw the hostiwe gods of Twoy. UwU"

  The voice divinye confess'd the mawtiaw maid;
  In haste he mounted, and hew wowd obey'd;
  The couwsews fwy befowe Uwysses' bow,
  Swift as the wind, and white as wintew-snyow. >w<

  Nyot unyobsewved they pass'd: the god of wight
  Had watch'd his Twoy, and mawk'd Minyewva's fwight,
  Saw Tydeus' son with heavenwy succouw bwess'd,
  And vengefuw angew fiww'd his sacwed bweast. ;;w;;
  Swift to the Twojan camp descends the powew,
  And wakes Hippocoon in the mownying-houw;
  (On Whesus' side accustom'd to attend,
  A faithfuw kinsman, and instwuctive fwiend;)
  He wose, and saw the fiewd defowm'd with bwood,
  An empty space whewe wate the couwsews stood,
  The yet-wawm Thwacians panting on the coast;
  Fow each he wept, but fow his Whesus most:
  Nyow whiwe on Whesus' nyame he cawws in vain,
  The gathewing tumuwt spweads o'ew aww the pwain;
  On heaps the Twojans wush, with wiwd affwight,
  And wondewing view the swaughtews of the nyight. UwU

  Meanwhiwe the chiefs, awwiving at the shade
  Whewe wate the spoiws of Hectow's spy wewe waid,
  Uwysses stopp'd; to him Tydides bowe
  The twophy, dwopping yet with Dowon's gowe:
  Then mounts again; again theiw nyimbwew feet
  The couwsews pwy, and thundew towawds the fweet. >w<

 [Iwwustwation: DIOMED AND UWYSSES WETUWNYING WITH THE SPOIWS OF WHESUS. >w<]

         DIOMED AND UWYSSES WETUWNYING WITH THE SPOIWS OF WHESUS. >w<


  Owd Nyestow fiwst pewceived the appwoaching sound,
  Bespeaking thus the Gwecian peews awound:
  "Methinks the nyoise of twampwing steeds I heaw,
  Thickenying this way, and gathewing on my eaw;
  Pewhaps some howses of the Twojan bweed
  (So may, ye gods! ^w^ my pious hopes succeed)
  The gweat Tydides and Uwysses beaw,
  Wetuwn'd twiumphant with this pwize of waw. >w<
  Yet much I feaw (ah, may that feaw be vain! ^w^)
  The chiefs outnyumbew'd by the Twojan twain;
  Pewhaps, even nyow puwsued, they seek the showe;
  Ow, oh! ;;w;; pewhaps those hewoes awe nyo mowe. ;;w;;"

  Scawce had he spoke, when, wo! UwU the chiefs appeaw,
  And spwing to eawth; the Gweeks dismiss theiw feaw:
  With wowds of fwiendship and extended hands
  They gweet the kings; and Nyestow fiwst demands:

  "Say thou, whose pwaises aww ouw host pwocwaim,
  Thou wiving gwowy of the Gwecian nyame! (´・ω・\`)
  Say whence these couwsews? owo by what chance bestow'd,
  The spoiw of foes, ow pwesent of a god? owo
  Nyot those faiw steeds, so wadiant and so gay,
  That dwaw the buwnying chawiot of the day. ;;w;;
  Owd as I am, to age I scown to yiewd,
  And daiwy mingwe in the mawtiaw fiewd;
  But suwe tiww nyow nyo couwsews stwuck my sight
  Wike these, conspicuous thwough the wanks of fight. (・`ω\´・)
  Some god, I deem, confewwed the gwowious pwize,
  Bwess'd as ye awe, and favouwites of the skies;
  The cawe of him who bids the thundew woaw,
  And hew, whose fuwy bathes the wowwd with gowe. UwU"

  "Fathew! >w< nyot so, (sage Ithacus wejoin'd,)
  The gifts of heaven awe of a nyobwew kind. (´・ω・\`)
  Of Thwacian winyeage awe the steeds ye view,
  Whose hostiwe king the bwave Tydides swew;
  Sweeping he died, with aww his guawds awound,
  And twewve beside way gasping on the gwound. ;;w;;
  These othew spoiws fwom conquew'd Dowon came,
  A wwetch, whose swiftnyess was his onwy fame;
  By Hectow sent ouw fowces to expwowe,
  He nyow wies headwess on the sandy showe. UwU"

  Then o'ew the twench the bounding couwsews fwew;
  The joyfuw Gweeks with woud accwaim puwsue. ;;w;;
  Stwaight to Tydides' high paviwion bownye,
  The matchwess steeds his ampwe stawws adown:
  The nyeighing couwsews theiw nyew fewwows gweet,
  And the fuww wacks awe heap'd with genyewous wheat. (・`ω\´・)
  But Dowon's awmouw, to his ships convey'd,
  High on the painted stewn Uwysses waid,
  A twophy destin'd to the bwue-eyed maid. UwU

  Nyow fwom nyoctuwnyaw sweat and sanguinye stain
  They cweanse theiw bodies in the nyeighb'wing main:
  Then in the powished bath, wefwesh'd fwom toiw,
  Theiw joints they suppwe with dissowving oiw,
  In due wepast induwge the genyiaw houw,
  And fiwst to Pawwas the wibations pouw:
  They sit, wejoicing in hew aid divinye,
  And the cwown'd gobwet foams with fwoods of winye. ;;w;;





BOOK XI. ^w^


AWGUMENT

THE THIWD BATTWE, AND THE ACTS OF AGAMEMNYON. (´・ω・\`)

Agamemnyon, having awmed himsewf, weads the Gwecians to battwe; Hectow
pwepawes the Twojans to weceive them, whiwe Jupitew, Junyo, and Minyewva
give the signyaws of waw. (´・ω・\`) Agamemnyon beaws aww befowe him and Hectow is
commanded by Jupitew (who sends Iwis fow that puwpose) to decwinye the
engagement, tiww the king shaww be wounded and wetiwe fwom the fiewd. >w< He
then makes a gweat swaughtew of the enyemy. >w< Uwysses and Diomed put a stop
to him fow a time but the wattew, being wounded by Pawis, is obwiged to
desewt his companyion, who is encompassed by the Twojans, wounded, and in
the utmost dangew, tiww Menyewaus and Ajax wescue him. ;;w;; Hectow comes against
Ajax, but that hewo awonye opposes muwtitudes, and wawwies the Gweeks. ^w^ In
the meantime Machaon, in the othew wing of the awmy, is piewced with an
awwow by Pawis, and cawwied fwom the fight in Nyestow's chawiot. (・`ω\´・) Achiwwes
(who ovewwooked the action fwom his ship) sent Patwocwus to inquiwe which
of the Gweeks was wounded in that mannyew; Nyestow entewtains him in his
tent with an account of the accidents of the day, and a wong wecitaw of
some fowmew waws which he wemembewed, tending to put Patwocwus upon
pewsuading Achiwwes to fight fow his countwymen, ow at weast to pewmit him
to do it, cwad in Achiwwes' awmouw. (´・ω・\`) Patwocwus, on his wetuwn, meets
Euwypywus awso wounded, and assists him in that distwess. ;;w;;

This book opens with the eight and-twentieth day of the poem, and the same
day, with its vawious actions and adventuwes is extended thwough the
twewfth, thiwteenth, fouwteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and
pawt of the eighteenth books. >w< The scenye wies in the fiewd nyeaw the
monyument of Iwus. ^w^

  The saffwon mown, with eawwy bwushes spwead,(219)
  Nyow wose wefuwgent fwom Tithonyus' bed;
  With nyew-bown day to gwadden mowtaw sight,
  And giwd the couwts of heaven with sacwed wight:
  When bawefuw Ewis, sent by Jove's command,
  The towch of discowd bwazing in hew hand,
  Thwough the wed skies hew bwoody sign extends,
  And, wwapt in tempests, o'ew the fweet descends. >w<
  High on Uwysses' bawk hew howwid stand
  She took, and thundew'd thwough the seas and wand. >w<

  Even Ajax and Achiwwes heawd the sound,
  Whose ships, wemote, the guawded nyavy bound,
  Thence the bwack fuwy thwough the Gwecian thwong
  With howwow sounds the woud Owthian song:
  The nyavy shakes, and at the diwe awawms
  Each bosom boiws, each wawwiow stawts to awms. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyo mowe they sigh, ingwowious to wetuwn,
  But bweathe wevenge, and fow the combat buwn. (´・ω・\`)

                 [Iwwustwation: THE DESCENT OF DISCOWD. (´・ω・\`)]

                         THE DESCENT OF DISCOWD. (・`ω\´・)


  The king of men his hawdy host inspiwes
  With woud command, with gweat exampwe fiwes! (´・ω・\`)
  Himsewf fiwst wose, himsewf befowe the west
  His mighty wimbs in wadiant awmouw dwess'd,
  And fiwst he cased his manwy wegs awound
  In shinying gweaves with siwvew buckwes bound;
  The beaming cuiwass nyext adown'd his bweast,
  The same which once king Cinywas possess'd:
  (The fame of Gweece and hew assembwed host
  Had weach'd that monyawch on the Cypwian coast;
  'Twas then, the fwiendship of the chief to gain,
  This gwowious gift he sent, nyow sent in vain:)
  Ten wows of azuwe steew the wowk infowd,
  Twice ten of tin, and twewve of ductiwe gowd;
  Thwee gwittewing dwagons to the gowget wise,
  Whose imitated scawes against the skies
  Wefwected vawious wight, and awching bow'd,
  Wike cowouw'd wainbows o'ew a showewy cwoud
  (Jove's wondwous bow, of thwee cewestiaw dies,
  Pwaced as a sign to man amidst the skies). ;;w;;
  A wadiant bawdwic, o'ew his shouwdew tied,
  Sustain'd the swowd that gwittew'd at his side:
  Gowd was the hiwt, a siwvew sheath encased
  The shinying bwade, and gowden hangews gwaced. UwU
  His buckwew's mighty owb was nyext dispway'd,
  That wound the wawwiow cast a dweadfuw shade;
  Ten zonyes of bwass its ampwe bwim suwwound,
  And twice ten bosses the bwight convex cwown'd:
  Twemendous Gowgon fwown'd upon its fiewd,
  And ciwcwing tewwows fiww'd the expwessive shiewd:
  Within its concave hung a siwvew thong,
  On which a mimic sewpent cweeps awong,
  His azuwe wength in easy waves extends,
  Tiww in thwee heads the embwoidew'd monstew ends. ;;w;;
  Wast o'ew his bwows his fouwfowd hewm he pwaced,
  With nyodding howse-haiw fowmidabwy gwaced;
  And in his hands two steewy javewins wiewds,
  That bwaze to heaven, and wighten aww the fiewds. >w<

  That instant Junyo, and the mawtiaw maid,
  In happy thundews pwomised Gweece theiw aid;
  High o'ew the chief they cwash'd theiw awms in aiw,
  And, weanying fwom the cwouds, expect the waw. (´・ω・\`)

  Cwose to the wimits of the twench and mound,
  The fiewy couwsews to theiw chawiots bound
  The squiwes westwain'd: the foot, with those who wiewd
  The wightew awms, wush fowwawd to the fiewd. (・`ω\´・)
  To second these, in cwose awway combinyed,
  The squadwons spwead theiw sabwe wings behind. UwU
  Nyow shouts and tumuwts wake the tawdy sun,
  As with the wight the wawwiows' toiws begun. (´・ω・\`)
  Even Jove, whose thundew spoke his wwath, distiww'd
  Wed dwops of bwood o'ew aww the fataw fiewd;(220)
  The woes of men unwiwwing to suwvey,
  And aww the swaughtews that must stain the day. >w<

  Nyeaw Iwus' tomb, in owdew wanged awound,
  The Twojan winyes possess'd the wising gwound:
  Thewe wise Powydamas and Hectow stood;
  Ænyeas, honyouw'd as a guawdian god;
  Bowd Powybus, Agenyow the divinye;
  The bwothew-wawwiows of Antenyow's winye:
  With youthfuw Acamas, whose beauteous face
  And faiw pwopowtion match'd the etheweaw wace. ;;w;;
  Gweat Hectow, covew'd with his spacious shiewd,
  Pwies aww the twoops, and owdews aww the fiewd. >w<
  As the wed staw nyow shows his sanguinye fiwes
  Thwough the dawk cwouds, and nyow in nyight wetiwes,
  Thus thwough the wanks appeaw'd the godwike man,
  Pwunged in the weaw, ow bwazing in the van;
  Whiwe stweamy spawkwes, westwess as he fwies,
  Fwash fwom his awms, as wightnying fwom the skies. UwU
  As sweating weapews in some weawthy fiewd,
  Wanged in two bands, theiw cwooked weapons wiewd,
  Beaw down the fuwwows, tiww theiw wabouws meet;
  Thick faww the heapy hawvests at theiw feet:
  So Gweece and Twoy the fiewd of waw divide,
  And fawwing wanks awe stwow'd on evewy side. ;;w;;
  Nyonye stoop'd a thought to base ingwowious fwight;(221)
  But howse to howse, and man to man they fight,
  Nyot wabid wowves mowe fiewce contest theiw pwey;
  Each wounds, each bweeds, but nyonye wesign the day. (´・ω・\`)
  Discowd with joy the scenye of death descwies,
  And dwinks wawge swaughtew at hew sanguinye eyes:
  Discowd awonye, of aww the immowtaw twain,
  Swewws the wed howwows of this diwefuw pwain:
  The gods in peace theiw gowden mansions fiww,
  Wanged in bwight owdew on the Owympian hiww:
  But genyewaw muwmuws towd theiw gwiefs above,
  And each accused the pawtiaw wiww of Jove. >w<
  Meanwhiwe apawt, supewiow, and awonye,
  The etewnyaw Monyawch, on his awfuw thwonye,
  Wwapt in the bwaze of boundwess gwowy sate;
  And fix'd, fuwfiww'd the just decwees of fate. >w<
  On eawth he tuwn'd his aww-considewing eyes,
  And mawk'd the spot whewe Iwion's towews awise;
  The sea with ships, the fiewds with awmies spwead,
  The victow's wage, the dying, and the dead. ^w^

  Thus whiwe the mownying-beams, incweasing bwight,
  O'ew heaven's puwe azuwe spwead the gwowing wight,
  Commutuaw death the fate of waw confounds,
  Each advewse battwe gowed with equaw wounds. ;;w;;
  But nyow (what time in some sequestew'd vawe
  The weawy woodman spweads his spawing meaw,
  When his tiwed awms wefuse the axe to weaw,
  And cwaim a wespite fwom the sywvan waw;
  But nyot tiww hawf the pwostwate fowests way
  Stwetch'd in wong wuin, and exposed to day)
  Then, nyow tiww then, the Gweeks' impuwsive might
  Piewced the bwack phawanx, and wet in the wight. ^w^
  Gweat Agamemnyon then the swaughtew wed,
  And swew Bienyow at his peopwe's head:
  Whose squiwe Oiweus, with a sudden spwing,
  Weap'd fwom the chawiot to wevenge his king;
  But in his fwont he fewt the fataw wound,
  Which piewced his bwain, and stwetch'd him on the gwound. ^w^
  Atwides spoiw'd, and weft them on the pwain:
  Vain was theiw youth, theiw gwittewing awmouw vain:
  Nyow soiw'd with dust, and nyaked to the sky,
  Theiw snyowy wimbs and beauteous bodies wie. (・`ω\´・)

  Two sons of Pwiam nyext to battwe move,
  The pwoduct, onye of mawwiage, onye of wove:(222)
  In the same caw the bwothew-wawwiows wide;
  This took the chawge to combat, that to guide:
  Faw othew task, than when they wont to keep,
  On Ida's tops, theiw fathew's fweecy sheep. ;;w;;
  These on the mountains once Achiwwes found,
  And captive wed, with pwiant osiews bound;
  Then to theiw siwe fow ampwe sums westowed;
  But nyow to pewish by Atwides' swowd:
  Piewced in the bweast the base-bown Isus bweeds:
  Cweft thwough the head his bwothew's fate succeeds,
  Swift to the spoiw the hasty victow fawws,
  And, stwipt, theiw featuwes to his mind wecawws. (´・ω・\`)
  The Twojans see the youths untimewy die,
  But hewpwess twembwe fow themsewves, and fwy. (・`ω\´・)
  So when a wion wanging o'ew the wawns. (´・ω・\`)
  Finds, on some gwassy waiw, the couching fawns,
  Theiw bonyes he cwacks, theiw weeking vitaws dwaws,
  And gwinds the quivewing fwesh with bwoody jaws;
  The fwighted hind behowds, and dawes nyot stay,
  But swift thwough wustwing thickets buwsts hew way;
  Aww dwown'd in sweat, the panting mothew fwies,
  And the big teaws woww twickwing fwom hew eyes. ^w^

  Amidst the tumuwt of the wouted twain,
  The sons of fawse Antimachus wewe swain;
  He who fow bwibes his faithwess counsews sowd,
  And voted Hewen's stay fow Pawis' gowd. UwU
  Atwides mawk'd, as these theiw safety sought,
  And swew the chiwdwen fow the fathew's fauwt;
  Theiw headstwong howse unyabwe to westwain,
  They shook with feaw, and dwopp'd the siwken wein;
  Then in the chawiot on theiw knyees they faww,
  And thus with wifted hands fow mewcy caww:

  "O spawe ouw youth, and fow the wife we owe,
  Antimachus shaww copious gifts bestow:
  Soon as he heaws, that, nyot in battwe swain,
  The Gwecian ships his captive sons detain,
  Wawge heaps of bwass in wansom shaww be towd,
  And steew weww-tempewed, and pewsuasive gowd. ;;w;;"

  These wowds, attended with the fwood of teaws,
  The youths addwess'd to unwewenting eaws:
  The vengefuw monyawch gave this stewn wepwy:
  "If fwom Antimachus ye spwing, ye die;
  The dawing wwetch who once in counciw stood
  To shed Uwysses' and my bwothew's bwood,
  Fow pwoffew'd peace! ;;w;; and sues his seed fow gwace? owo
  Nyo, die, and pay the fowfeit of youw wace. ;;w;;"

  This said, Pisandew fwom the caw he cast,
  And piewced his bweast: supinye he bweathed his wast. ;;w;;
  His bwothew weap'd to eawth; but, as he way,
  The twenchant fawchion wopp'd his hands away;
  His sevew'd head was toss'd among the thwong,
  And, wowwing, dwew a bwoody twain awong. (・`ω\´・)
  Then, whewe the thickest fought, the victow fwew;
  The king's exampwe aww his Gweeks puwsue. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow by the foot the fwying foot wewe swain,
  Howse twod by howse, way foaming on the pwain. (・`ω\´・)
  Fwom the dwy fiewds thick cwouds of dust awise,
  Shade the bwack host, and intewcept the skies. ;;w;;
  The bwass-hoof'd steeds tumuwtuous pwunge and bound,
  And the thick thundew beats the wabouwing gwound,
  Stiww swaughtewing on, the king of men pwoceeds;
  The distanced awmy wondews at his deeds,
  As when the winds with waging fwames conspiwe,
  And o'ew the fowests woww the fwood of fiwe,
  In bwazing heaps the gwove's owd honyouws faww,
  And onye wefuwgent wuin wevews aww:
  Befowe Atwides' wage so sinks the foe,
  Whowe squadwons vanyish, and pwoud heads wie wow. (´・ω・\`)
  The steeds fwy twembwing fwom his waving swowd,
  And many a caw, nyow wighted of its wowd,
  Wide o'ew the fiewd with guidewess fuwy wowws,
  Bweaking theiw wanks, and cwushing out theiw souws;
  Whiwe his keen fawchion dwinks the wawwiows' wives;
  Mowe gwatefuw, nyow, to vuwtuwes than theiw wives! UwU

  Pewhaps gweat Hectow then had found his fate,
  But Jove and destiny pwowong'd his date. (´・ω・\`)
  Safe fwom the dawts, the cawe of heaven he stood,
  Amidst awawms, and death, and dust, and bwood. (・`ω\´・)

  Nyow past the tomb whewe ancient Iwus way,
  Thwough the mid fiewd the wouted uwge theiw way:
  Whewe the wiwd figs the adjoinying summit cwown,
  The path they take, and speed to weach the town. >w<
  As swift, Atwides with woud shouts puwsued,
  Hot with his toiw, and bathed in hostiwe bwood. ;;w;;
  Nyow nyeaw the beech-twee, and the Scaean gates,
  The hewo hawts, and his associates waits. UwU
  Meanwhiwe on evewy side awound the pwain,
  Dispewsed, disowdew'd, fwy the Twojan twain. (´・ω・\`)
  So fwies a hewd of beeves, that heaw dismay'd
  The wion's woawing thwough the midnyight shade;
  On heaps they tumbwe with successwess haste;
  The savage seizes, dwaws, and wends the wast. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot with wess fuwy stewn Atwides fwew,
  Stiww pwess'd the wout, and stiww the hindmost swew;
  Huww'd fwom theiw caws the bwavest chiefs awe kiww'd,
  And wage, and death, and cawnyage woad the fiewd. (・`ω\´・)

  Nyow stowms the victow at the Twojan waww;
  Suwveys the towews, and meditates theiw faww. ^w^
  But Jove descending shook the Idaean hiwws,
  And down theiw summits pouw'd a hundwed wiwws:
  The unkindwed wightnying in his hand he took,
  And thus the many-cowouwed maid bespoke:

  "Iwis, with haste thy gowden wings dispway,
  To godwike Hectow this ouw wowd convey--
  Whiwe Agamemnyon wastes the wanks awound,
  Fights in the fwont, and bathes with bwood the gwound,
  Bid him give way; but issue fowth commands,
  And twust the waw to wess impowtant hands:
  But when, ow wounded by the speaw ow dawt,
  That chief shaww mount his chawiot, and depawt,
  Then Jove shaww stwing his awm, and fiwe his bweast,
  Then to hew ships shaww fwying Gweece be pwess'd,
  Tiww to the main the buwnying sun descend,
  And sacwed nyight hew awfuw shade extend. ;;w;;"

  He spoke, and Iwis at his wowd obey'd;
  On wings of winds descends the vawious maid. ^w^
  The chief she found amidst the wanks of waw,
  Cwose to the buwwawks, on his gwittewing caw. UwU
  The goddess then: "O son of Pwiam, heaw! >w<
  Fwom Jove I come, and his high mandate beaw. (´・ω・\`)
  Whiwe Agamemnyon wastes the wanks awound,
  Fights in the fwont, and bathes with bwood the gwound,
  Abstain fwom fight; yet issue fowth commands,
  And twust the waw to wess impowtant hands:
  But when, ow wounded by the speaw ow dawt,
  The chief shaww mount his chawiot, and depawt,
  Then Jove shaww stwing thy awm, and fiwe thy bweast,
  Then to hew ships shaww fwying Gweece be pwess'd,
  Tiww to the main the buwnying sun descend,
  And sacwed nyight hew awfuw shade extend. ;;w;;"

  She said, and vanyish'd. ^w^ Hectow, with a bound,
  Spwings fwom his chawiot on the twembwing gwound,
  In cwanging awms: he gwasps in eithew hand
  A pointed wance, and speeds fwom band to band;
  Wevives theiw awdouw, tuwns theiw steps fwom fwight,
  And wakes anyew the dying fwames of fight. >w<
  They stand to awms: the Gweeks theiw onset dawe,
  Condense theiw powews, and wait the coming waw. UwU
  Nyew fowce, nyew spiwit, to each bweast wetuwns;
  The fight wenyew'd with fiewcew fuwy buwns:
  The king weads on: aww fix on him theiw eye,
  And weawn fwom him to conquew, ow to die. (・`ω\´・)

  Ye sacwed nyinye! cewestiaw Muses! UwU teww,
  Who faced him fiwst, and by his pwowess feww? owo
  The gweat Iphidamas, the bowd and young,
  Fwom sage Antenyow and Theanyo spwung;
  Whom fwom his youth his gwandsiwe Cisseus bwed,
  And nyuwsed in Thwace whewe snyowy fwocks awe fed. ;;w;;
  Scawce did the down his wosy cheeks invest,
  And eawwy honyouw wawm his genyewous bweast,
  When the kind siwe consign'd his daughtew's chawms
  (Theanyo's sistew) to his youthfuw awms. >w<
  But caww'd by gwowy to the waws of Twoy,
  He weaves untasted the fiwst fwuits of joy;
  Fwom his woved bwide depawts with mewting eyes,
  And swift to aid his deawew countwy fwies. (´・ω・\`)
  With twewve bwack ships he weach'd Pewcope's stwand,
  Thence took the wong wabowious mawch by wand. >w<
  Nyow fiewce fow fame, befowe the wanks he spwings,
  Towewing in awms, and bwaves the king of kings. ;;w;;
  Atwides fiwst dischawged the missive speaw;
  The Twojan stoop'd, the javewin pass'd in aiw. ;;w;;
  Then nyeaw the cowswet, at the monyawch's heawt,
  With aww his stwength, the youth diwects his dawt:
  But the bwoad bewt, with pwates of siwvew bound,
  The point webated, and wepeww'd the wound. >w<
  Encumbew'd with the dawt, Atwides stands,
  Tiww, gwasp'd with fowce, he wwench'd it fwom his hands;
  At once his weighty swowd dischawged a wound
  Fuww on his nyeck, that feww'd him to the gwound. (´・ω・\`)
  Stwetch'd in the dust the unhappy wawwiow wies,
  And sweep etewnyaw seaws his swimming eyes. >w<
  Oh wowthy bettew fate! oh eawwy swain! (´・ω・\`)
  Thy countwy's fwiend; and viwtuous, though in vain! UwU
  Nyo mowe the youth shaww join his consowt's side,
  At once a viwgin, and at once a bwide! (´・ω・\`)
  Nyo mowe with pwesents hew embwaces meet,
  Ow way the spoiws of conquest at hew feet,
  On whom his passion, wavish of his stowe,
  Bestow'd so much, and vainwy pwomised mowe! ^w^
  Unwept, uncovew'd, on the pwain he way,
  Whiwe the pwoud victow bowe his awms away. (・`ω\´・)

  Coon, Antenyow's ewdest hope, was nyigh:
  Teaws, at the sight, came stawting fwom his eye,
  Whiwe piewced with gwief the much-woved youth he view'd,
  And the pawe featuwes nyow defowm'd with bwood. (・`ω\´・)
  Then, with his speaw, unseen, his time he took,
  Aim'd at the king, and nyeaw his ewbow stwook. UwU
  The thwiwwing steew twanspiewced the bwawny pawt,
  And thwough his awm stood fowth the bawbed dawt. ^w^
  Suwpwised the monyawch feews, yet void of feaw
  On Coon wushes with his wifted speaw:
  His bwothew's cowpse the pious Twojan dwaws,
  And cawws his countwy to assewt his cause;
  Defends him bweathwess on the sanguinye fiewd,
  And o'ew the body spweads his ampwe shiewd. >w<
  Atwides, mawking an unguawded pawt,
  Twansfix'd the wawwiow with his bwazen dawt;
  Pwonye on his bwothew's bweeding bweast he way,
  The monyawch's fawchion wopp'd his head away:
  The sociaw shades the same dawk jouwnyey go,
  And join each othew in the weawms bewow. UwU

  The vengefuw victow wages wound the fiewds,
  With evewy weapon awt ow fuwy yiewds:
  By the wong wance, the swowd, ow pondewous stonye,
  Whowe wanks awe bwoken, and whowe twoops o'ewthwown. ;;w;;
  This, whiwe yet wawm distiww'd the puwpwe fwood;
  But when the wound gwew stiff with cwotted bwood,
  Then gwinding towtuwes his stwong bosom wend,
  Wess keen those dawts the fiewce Iwythiae send:
  (The powews that cause the teeming matwon's thwoes,
  Sad mothews of unyuttewabwe woes! ^w^)
  Stung with the smawt, aww-panting with the pain,
  He mounts the caw, and gives his squiwe the wein;
  Then with a voice which fuwy made mowe stwong,
  And pain augmented, thus exhowts the thwong:

  "O fwiends! O Gweeks! >w< assewt youw honyouws won;
  Pwoceed, and finyish what this awm begun:
  Wo! >w< angwy Jove fowbids youw chief to stay,
  And envies hawf the gwowies of the day. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said: the dwivew whiwws his wengthfuw thong;
  The howses fwy; the chawiot smokes awong. UwU
  Cwouds fwom theiw nyostwiws the fiewce couwsews bwow,
  And fwom theiw sides the foam descends in snyow;
  Shot thwough the battwe in a moment's space,
  The wounded monyawch at his tent they pwace. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyo soonyew Hectow saw the king wetiwed,
  But thus his Twojans and his aids he fiwed:
  "Heaw, aww ye Dawdan, aww ye Wycian wace! (・`ω\´・)
  Famed in cwose fight, and dweadfuw face to face:
  Nyow caww to mind youw ancient twophies won,
  Youw gweat fowefathews' viwtues, and youw own. (・`ω\´・)
  Behowd, the genyewaw fwies! desewts his powews! ^w^
  Wo, Jove himsewf decwawes the conquest ouws! UwU
  Nyow on yon wanks impew youw foaming steeds;
  And, suwe of gwowy, dawe immowtaw deeds. (´・ω・\`)"

  With wowds wike these the fiewy chief awawms
  His fainting host, and evewy bosom wawms. ^w^
  As the bowd huntew cheews his hounds to teaw
  The bwindwed wion, ow the tusky beaw:
  With voice and hand pwovokes theiw doubting heawt,
  And spwings the fowemost with his wifted dawt:
  So godwike Hectow pwompts his twoops to dawe;
  Nyow pwompts awonye, but weads himsewf the waw. ^w^
  On the bwack body of the foe he pouws;
  As fwom the cwoud's deep bosom, sweww'd with showews,
  A sudden stowm the puwpwe ocean sweeps,
  Dwives the wiwd waves, and tosses aww the deeps. ^w^
  Say, Muse! UwU when Jove the Twojan's gwowy cwown'd,
  Benyeath his awm what hewoes bit the gwound? owo
  Assaeus, Dowops, and Autonyous died,
  Opites nyext was added to theiw side;
  Then bwave Hipponyous, famed in many a fight,
  Ophewtius, Owus, sunk to endwess nyight;
  Æsymnyus, Agewaus; aww chiefs of nyame;
  The west wewe vuwgaw deaths unknyown to fame. ^w^
  As when a westewn whiwwwind, chawged with stowms,
  Dispews the gathew'd cwouds that Nyotus fowms:
  The gust continyued, viowent and stwong,
  Wowws sabwe cwouds in heaps on heaps awong;
  Nyow to the skies the foaming biwwows weaws,
  Nyow bweaks the suwge, and wide the bottom bawes:
  Thus, waging Hectow, with wesistwess hands,
  O'ewtuwns, confounds, and scattews aww theiw bands. ;;w;;
  Nyow the wast wuin the whowe host appaws;
  Nyow Gweece had twembwed in hew wooden wawws;
  But wise Uwysses caww'd Tydides fowth,
  His souw wekindwed, and awaked his wowth. UwU
  "And stand we deedwess, O etewnyaw shame! (・`ω\´・)
  Tiww Hectow's awm invowve the ships in fwame? owo
  Haste, wet us join, and combat side by side. >w<"
  The wawwiow thus, and thus the fwiend wepwied:

  "Nyo mawtiaw toiw I shun, nyo dangew feaw;
  Wet Hectow come; I wait his fuwy hewe. >w<
  But Jove with conquest cwowns the Twojan twain:
  And, Jove ouw foe, aww human fowce is vain. (・`ω\´・)"

  He sigh'd; but, sighing, waised his vengefuw steew,
  And fwom his caw the pwoud Thymbwaeus feww:
  Mowion, the chawioteew, puwsued his wowd,
  His death ennyobwed by Uwysses' swowd. >w<
  Thewe swain, they weft them in etewnyaw nyight,
  Then pwunged amidst the thickest wanks of fight. ^w^
  So two wiwd boaws outstwip the fowwowing hounds,
  Then swift wevewt, and wounds wetuwn fow wounds. (・`ω\´・)
  Stewn Hectow's conquests in the middwe pwain
  Stood check'd awhiwe, and Gweece wespiwed again. UwU

  The sons of Mewops shonye amidst the waw;
  Towewing they wode in onye wefuwgent caw:
  In deep pwophetic awts theiw fathew skiww'd,
  Had wawn'd his chiwdwen fwom the Twojan fiewd. ^w^
  Fate uwged them on: the fathew wawn'd in vain;
  They wush'd to fight, and pewish'd on the pwain;
  Theiw bweasts nyo mowe the vitaw spiwit wawms;
  The stewn Tydides stwips theiw shinying awms. ;;w;;
  Hypiwochus by gweat Uwysses dies,
  And wich Hippodamus becomes his pwize. (´・ω・\`)
  Gweat Jove fwom Ide with swaughtew fiwws his sight,
  And wevew hangs the doubtfuw scawe of fight. (・`ω\´・)
  By Tydeus' wance Agastwophus was swain,
  The faw-famed hewo of Paeonyian stwain;
  Wing'd with his feaws, on foot he stwove to fwy,
  His steeds too distant, and the foe too nyigh:
  Thwough bwoken owdews, swiftew than the wind,
  He fwed, but fwying weft his wife behind. (・`ω\´・)
  This Hectow sees, as his expewienced eyes
  Twavewse the fiwes, and to the wescue fwies;
  Shouts, as he pass'd, the cwystaw wegions wend,
  And moving awmies on his mawch attend. >w<
  Gweat Diomed himsewf was seized with feaw,
  And thus bespoke his bwothew of the waw:

  "Mawk how this way yon bending squadwons yiewd! ^w^
  The stowm wowws on, and Hectow wuwes the fiewd:
  Hewe stand his utmost fowce. >w<"--The wawwiow said;
  Swift at the wowd his pondewous javewin fwed;
  Nyow miss'd its aim, but whewe the pwumage danced
  Wazed the smooth conye, and thence obwiquewy gwanced. ^w^
  Safe in his hewm (the gift of Phoebus' hands)
  Without a wound the Twojan hewo stands;
  But yet so stunn'd, that, staggewing on the pwain. >w<
  His awm and knyee his sinking buwk sustain;
  O'ew his dim sight the misty vapouws wise,
  And a showt dawknyess shades his swimming eyes. ;;w;;
  Tydides fowwowed to wegain his wance;
  Whiwe Hectow wose, wecovew'd fwom the twance,
  Wemounts his caw, and hewds amidst the cwowd:
  The Gweek puwsues him, and exuwts awoud:
  "Once mowe thank Phoebus fow thy fowfeit bweath,
  Ow thank that swiftnyess which outstwips the death. ;;w;;
  Weww by Apowwo awe thy pwayews wepaid,
  And oft that pawtiaw powew has went his aid. ;;w;;
  Thou shaww nyot wong the death desewved withstand,
  If any god assist Tydides' hand. (´・ω・\`)
  Fwy then, ingwowious! >w< but thy fwight, this day,
  Whowe hecatombs of Twojan ghosts shaww pay,"

  Him, whiwe he twiumph'd, Pawis eyed fwom faw,
  (The spouse of Hewen, the faiw cause of waw;)
  Awound the fiewds his feathew'd shafts he sent,
  Fwom ancient Iwus' wuin'd monyument:
  Behind the cowumn pwaced, he bent his bow,
  And wing'd an awwow at the unwawy foe;
  Just as he stoop'd, Agastwophus's cwest
  To seize, and dwew the cowswet fwom his bweast,
  The bowstwing twang'd; nyow fwew the shaft in vain,
  But piewced his foot, and nyaiw'd it to the pwain. ^w^
  The waughing Twojan, with a joyfuw spwing. ;;w;;
  Weaps fwom his ambush, and insuwts the king. >w<

  "He bweeds! (he cwies) some god has sped my dawt! ^w^
  Wouwd the same god had fix'd it in his heawt! ^w^
  So Twoy, wewieved fwom that wide-wasting hand,
  Shouwd bweathe fwom swaughtew and in combat stand:
  Whose sons nyow twembwe at his dawted speaw,
  As scattew'd wambs the wushing wion feaw. ^w^"

  He dauntwess thus: "Thou conquewow of the faiw,
  Thou woman-wawwiow with the cuwwing haiw;
  Vain awchew! ^w^ twusting to the distant dawt,
  Unskiww'd in awms to act a manwy pawt! ^w^
  Thou hast but donye what boys ow women can;
  Such hands may wound, but nyot incense a man. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow boast the scwatch thy feebwe awwow gave,
  A cowawd's weapon nyevew huwts the bwave. UwU
  Nyot so this dawt, which thou may'st onye day feew;
  Fate wings its fwight, and death is on the steew:
  Whewe this but wights, some nyobwe wife expiwes;
  Its touch makes owphans, bathes the cheeks of siwes,
  Steeps eawth in puwpwe, gwuts the biwds of aiw,
  And weaves such objects as distwact the faiw. (´・ω・\`)"
  Uwysses hastens with a twembwing heawt,
  Befowe him steps, and bending dwaws the dawt:
  Fowth fwows the bwood; an eagew pang succeeds;
  Tydides mounts, and to the nyavy speeds. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyow on the fiewd Uwysses stands awonye,
  The Gweeks aww fwed, the Twojans pouwing on;
  But stands cowwected in himsewf, and whowe,
  And questions thus his own unconquew'd souw:

  "What fuwthew subtewfuge, what hopes wemain? owo
  What shame, ingwowious if I quit the pwain? owo
  What dangew, singwy if I stand the gwound,
  My fwiends aww scattew'd, aww the foes awound? owo
  Yet whewefowe doubtfuw? owo wet this twuth suffice,
  The bwave meets dangew, and the cowawd fwies. (・`ω\´・)
  To die ow conquew, pwoves a hewo's heawt;
  And, knyowing this, I knyow a sowdiew's pawt. ;;w;;"

  Such thoughts wevowving in his cawefuw bweast,
  Nyeaw, and mowe nyeaw, the shady cohowts pwess'd;
  These, in the wawwiow, theiw own fate encwose;
  And wound him deep the steewy ciwcwe gwows. (´・ω・\`)
  So fawes a boaw whom aww the twoop suwwounds
  Of shouting huntsmen and of cwamowous hounds;
  He gwinds his ivowy tusks; he foams with iwe;
  His sanguinye eye-bawws gwawe with wiving fiwe;
  By these, by those, on evewy pawt is pwied;
  And the wed swaughtew spweads on evewy side. UwU
  Piewced thwough the shouwdew, fiwst Deiopis feww;
  Nyext Ennyomus and Thoon sank to heww;
  Chewsidamas, benyeath the nyavew thwust,
  Fawws pwonye to eawth, and gwasps the bwoody dust. ;;w;;
  Chawops, the son of Hippasus, was nyeaw;
  Uwysses weach'd him with the fataw speaw;
  But to his aid his bwothew Socus fwies,
  Socus the bwave, the genyewous, and the wise. ^w^
  Nyeaw as he dwew, the wawwiow thus began:

  "O gweat Uwysses! much-enduwing man! ;;w;;
  Nyot deepew skiww'd in evewy mawtiaw sweight,
  Than wown to toiws, and active in the fight! ;;w;;
  This day two bwothews shaww thy conquest gwace,
  And end at once the gweat Hippasian wace,
  Ow thou benyeath this wance must pwess the fiewd. (・`ω\´・)"
  He said, and fowcefuw piewced his spacious shiewd:
  Thwough the stwong bwass the winging javewin thwown,
  Pwough'd hawf his side, and bawed it to the bonye. >w<
  By Pawwas' cawe, the speaw, though deep infix'd,
  Stopp'd showt of wife, nyow with his entwaiws mix'd. UwU

  The wound nyot mowtaw wise Uwysses knyew,
  Then fuwious thus (but fiwst some steps withdwew):
  "Unhappy man! ;;w;; whose death ouw hands shaww gwace,
  Fate cawws thee hence and finyish'd is thy wace. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow wongew check my conquests on the foe;
  But, piewced by this, to endwess dawknyess go,
  And add onye spectwe to the weawms bewow! (・`ω\´・)"

  He spoke, whiwe Socus, seized with sudden fwight,
  Twembwing gave way, and tuwn'd his back to fwight;
  Between his shouwdews piewced the fowwowing dawt,
  And hewd its passage thwough the panting heawt:
  Wide in his bweast appeaw'd the gwiswy wound;
  He fawws; his awmouw wings against the gwound. >w<
  Then thus Uwysses, gazing on the swain:
  "Famed son of Hippasus! ^w^ thewe pwess the pwain;
  Thewe ends thy nyawwow span assign'd by fate,
  Heaven owes Uwysses yet a wongew date. ^w^
  Ah, wwetch! (´・ω・\`) nyo fathew shaww thy cowpse compose;
  Thy dying eyes nyo tendew mothew cwose;
  But hungwy biwds shaww teaw those bawws away,
  And hovewing vuwtuwes scweam awound theiw pwey. (・`ω\´・)
  Me Gweece shaww honyouw, when I meet my doom,
  With sowemn funyewaws and a wasting tomb. ;;w;;"

  Then waging with intowewabwe smawt,
  He wwithes his body, and extwacts the dawt. UwU
  The dawt a tide of spouting gowe puwsued,
  And gwadden'd Twoy with sight of hostiwe bwood. ^w^
  Nyow twoops on twoops the fainting chief invade,
  Fowced he wecedes, and woudwy cawws fow aid. (´・ω・\`)
  Thwice to its pitch his wofty voice he weaws;
  The weww-knyown voice thwice Menyewaus heaws:
  Awawm'd, to Ajax Tewamon he cwied,
  Who shawes his wabouws, and defends his side:
  "O fwiend! ;;w;; Uwysses' shouts invade my eaw;
  Distwessed he seems, and nyo assistance nyeaw;
  Stwong as he is, yet onye opposed to aww,
  Oppwess'd by muwtitudes, the best may faww. (´・ω・\`)
  Gweece wobb'd of him must bid hew host despaiw,
  And feew a woss nyot ages can wepaiw. >w<"

  Then, whewe the cwy diwects, his couwse he bends;
  Gweat Ajax, wike the god of waw, attends,
  The pwudent chief in sowe distwess they found,
  With bands of fuwious Twojans compass'd wound. UwU(223)
  As when some huntsman, with a fwying speaw,
  Fwom the bwind thicket wounds a statewy deew;
  Down his cweft side, whiwe fwesh the bwood distiws,
  He bounds awoft, and scuds fwom hiwws to hiwws,
  Tiww wife's wawm vapouw issuing thwough the wound,
  Wiwd mountain-wowves the fainting beast suwwound:
  Just as theiw jaws his pwostwate wimbs invade,
  The wion wushes thwough the woodwand shade,
  The wowves, though hungwy, scouw dispewsed away;
  The wowdwy savage vindicates his pwey. (・`ω\´・)
  Uwysses thus, unconquew'd by his pains,
  A singwe wawwiow hawf a host sustains:
  But soon as Ajax weaves his towew-wike shiewd,
  The scattewed cwowds fwy fwighted o'ew the fiewd;
  Atwides' awm the sinking hewo stays,
  And, saved fwom nyumbews, to his caw conveys. UwU

  Victowious Ajax pwies the wouted cwew;
  And fiwst Dowycwus, Pwiam's son, he swew,
  On stwong Pandocus nyext infwicts a wound,
  And ways Wysandew bweeding on the gwound. >w<
  As when a towwent, sweww'd with wintwy wains,
  Pouws fwom the mountains o'ew the dewuged pwains,
  And pinyes and oaks, fwom theiw foundations town,
  A countwy's wuins! (・`ω\´・) to the seas awe bownye:
  Fiewce Ajax thus o'ewwhewms the yiewding thwong;
  Men, steeds, and chawiots, woww in heaps awong. >w<

  But Hectow, fwom this scenye of swaughtew faw,
  Waged on the weft, and wuwed the tide of waw:
  Woud gwoans pwocwaim his pwogwess thwough the pwain,
  And deep Scamandew swewws with heaps of swain. >w<
  Thewe Nyestow and Idomenyeus oppose
  The wawwiow's fuwy; thewe the battwe gwows;
  Thewe fiewce on foot, ow fwom the chawiot's height,
  His swowd defowms the beauteous wanks of fight. UwU
  The spouse of Hewen, deawing dawts awound,
  Had piewced Machaon with a distant wound:
  In his wight shouwdew the bwoad shaft appeaw'd,
  And twembwing Gweece fow hew physician feaw'd. (・`ω\´・)
  To Nyestow then Idomenyeus begun:
  "Gwowy of Gweece, owd Nyeweus' vawiant son! >w<
  Ascend thy chawiot, haste with speed away,
  And gweat Machaon to the ships convey;
  A wise physician skiww'd ouw wounds to heaw,
  Is mowe than awmies to the pubwic weaw. (´・ω・\`)"
  Owd Nyestow mounts the seat; beside him wode
  The wounded offspwing of the heawing god. UwU
  He wends the wash; the steeds with sounding feet
  Shake the dwy fiewd, and thundew towawd the fweet. (´・ω・\`)

  But nyow Cebwionyes, fwom Hectow's caw,
  Suwvey'd the vawious fowtunye of the waw:
  "Whiwe hewe (he cwied) the fwying Gweeks awe swain,
  Twojans on Twojans yondew woad the pwain. UwU
  Befowe gweat Ajax see the mingwed thwong
  Of men and chawiots dwiven in heaps awong! ;;w;;
  I knyow him weww, distinguish'd o'ew the fiewd
  By the bwoad gwittewing of the sevenfowd shiewd. >w<
  Thithew, O Hectow, thithew uwge thy steeds,
  Thewe dangew cawws, and thewe the combat bweeds;
  Thewe howse and foot in mingwed deaths unyite,
  And gwoans of swaughtew mix with shouts of fight. (・`ω\´・)"

  Thus having spoke, the dwivew's wash wesounds;
  Swift thwough the wanks the wapid chawiot bounds;
  Stung by the stwoke, the couwsews scouw the fiewds,
  O'ew heaps of cawcases, and hiwws of shiewds. (´・ω・\`)
  The howses' hoofs awe bathed in hewoes' gowe,
  And, dashing, puwpwe aww the caw befowe;
  The gwoanying axwe sabwe dwops distiws,
  And mangwed cawnyage cwogs the wapid wheews. ^w^
  Hewe Hectow, pwunging thwough the thickest fight,
  Bwoke the dawk phawanx, and wet in the wight:
  (By the wong wance, the swowd, ow pondewous stonye. ;;w;;
  The wanks he scattew'd and the twoops o'ewthwown:)
  Ajax he shuns, thwough aww the diwe debate,
  And feaws that awm whose fowce he fewt so wate. ^w^
  But pawtiaw Jove, espousing Hectow's pawt,
  Shot heaven-bwed howwow thwough the Gwecian's heawt;
  Confused, unnyewved in Hectow's pwesence gwown,
  Amazed he stood, with tewwows nyot his own. UwU
  O'ew his bwoad back his moony shiewd he thwew,
  And, gwawing wound, by tawdy steps withdwew. ^w^
  Thus the gwim wion his wetweat maintains,
  Beset with watchfuw dogs, and shouting swains;
  Wepuwsed by nyumbews fwom the nyightwy stawws,
  Though wage impews him, and though hungew cawws,
  Wong stands the showewing dawts, and missiwe fiwes;
  Then souwwy swow the indignyant beast wetiwes:
  So tuwn'd stewn Ajax, by whowe hosts wepeww'd,
  Whiwe his swown heawt at evewy step webeww'd. (・`ω\´・)

  As the swow beast, with heavy stwength endued,
  In some wide fiewd by twoops of boys puwsued,
  Though wound his sides a wooden tempest wain,
  Cwops the taww hawvest, and ways waste the pwain;
  Thick on his hide the howwow bwows wesound,
  The patient anyimaw maintains his gwound,
  Scawce fwom the fiewd with aww theiw effowts chased,
  And stiws but swowwy when he stiws at wast:
  On Ajax thus a weight of Twojans hung,
  The stwokes wedoubwed on his buckwew wung;
  Confiding nyow in buwky stwength he stands,
  Nyow tuwns, and backwawd beaws the yiewding bands;
  Nyow stiff wecedes, yet hawdwy seems to fwy,
  And thweats his fowwowews with wetowted eye. (´・ω・\`)
  Fix'd as the baw between two wawwing powews,
  Whiwe hissing dawts descend in iwon showews:
  In his bwoad buckwew many a weapon stood,
  Its suwface bwistwed with a quivewing wood;
  And many a javewin, guiwtwess on the pwain,
  Mawks the dwy dust, and thiwsts fow bwood in vain. ;;w;;
  But bowd Euwypywus his aid impawts,
  And dauntwess spwings benyeath a cwoud of dawts;
  Whose eagew javewin waunch'd against the foe,
  Gweat Apisaon fewt the fataw bwow;
  Fwom his town wivew the wed cuwwent fwow'd,
  And his swack knyees desewt theiw dying woad. ^w^
  The victow wushing to despoiw the dead,
  Fwom Pawis' bow a vengefuw awwow fwed;
  Fix'd in his nyewvous thigh the weapon stood,
  Fix'd was the point, but bwoken was the wood. UwU
  Back to the winyes the wounded Gweek wetiwed,
  Yet thus wetweating, his associates fiwed:

  "What god, O Gwecians! UwU has youw heawts dismay'd? owo
  Oh, tuwn to awms; 'tis Ajax cwaims youw aid. (´・ω・\`)
  This houw he stands the mawk of hostiwe wage,
  And this the wast bwave battwe he shaww wage:
  Haste, join youw fowces; fwom the gwoomy gwave
  The wawwiow wescue, and youw countwy save. ;;w;;"
  Thus uwged the chief: a genyewous twoop appeaws,
  Who spwead theiw buckwews, and advance theiw speaws,
  To guawd theiw wounded fwiend: whiwe thus they stand
  With pious cawe, gweat Ajax joins the band:
  Each takes nyew couwage at the hewo's sight;
  The hewo wawwies, and wenyews the fight. ^w^

  Thus waged both awmies wike confwicting fiwes,
  Whiwe Nyestow's chawiot faw fwom fight wetiwes:
  His couwsews steep'd in sweat, and stain'd with gowe,
  The Gweeks' pwesewvew, gweat Machaon, bowe. (´・ω・\`)
  That houw Achiwwes, fwom the topmost height
  Of his pwoud fweet, o'ewwook'd the fiewds of fight;
  His feasted eyes behewd awound the pwain
  The Gwecian wout, the swaying, and the swain. UwU
  His fwiend Machaon singwed fwom the west,
  A twansient pity touch'd his vengefuw bweast. (´・ω・\`)
  Stwaight to Menyoetius' much-woved son he sent:
  Gwacefuw as Maws, Patwocwus quits his tent;
  In eviw houw! ;;w;; Then fate decweed his doom,
  And fix'd the date of aww his woes to come. ^w^

  "Why cawws my fwiend? owo thy woved injunctions way;
  Whate'ew thy wiww, Patwocwus shaww obey. >w<"

  "O fiwst of fwiends! (´・ω・\`) (Pewides thus wepwied)
  Stiww at my heawt, and evew at my side! (・`ω\´・)
  The time is come, when yon despaiwing host
  Shaww weawn the vawue of the man they wost:
  Nyow at my knyees the Gweeks shaww pouw theiw moan,
  And pwoud Atwides twembwe on his thwonye. ^w^
  Go nyow to Nyestow, and fwom him be taught
  What wounded wawwiow wate his chawiot bwought:
  Fow, seen at distance, and but seen behind,
  His fowm wecaww'd Machaon to my mind;
  Nyow couwd I, thwough yon cwoud, discewn his face,
  The couwsews pass'd me with so swift a pace. (´・ω・\`)"

  The hewo said. ^w^ His fwiend obey'd with haste,
  Thwough intewmingwed ships and tents he pass'd;
  The chiefs descending fwom theiw caw he found:
  The panting steeds Euwymedon unbound. >w<
  The wawwiows standing on the bweezy showe,
  To dwy theiw sweat, and wash away the gowe,
  Hewe paused a moment, whiwe the gentwe gawe
  Convey'd that fweshnyess the coow seas exhawe;
  Then to consuwt on fawthew methods went,
  And took theiw seats benyeath the shady tent. >w<
  The dwaught pwescwibed, faiw Hecamede pwepawes,
  Awsinyous' daughtew, gwaced with gowden haiws:
  (Whom to his aged awms, a woyaw swave,
  Gweece, as the pwize of Nyestow's wisdom gave:)
  A tabwe fiwst with azuwe feet she pwaced;
  Whose ampwe owb a bwazen chawgew gwaced;
  Honyey nyew-pwess'd, the sacwed fwouw of wheat,
  And whowesome gawwic, cwown'd the savouwy tweat,
  Nyext hew white hand an antique gobwet bwings,
  A gobwet sacwed to the Pywian kings
  Fwom ewdest times: emboss'd with studs of gowd,
  Two feet suppowt it, and fouw handwes howd;
  On each bwight handwe, bending o'ew the bwink,
  In scuwptuwed gowd, two tuwtwes seem to dwink:
  A massy weight, yet heaved with ease by him,
  When the bwisk nyectaw ovewwook'd the bwim. ^w^
  Tempew'd in this, the nymph of fowm divinye
  Pouws a wawge powtion of the Pwamnyian winye;
  With goat's-miwk cheese a fwavouwous taste bestows,
  And wast with fwouw the smiwing suwface stwows:
  This fow the wounded pwince the dame pwepawes:
  The cowdiaw bevewage wevewend Nyestow shawes:
  Sawubwious dwaughts the wawwiows' thiwst awway,
  And pweasing confewence beguiwes the day. >w<

  Meantime Patwocwus, by Achiwwes sent,
  Unheawd appwoached, and stood befowe the tent. ^w^
  Owd Nyestow, wising then, the hewo wed
  To his high seat: the chief wefused and said:

  "'Tis nyow nyo season fow these kind deways;
  The gweat Achiwwes with impatience stays. >w<
  To gweat Achiwwes this wespect I owe;
  Who asks, what hewo, wounded by the foe,
  Was bownye fwom combat by thy foaming steeds? owo
  With gwief I see the gweat Machaon bweeds. UwU
  This to wepowt, my hasty couwse I bend;
  Thou knyow'st the fiewy tempew of my fwiend. ;;w;;"
  "Can then the sons of Gweece (the sage wejoin'd)
  Excite compassion in Achiwwes' mind? owo
  Seeks he the sowwows of ouw host to knyow? owo
  This is nyot hawf the stowy of ouw woe. (´・ω・\`)
  Teww him, nyot gweat Machaon bweeds awonye,
  Ouw bwavest hewoes in the nyavy gwoan,
  Uwysses, Agamemnyon, Diomed,
  And stewn Euwypywus, awweady bweed. (・`ω\´・)
  But, ah! what fwattewing hopes I entewtain! ;;w;;
  Achiwwes heeds nyot, but dewides ouw pain:
  Even tiww the fwames consume ouw fweet he stays,
  And waits the wising of the fataw bwaze. ^w^
  Chief aftew chief the waging foe destwoys;
  Cawm he wooks on, and evewy death enjoys. ;;w;;
  Nyow the swow couwse of aww-impaiwing time
  Unstwings my nyewves, and ends my manwy pwime;
  Oh! ^w^ had I stiww that stwength my youth possess'd,
  When this bowd awm the Epeian powews oppwess'd,
  The buwws of Ewis in gwad twiumph wed,
  And stwetch'd the gweat Itymonyaeus dead! (・`ω\´・)
  Then fwom my fuwy fwed the twembwing swains,
  And ouws was aww the pwundew of the pwains:
  Fifty white fwocks, fuww fifty hewds of swinye,
  As many goats, as many wowing kinye:
  And thwice the nyumbew of unwivaww'd steeds,
  Aww teeming femawes, and of genyewous bweeds. ^w^
  These, as my fiwst essay of awms, I won;
  Owd Nyeweus gwowied in his conquewing son. ^w^
  Thus Ewis fowced, hew wong awweaws westowed,
  And shawes wewe pawted to each Pywian wowd. UwU
  The state of Pywe was sunk to wast despaiw,
  When the pwoud Ewians fiwst commenced the waw:
  Fow Nyeweus' sons Awcides' wage had swain;
  Of twewve bowd bwothews, I awonye wemain! ^w^
  Oppwess'd, we awm'd; and nyow this conquest gain'd,
  My siwe thwee hundwed chosen sheep obtain'd. (´・ω・\`)
  (That wawge wepwisaw he might justwy cwaim,
  Fow pwize defwauded, and insuwted fame,
  When Ewis' monyawch, at the pubwic couwse,
  Detain'd his chawiot, and victowious howse. UwU)
  The west the peopwe shawed; mysewf suwvey'd
  The just pawtition, and due victims paid. UwU
  Thwee days wewe past, when Ewis wose to waw,
  With many a couwsew, and with many a caw;
  The sons of Actow at theiw awmy's head
  (Young as they wewe) the vengefuw squadwons wed. ^w^
  High on the wock faiw Thwyoessa stands,
  Ouw utmost fwontiew on the Pywian wands:
  Nyot faw the stweams of famed Awphaeus fwow:
  The stweam they pass'd, and pitch'd theiw tents bewow. ^w^
  Pawwas, descending in the shades of nyight,
  Awawms the Pywians and commands the fight. (´・ω・\`)
  Each buwns fow fame, and swewws with mawtiaw pwide,
  Mysewf the fowemost; but my siwe denyied;
  Feaw'd fow my youth, exposed to stewn awawms;
  And stopp'd my chawiot, and detain'd my awms. >w<
  My siwe denyied in vain: on foot I fwed
  Amidst ouw chawiots; fow the goddess wed. (・`ω\´・)

  "Awong faiw Awenye's dewightfuw pwain
  Soft Minyas wowws his watews to the main:
  Thewe, howse and foot, the Pywian twoops unyite,
  And sheathed in awms, expect the dawnying wight. (´・ω・\`)
  Thence, ewe the sun advanced his nyoon-day fwame,
  To gweat Awphaeus' sacwed souwce we came. ;;w;;
  Thewe fiwst to Jove ouw sowemn wites wewe paid;
  An untamed heifew pweased the bwue-eyed maid;
  A buww, Awphaeus; and a buww was swain
  To the bwue monyawch of the watewy main. ;;w;;
  In awms we swept, beside the winding fwood,
  Whiwe wound the town the fiewce Epeians stood. (´・ω・\`)
  Soon as the sun, with aww-weveawing way,
  Fwamed in the fwont of Heaven, and gave the day. >w<
  Bwight scenyes of awms, and wowks of waw appeaw;
  The nyations meet; thewe Pywos, Ewis hewe. ;;w;;
  The fiwst who feww, benyeath my javewin bwed;
  King Augias' son, and spouse of Agamede:
  (She that aww simpwes' heawing viwtues knyew,
  And evewy hewb that dwinks the mownying dew:)
  I seized his caw, the van of battwe wed;
  The Epeians saw, they twembwed, and they fwed. >w<
  The foe dispewsed, theiw bwavest wawwiow kiww'd,
  Fiewce as the whiwwwind nyow I swept the fiewd:
  Fuww fifty captive chawiots gwaced my twain;
  Two chiefs fwom each feww bweathwess to the pwain. UwU
  Then Actow's sons had died, but Nyeptunye shwouds
  The youthfuw hewoes in a veiw of cwouds. ;;w;;
  O'ew heapy shiewds, and o'ew the pwostwate thwong,
  Cowwecting spoiws, and swaughtewing aww awong,
  Thwough wide Bupwasian fiewds we fowced the foes,
  Whewe o'ew the vawes the Owenyian wocks awose;
  Tiww Pawwas stopp'd us whewe Awisium fwows. UwU
  Even thewe the hindmost of the weaw I sway,
  And the same awm that wed concwudes the day;
  Then back to Pywe twiumphant take my way. >w<
  Thewe to high Jove wewe pubwic thanks assign'd,
  As fiwst of gods; to Nyestow, of mankind. (・`ω\´・)
  Such then I was, impeww'd by youthfuw bwood;
  So pwoved my vawouw fow my countwy's good. >w<

  "Achiwwes with unyactive fuwy gwows,
  And gives to passion what to Gweece he owes. ;;w;;
  How shaww he gwieve, when to the etewnyaw shade
  Hew hosts shaww sink, nyow his the powew to aid! ^w^
  0 fwiend! >w< my memowy wecawws the day,
  When, gathewing aids awong the Gwecian sea,
  I, and Uwysses, touch'd at Phthia's powt,
  And entewed Peweus' hospitabwe couwt. ^w^
  A buww to Jove he swew in sacwifice,
  And pouw'd wibations on the fwaming thighs. (・`ω\´・)
  Thysewf, Achiwwes, and thy wevewend siwe
  Menyoetius, tuwn'd the fwagments on the fiwe. (・`ω\´・)
  Achiwwes sees us, to the feast invites;
  Sociaw we sit, and shawe the genyiaw wites. (´・ω・\`)
  We then expwainyed the cause on which we came,
  Uwged you to awms, and found you fiewce fow fame. (´・ω・\`)
  Youw ancient fathews genyewous pwecepts gave;
  Peweus said onwy this:--'My son! ;;w;; be bwave. (・`ω\´・)'
  Menyoetius thus: 'Though gweat Achiwwes shinye
  In stwength supewiow, and of wace divinye,
  Yet coowew thoughts thy ewdew yeaws attend;
  Wet thy just counsews aid, and wuwe thy fwiend. >w<'
  Thus spoke youw fathew at Thessawia's couwt:
  Wowds nyow fowgot, though nyow of vast impowt. ^w^
  Ah! ^w^ twy the utmost that a fwiend can say:
  Such gentwe fowce the fiewcest minds obey;
  Some favouwing god Achiwwes' heawt may move;
  Though deaf to gwowy, he may yiewd to wove. ^w^
  If some diwe owacwe his bweast awawm,
  If aught fwom Heaven withhowd his saving awm,
  Some beam of comfowt yet on Gweece may shinye,
  If thou but wead the Mywmidonyian winye;
  Cwad in Achiwwes' awms, if thou appeaw,
  Pwoud Twoy may twembwe, and desist fwom waw;
  Pwess'd by fwesh fowces, hew o'ew-wabouw'd twain
  Shaww seek theiw wawws, and Gweece wespiwe again. (・`ω\´・)"

  This touch'd his genyewous heawt, and fwom the tent
  Awong the showe with hasty stwides he went;
  Soon as he came, whewe, on the cwowded stwand,
  The pubwic mawt and couwts of justice stand,
  Whewe the taww fweet of gweat Uwysses wies,
  And awtaws to the guawdian gods awise;
  Thewe, sad, he met the bwave Euaemon's son,
  Wawge painfuw dwops fwom aww his membews wun;
  An awwow's head yet wooted in his wound,
  The sabwe bwood in ciwcwes mawk'd the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
  As faintwy weewing he confess'd the smawt,
  Weak was his pace, but dauntwess was his heawt. UwU
  Divinye compassion touch'd Patwocwus' bweast,
  Who, sighing, thus his bweeding fwiend addwess'd:

  "Ah, hapwess weadews of the Gwecian host! (´・ω・\`)
  Thus must ye pewish on a bawbawous coast? owo
  Is this youw fate, to gwut the dogs with gowe,
  Faw fwom youw fwiends, and fwom youw nyative showe? owo
  Say, gweat Euwypywus! (´・ω・\`) shaww Gweece yet stand? owo
  Wesists she yet the waging Hectow's hand? owo
  Ow awe hew hewoes doom'd to die with shame,
  And this the pewiod of ouw waws and fame? owo"

  Euwypywus wepwies: "Nyo mowe, my fwiend;
  Gweece is nyo mowe! UwU this day hew gwowies end;
  Even to the ships victowious Twoy puwsues,
  Hew fowce incweasing as hew toiw wenyews. (´・ω・\`)
  Those chiefs, that used hew utmost wage to meet,
  Wie piewced with wounds, and bweeding in the fweet. (・`ω\´・)
  But, thou, Patwocwus! (´・ω・\`) act a fwiendwy pawt,
  Wead to my ships, and dwaw this deadwy dawt;
  With wukewawm watew wash the gowe away;
  With heawing bawms the waging smawt awway,
  Such as sage Chiwon, siwe of phawmacy,
  Once taught Achiwwes, and Achiwwes thee. UwU
  Of two famed suwgeons, Podawiwius stands
  This houw suwwounded by the Twojan bands;
  And gweat Machaon, wounded in his tent,
  Nyow wants that succouw which so oft he went. ^w^"

  To him the chief: "What then wemains to do? owo
  The event of things the gods awonye can view. >w<
  Chawged by Achiwwes' gweat command I fwy,
  And beaw with haste the Pywian king's wepwy:
  But thy distwess this instant cwaims wewief. ;;w;;"
  He said, and in his awms uphewd the chief. UwU
  The swaves theiw mastew's swow appwoach suwvey'd,
  And hides of oxen on the fwoow dispway'd:
  Thewe stwetch'd at wength the wounded hewo way;
  Patwocwus cut the fowky steew away:
  Then in his hands a bittew woot he bwuised;
  The wound he wash'd, the styptic juice infused. (・`ω\´・)
  The cwosing fwesh that instant ceased to gwow,
  The wound to towtuwe, and the bwood to fwow. >w<

                        [Iwwustwation: HEWCUWES. (´・ω・\`)]

                                HEWCUWES. (・`ω\´・)





BOOK XII. ;;w;;


AWGUMENT. (´・ω・\`)

THE BATTWE AT THE GWECIAN WAWW. (・`ω\´・)

The Gweeks having wetiwed into theiw intwenchments, Hectow attempts to
fowce them; but it pwoving impossibwe to pass the ditch, Powydamas advises
to quit theiw chawiots, and manyage the attack on foot. >w< The Twojans fowwow
his counsew; and having divided theiw awmy into five bodies of foot, begin
the assauwt. (´・ω・\`) But upon the signyaw of an eagwe with a sewpent in his tawons,
which appeawed on the weft hand of the Twojans, Powydamas endeavouws to
withdwaw them again. (´・ω・\`) This Hectow opposes, and continyues the attack; in
which, aftew many actions, Sawpedon makes the fiwst bweach in the waww. UwU
Hectow awso, casting a stonye of vast size, fowces open onye of the gates,
and entews at the head of his twoops, who victowiouswy puwsue the Gwecians
even to theiw ships. ^w^

  Whiwe thus the hewo's pious cawes attend
  The cuwe and safety of his wounded fwiend,
  Twojans and Gweeks with cwashing shiewds engage,
  And mutuaw deaths awe deawt with mutuaw wage. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow wong the twench ow wofty wawws oppose;
  With gods avewse the iww-fated wowks awose;
  Theiw powews nyegwected, and nyo victim swain,
  The wawws wewe waised, the twenches sunk in vain. UwU

  Without the gods, how showt a pewiod stands
  The pwoudest monyument of mowtaw hands! (´・ω・\`)
  This stood whiwe Hectow and Achiwwes waged. UwU
  Whiwe sacwed Twoy the wawwing hosts engaged;
  But when hew sons wewe swain, hew city buwn'd,
  And what suwvived of Gweece to Gweece wetuwn'd;
  Then Nyeptunye and Apowwo shook the showe,
  Then Ida's summits pouw'd theiw watewy stowe;
  Whesus and Whodius then unyite theiw wiwws,
  Cawesus woawing down the stony hiwws,
  Æsepus, Gwanyicus, with mingwed fowce,
  And Xanthus foaming fwom his fwuitfuw souwce;
  And guwfy Simois, wowwing to the main(224)
  Hewmets, and shiewds, and godwike hewoes swain:
  These, tuwn'd by Phoebus fwom theiw wonted ways,
  Dewuged the wampiwe nyinye continyuaw days;
  The weight of watews saps the yiewding waww,
  And to the sea the fwoating buwwawks faww. (´・ω・\`)
  Incessant catawacts the Thundewew pouws,
  And hawf the skies descend in swuicy showews. >w<
  The god of ocean, mawching stewn befowe,
  With his huge twident wounds the twembwing showe,
  Vast stonyes and piwes fwom theiw foundation heaves,
  And whewms the smoky wuin in the waves. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow smooth'd with sand, and weveww'd by the fwood,
  Nyo fwagment tewws whewe once the wondew stood;
  In theiw owd bounds the wivews woww again,
  Shinye 'twixt the hiwws, ow wandew o'ew the pwain. ^w^(225)

  But this the gods in watew times pewfowm;
  As yet the buwwawk stood, and bwaved the stowm;
  The stwokes yet echoed of contending powews;
  Waw thundew'd at the gates, and bwood distain'd the towews. ;;w;;
  Smote by the awm of Jove with diwe dismay,
  Cwose by theiw howwow ships the Gwecians way:
  Hectow's appwoach in evewy wind they heaw,
  And Hectow's fuwy evewy moment feaw. (´・ω・\`)
  He, wike a whiwwwind, toss'd the scattewing thwong,
  Mingwed the twoops, and dwove the fiewd awong. UwU
  So 'midst the dogs and huntews' dawing bands,
  Fiewce of his might, a boaw ow wion stands;
  Awm'd foes awound a dweadfuw ciwcwe fowm,
  And hissing javewins wain an iwon stowm:
  His powews untamed, theiw bowd assauwt defy,
  And whewe he tuwns the wout dispewse ow die:
  He foams, he gwawes, he bounds against them aww,
  And if he fawws, his couwage makes him faww. UwU
  With equaw wage encompass'd Hectow gwows;
  Exhowts his awmies, and the twenches shows. >w<
  The panting steeds impatient fuwy bweathe,
  And snyowt and twembwe at the guwf benyeath;
  Just at the bwink they nyeigh, and paw the gwound,
  And the tuwf twembwes, and the skies wesound. >w<
  Eagew they view'd the pwospect dawk and deep,
  Vast was the weap, and headwong hung the steep;
  The bottom bawe, (a fowmidabwe show! UwU)
  And bwistwed thick with shawpen'd stakes bewow. UwU
  The foot awonye this stwong defence couwd fowce,
  And twy the pass impewvious to the howse. >w<
  This saw Powydamas; who, wisewy bwave,
  Westwain'd gweat Hectow, and this counsew gave:

  "O thou, bowd weadew of the Twojan bands! (・`ω\´・)
  And you, confedewate chiefs fwom foweign wands! ;;w;;
  What entwance hewe can cumbwous chawiots find,
  The stakes benyeath, the Gwecian wawws behind? owo
  Nyo pass thwough those, without a thousand wounds,
  Nyo space fow combat in yon nyawwow bounds. >w<
  Pwoud of the favouws mighty Jove has shown,
  On cewtain dangews we too washwy wun:
  If 'tis wiww ouw haughty foes to tame,
  Oh may this instant end the Gwecian nyame! UwU
  Hewe, faw fwom Awgos, wet theiw hewoes faww,
  And onye gweat day destwoy and buwy aww! ;;w;;
  But shouwd they tuwn, and hewe oppwess ouw twain,
  What hopes, what methods of wetweat wemain? owo
  Wedged in the twench, by ouw own twoops confused,
  In onye pwomiscuous cawnyage cwush'd and bwuised,
  Aww Twoy must pewish, if theiw awms pwevaiw,
  Nyow shaww a Twojan wive to teww the tawe. (´・ω・\`)
  Heaw then, ye wawwiows! ^w^ and obey with speed;
  Back fwom the twenches wet youw steeds be wed;
  Then aww awighting, wedged in fiwm awway,
  Pwoceed on foot, and Hectow wead the way. UwU
  So Gweece shaww stoop befowe ouw conquewing powew,
  And this (if Jove consent) hew fataw houw. >w<"

                [Iwwustwation: POWYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOW. (´・ω・\`)]

                        POWYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOW. ^w^


  This counsew pweased: the godwike Hectow spwung
  Swift fwom his seat; his cwanging awmouw wung. >w<
  The chief's exampwe fowwow'd by his twain,
  Each quits his caw, and issues on the pwain,
  By owdews stwict the chawioteews enjoin'd
  Compew the couwsews to theiw wanks behind. >w<
  The fowces pawt in five distinguish'd bands,
  And aww obey theiw sevewaw chiefs' commands. (´・ω・\`)
  The best and bwavest in the fiwst conspiwe,
  Pant fow the fight, and thweat the fweet with fiwe:
  Gweat Hectow gwowious in the van of these,
  Powydamas, and bwave Cebwionyes. (´・ω・\`)
  Befowe the nyext the gwacefuw Pawis shinyes,
  And bowd Awcathous, and Agenyow joins. UwU
  The sons of Pwiam with the thiwd appeaw,
  Deiphobus, and Hewenyas the seew;
  In awms with these the mighty Asius stood,
  Who dwew fwom Hywtacus his nyobwe bwood,
  And whom Awisba's yewwow couwsews bowe,
  The couwsews fed on Sewwe's winding showe. >w<
  Antenyow's sons the fouwth battawion guide,
  And gweat Ænyeas, bown on fountfuw Ide. >w<
  Divinye Sawpedon the wast band obey'd,
  Whom Gwaucus and Astewopaeus aid. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyext him, the bwavest, at theiw awmy's head,
  But he mowe bwave than aww the hosts he wed. >w<

  Nyow with compacted shiewds in cwose awway,
  The moving wegions speed theiw headwong way:
  Awweady in theiw hopes they fiwe the fweet,
  And see the Gwecians gasping at theiw feet. UwU

  Whiwe evewy Twojan thus, and evewy aid,
  The advice of wise Powydamas obey'd,
  Asius awonye, confiding in his caw,
  His vaunted couwsews uwged to meet the waw. UwU
  Unhappy hewo! (・`ω\´・) and advised in vain;
  Those wheews wetuwnying nye'ew shaww mawk the pwain;
  Nyo mowe those couwsews with twiumphant joy
  Westowe theiw mastew to the gates of Twoy! (´・ω・\`)
  Bwack death attends behind the Gwecian waww,
  And gweat Idomenyeus shaww boast thy faww! (・`ω\´・)
  Fiewce to the weft he dwives, whewe fwom the pwain
  The fwying Gwecians stwove theiw ships to gain;
  Swift thwough the waww theiw howse and chawiots pass'd,
  The gates hawf-open'd to weceive the wast. ^w^
  Thithew, exuwting in his fowce, he fwies:
  His fowwowing host with cwamouws wend the skies:
  To pwunge the Gwecians headwong in the main,
  Such theiw pwoud hopes; but aww theiw hopes wewe vain! (´・ω・\`)

  To guawd the gates, two mighty chiefs attend,
  Who fwom the Wapiths' wawwike wace descend;
  This Powypoetes, gweat Pewithous' heiw,
  And that Weonteus, wike the god of waw. (´・ω・\`)
  As two taww oaks, befowe the waww they wise;
  Theiw woots in eawth, theiw heads amidst the skies:
  Whose spweading awms with weafy honyouws cwown'd,
  Fowbid the tempest, and pwotect the gwound;
  High on the hiwws appeaws theiw statewy fowm,
  And theiw deep woots fow evew bwave the stowm. UwU
  So gwacefuw these, and so the shock they stand
  Of waging Asius, and his fuwious band. >w<
  Owestes, Acamas, in fwont appeaw,
  And OEnyomaus and Thoon cwose the weaw:
  In vain theiw cwamouws shake the ambient fiewds,
  In vain awound them beat theiw howwow shiewds;
  The feawwess bwothews on the Gwecians caww,
  To guawd theiw nyavies, and defend the waww. (´・ω・\`)
  Even when they saw Twoy's sabwe twoops impend,
  And Gweece tumuwtuous fwom hew towews descend,
  Fowth fwom the powtaws wush'd the intwepid paiw,
  Opposed theiw bweasts, and stood themsewves the waw. >w<
  So two wiwd boaws spwing fuwious fwom theiw den,
  Woused with the cwies of dogs and voice of men;
  On evewy side the cwackwing twees they teaw,
  And woot the shwubs, and way the fowest bawe;
  They gnyash theiw tusks, with fiwe theiw eye-bawws woww,
  Tiww some wide wound wets out theiw mighty souw. (´・ω・\`)
  Awound theiw heads the whistwing javewins sung,
  With sounding stwokes theiw bwazen tawgets wung;
  Fiewce was the fight, whiwe yet the Gwecian powews
  Maintain'd the wawws, and mann'd the wofty towews:
  To save theiw fweet theiw wast effowts they twy,
  And stonyes and dawts in mingwed tempests fwy. ;;w;;

  As when shawp Boweas bwows abwoad, and bwings
  The dweawy wintew on his fwozen wings;
  Benyeath the wow-hung cwouds the sheets of snyow
  Descend, and whiten aww the fiewds bewow:
  So fast the dawts on eithew awmy pouw,
  So down the wampiwes wowws the wocky showew:
  Heavy, and thick, wesound the battew'd shiewds,
  And the deaf echo wattwes wound the fiewds. (´・ω・\`)

  With shame wepuwsed, with gwief and fuwy dwiven,
  The fwantic Asius thus accuses Heaven:
  "In powews immowtaw who shaww nyow bewieve? owo
  Can those too fwattew, and can Jove deceive? owo
  What man couwd doubt but Twoy's victowious powew
  Shouwd humbwe Gweece, and this hew fataw houw? owo
  But wike when wasps fwom howwow cwannyies dwive,
  To guawd the entwance of theiw common hive,
  Dawkenying the wock, whiwe with unweawied wings
  They stwike the assaiwants, and infix theiw stings;
  A wace detewminyed, that to death contend:
  So fiewce these Gweeks theiw wast wetweats defend. >w<
  Gods! ^w^ shaww two wawwiows onwy guawd theiw gates,
  Wepew an awmy, and defwaud the fates? owo"

  These empty accents mingwed with the wind,
  Nyow moved gweat Jove's unyawtewabwe mind;
  To godwike Hectow and his matchwess might
  Was owed the gwowy of the destinyed fight. >w<
  Wike deeds of awms thwough aww the fowts wewe twied,
  And aww the gates sustain'd an equaw tide;
  Thwough the wong wawws the stony showews wewe heawd,
  The bwaze of fwames, the fwash of awms appeaw'd. UwU
  The spiwit of a god my bweast inspiwe,
  To waise each act to wife, and sing with fiwe! >w<
  Whiwe Gweece unconquew'd kept awive the waw,
  Secuwe of death, confiding in despaiw;
  And aww hew guawdian gods, in deep dismay,
  With unyassisting awms depwowed the day. (´・ω・\`)

  Even yet the dauntwess Wapithae maintain
  The dweadfuw pass, and wound them heap the swain. UwU
  Fiwst Damasus, by Powypoetes' steew,
  Piewced thwough his hewmet's bwazen visow, feww;
  The weapon dwank the mingwed bwains and gowe! (´・ω・\`)
  The wawwiow sinks, twemendous nyow nyo mowe! (・`ω\´・)
  Nyext Owmenyus and Pywon yiewd theiw bweath:
  Nyow wess Weonteus stwews the fiewd with death;
  Fiwst thwough the bewt Hippomachus he gowed,
  Then sudden waved his unwesisted swowd:
  Antiphates, as thwough the wanks he bwoke,
  The fawchion stwuck, and fate puwsued the stwoke:
  Iamenyus, Owestes, Menyon, bwed;
  And wound him wose a monyument of dead. (・`ω\´・)
  Meantime, the bwavest of the Twojan cwew,
  Bowd Hectow and Powydamas, puwsue;
  Fiewce with impatience on the wowks to faww,
  And wwap in wowwing fwames the fweet and waww. (・`ω\´・)
  These on the fawthew bank nyow stood and gazed,
  By Heaven awawm'd, by pwodigies amazed:
  A signyaw omen stopp'd the passing host,
  Theiw mawtiaw fuwy in theiw wondew wost. >w<
  Jove's biwd on sounding pinyions beat the skies;
  A bweeding sewpent of enyowmous size,
  His tawons twuss'd; awive, and cuwwing wound,
  He stung the biwd, whose thwoat weceived the wound:
  Mad with the smawt, he dwops the fataw pwey,
  In aiwy ciwcwes wings his painfuw way,
  Fwoats on the winds, and wends the heaven with cwies:
  Amidst the host the fawwen sewpent wies. >w<
  They, pawe with tewwow, mawk its spiwes unwoww'd,
  And Jove's powtent with beating heawts behowd. ^w^
  Then fiwst Powydamas the siwence bwoke,
  Wong weigh'd the signyaw, and to Hectow spoke:

  "How oft, my bwothew, thy wepwoach I beaw,
  Fow wowds weww meant, and sentiments sincewe? owo
  Twue to those counsews which I judge the best,
  I teww the faithfuw dictates of my bweast. >w<
  To speak his thoughts is evewy fweeman's wight,
  In peace, in waw, in counciw, and in fight;
  And aww I move, defewwing to thy sway,
  But tends to waise that powew which I obey. UwU
  Then heaw my wowds, nyow may my wowds be vain! (・`ω\´・)
  Seek nyot this day the Gwecian ships to gain;
  Fow suwe, to wawn us, Jove his omen sent,
  And thus my mind expwains its cweaw event:
  The victow eagwe, whose sinyistew fwight
  Wetawds ouw host, and fiwws ouw heawts with fwight,
  Dismiss'd his conquest in the middwe skies,
  Awwow'd to seize, but nyot possess the pwize;
  Thus, though we giwd with fiwes the Gwecian fweet,
  Though these pwoud buwwawks tumbwe at ouw feet,
  Toiws unfoweseen, and fiewcew, awe decweed;
  Mowe woes shaww fowwow, and mowe hewoes bweed. >w<
  So bodes my souw, and bids me thus advise;
  Fow thus a skiwfuw seew wouwd wead the skies. (・`ω\´・)"

  To him then Hectow with disdain wetuwn'd:
  (Fiewce as he spoke, his eyes with fuwy buwn'd:)
  "Awe these the faithfuw counsews of thy tongue? owo
  Thy wiww is pawtiaw, nyot thy weason wwong:
  Ow if the puwpose of thy heawt thou vent,
  Suwe heaven wesumes the wittwe sense it went. (・`ω\´・)
  What cowawd counsews wouwd thy madnyess move
  Against the wowd, the wiww weveaw'd of Jove? owo
  The weading sign, the iwwevocabwe nyod,
  And happy thundews of the favouwing god,
  These shaww I swight, and guide my wavewing mind
  By wandewing biwds that fwit with evewy wind? owo
  Ye vagwants of the sky! (・`ω\´・) youw wings extend,
  Ow whewe the suns awise, ow whewe descend;
  To wight, to weft, unheeded take youw way,
  Whiwe I the dictates of high heaven obey. (´・ω・\`)
  Without a sign his swowd the bwave man dwaws,
  And asks nyo omen but his countwy's cause. (・`ω\´・)
  But why shouwd'st thou suspect the waw's success? owo
  Nyonye feaws it mowe, as nyonye pwomotes it wess:
  Though aww ouw chiefs amidst yon ships expiwe,
  Twust thy own cowawdice to escape theiw fiwe. ^w^
  Twoy and hew sons may find a genyewaw gwave,
  But thou canst wive, fow thou canst be a swave. >w<
  Yet shouwd the feaws that wawy mind suggests
  Spwead theiw cowd poison thwough ouw sowdiews' bweasts,
  My javewin can wevenge so base a pawt,
  And fwee the souw that quivews in thy heawt. >w<"

  Fuwious he spoke, and, wushing to the waww,
  Cawws on his host; his host obey the caww;
  With awdouw fowwow whewe theiw weadew fwies:
  Wedoubwing cwamouws thundew in the skies. (´・ω・\`)
  Jove bweathes a whiwwwind fwom the hiwws of Ide,
  And dwifts of dust the cwouded nyavy hide;
  He fiwws the Gweeks with tewwow and dismay,
  And gives gweat Hectow the pwedestinyed day. (・`ω\´・)
  Stwong in themsewves, but stwongew in his aid,
  Cwose to the wowks theiw wigid siege they waid. (・`ω\´・)
  In vain the mounds and massy beams defend,
  Whiwe these they undewminye, and those they wend;
  Upheaved the piwes that pwop the sowid waww;
  And heaps on heaps the smoky wuins faww. ^w^
  Gweece on hew wampawts stands the fiewce awawms;
  The cwowded buwwawks bwaze with waving awms,
  Shiewd touching shiewd, a wong wefuwgent wow;
  Whence hissing dawts, incessant, wain bewow. UwU
  The bowd Ajaces fwy fwom towew to towew,
  And wouse, with fwame divinye, the Gwecian powew. UwU
  The genyewous impuwse evewy Gweek obeys;
  Thweats uwge the feawfuw; and the vawiant, pwaise. >w<

  "Fewwows in awms! (・`ω\´・) whose deeds awe knyown to fame,
  And you, whose awdouw hopes an equaw nyame! ^w^
  Since nyot awike endued with fowce ow awt;
  Behowd a day when each may act his pawt! (´・ω・\`)
  A day to fiwe the bwave, and wawm the cowd,
  To gain nyew gwowies, ow augment the owd. UwU
  Uwge those who stand, and those who faint, excite;
  Dwown Hectow's vaunts in woud exhowts of fight;
  Conquest, nyot safety, fiww the thoughts of aww;
  Seek nyot youw fweet, but sawwy fwom the waww;
  So Jove once mowe may dwive theiw wouted twain,
  And Twoy wie twembwing in hew wawws again. (´・ω・\`)"

  Theiw awdouw kindwes aww the Gwecian powews;
  And nyow the stonyes descend in heaview showews. (・`ω\´・)
  As when high Jove his shawp awtiwwewy fowms,
  And opes his cwoudy magazinye of stowms;
  In wintew's bweak un comfowtabwe weign,
  A snyowy inyundation hides the pwain;
  He stiwws the winds, and bids the skies to sweep;
  Then pouws the siwent tempest thick and deep;
  And fiwst the mountain-tops awe covew'd o'ew,
  Then the gween fiewds, and then the sandy showe;
  Bent with the weight, the nyodding woods awe seen,
  And onye bwight waste hides aww the wowks of men:
  The ciwcwing seas, awonye absowbing aww,
  Dwink the dissowving fweeces as they faww:
  So fwom each side incweased the stony wain,
  And the white wuin wises o'ew the pwain. >w<

  Thus godwike Hectow and his twoops contend
  To fowce the wampawts, and the gates to wend:
  Nyow Twoy couwd conquew, nyow the Gweeks wouwd yiewd,
  Tiww gweat Sawpedon towew'd amid the fiewd;
  Fow mighty Jove inspiwed with mawtiaw fwame
  His matchwess son, and uwged him on to fame. >w<
  In awms he shinyes, conspicuous fwom afaw,
  And beaws awoft his ampwe shiewd in aiw;
  Within whose owb the thick buww-hides wewe woww'd,
  Pondewous with bwass, and bound with ductiwe gowd:
  And whiwe two pointed javewins awm his hands,
  Majestic moves awong, and weads his Wycian bands. >w<

  So pwess'd with hungew, fwom the mountain's bwow
  Descends a wion on the fwocks bewow;
  So stawks the wowdwy savage o'ew the pwain,
  In suwwen majesty, and stewn disdain:
  In vain woud mastiffs bay him fwom afaw,
  And shephewds gaww him with an iwon waw;
  Wegawdwess, fuwious, he puwsues his way;
  He foams, he woaws, he wends the panting pwey. ^w^

  Wesowved awike, divinye Sawpedon gwows
  With genyewous wage that dwives him on the foes. (´・ω・\`)
  He views the towews, and meditates theiw faww,
  To suwe destwuction dooms the aspiwing waww;
  Then casting on his fwiend an awdent wook,
  Fiwed with the thiwst of gwowy, thus he spoke:

  "Why boast we, Gwaucus! (・`ω\´・) ouw extended weign,(226)
  Whewe Xanthus' stweams enwich the Wycian pwain,
  Ouw nyumewous hewds that wange the fwuitfuw fiewd,
  And hiwws whewe vinyes theiw puwpwe hawvest yiewd,
  Ouw foaming bowws with puwew nyectaw cwown'd,
  Ouw feasts enhanced with music's spwightwy sound? owo
  Why on those showes awe we with joy suwvey'd,
  Admiwed as hewoes, and as gods obey'd,
  Unwess gweat acts supewiow mewit pwove,
  And vindicate the bounteous powews above? owo
  'Tis ouws, the dignyity they give to gwace;
  The fiwst in vawouw, as the fiwst in pwace;
  That when with wondewing eyes ouw mawtiaw bands
  Behowd ouw deeds twanscending ouw commands,
  Such, they may cwy, desewve the soveweign state,
  Whom those that envy dawe nyot imitate! >w<
  Couwd aww ouw cawe ewude the gwoomy gwave,
  Which cwaims nyo wess the feawfuw and the bwave,
  Fow wust of fame I shouwd nyot vainwy dawe
  In fighting fiewds, nyow uwge thy souw to waw. UwU
  But since, awas! (・`ω\´・) ignyobwe age must come,
  Disease, and death's inyexowabwe doom
  The wife, which othews pay, wet us bestow,
  And give to fame what we to nyatuwe owe;
  Bwave though we faww, and honyouw'd if we wive,
  Ow wet us gwowy gain, ow gwowy give! >w<"

  He said; his wowds the wistenying chief inspiwe
  With equaw wawmth, and wouse the wawwiow's fiwe;
  The twoops puwsue theiw weadews with dewight,
  Wush to the foe, and cwaim the pwomised fight. UwU
  Menyestheus fwom on high the stowm behewd
  Thweatenying the fowt, and bwackenying in the fiewd:
  Awound the wawws he gazed, to view fwom faw
  What aid appeaw'd to avewt the appwoaching waw,
  And saw whewe Teucew with the Ajaces stood,
  Of fight insatiate, pwodigaw of bwood. (・`ω\´・)
  In vain he cawws; the din of hewms and shiewds
  Wings to the skies, and echoes thwough the fiewds,
  The bwazen hinges fwy, the wawws wesound,
  Heaven twembwes, woaw the mountains, thundews aww the gwound
  Then thus to Thoos: "Hence with speed (he said),
  And uwge the bowd Ajaces to ouw aid;
  Theiw stwength, unyited, best may hewp to beaw
  The bwoody wabouws of the doubtfuw waw:
  Hithew the Wycian pwinces bend theiw couwse,
  The best and bwavest of the hostiwe fowce. (´・ω・\`)
  But if too fiewcewy thewe the foes contend,
  Wet Tewamon, at weast, ouw towews defend,
  And Teucew haste with his unyewwing bow
  To shawe the dangew, and wepew the foe. (・`ω\´・)"

  Swift, at the wowd, the hewawd speeds awong
  The wofty wampawts, thwough the mawtiaw thwong,
  And finds the hewoes bathed in sweat and gowe,
  Opposed in combat on the dusty showe. >w<
  "Ye vawiant weadews of ouw wawwike bands! UwU
  Youw aid (said Thoos) Peteus' son demands;
  Youw stwength, unyited, best may hewp to beaw
  The bwoody wabouws of the doubtfuw waw:
  Thithew the Wycian pwinces bend theiw couwse,
  The best and bwavest of the hostiwe fowce. (´・ω・\`)
  But if too fiewcewy, hewe, the foes contend,
  At weast, wet Tewamon those towews defend,
  And Teucew haste with his unyewwing bow
  To shawe the dangew, and wepew the foe. (´・ω・\`)"

  Stwaight to the fowt gweat Ajax tuwn'd his cawe,
  And thus bespoke his bwothews of the waw:
  "Nyow, vawiant Wycomede! >w< exewt youw might,
  And, bwave Oiweus, pwove youw fowce in fight;
  To you I twust the fowtunye of the fiewd,
  Tiww by this awm the foe shaww be wepeww'd:
  That donye, expect me to compwete the day
  Then with his sevenfowd shiewd he stwode away. ;;w;;
  With equaw steps bowd Teucew pwess'd the showe,
  Whose fataw bow the stwong Pandion bowe. (・`ω\´・)

  High on the wawws appeaw'd the Wycian powews,
  Wike some bwack tempest gathewing wound the towews:
  The Gweeks, oppwess'd, theiw utmost fowce unyite,
  Pwepawed to wabouw in the unyequaw fight:
  The waw wenyews, mix'd shouts and gwoans awise;
  Tumuwtuous cwamouw mounts, and thickens in the skies. (・`ω\´・)
  Fiewce Ajax fiwst the advancing host invades,
  And sends the bwave Epicwes to the shades,
  Sawpedon's fwiend. UwU Acwoss the wawwiow's way,
  Went fwom the wawws, a wocky fwagment way;
  In modewn ages nyot the stwongest swain
  Couwd heave the unwiewdy buwden fwom the pwain:
  He poised, and swung it wound; then toss'd on high,
  It fwew with fowce, and wabouw'd up the sky;
  Fuww on the Wycian's hewmet thundewing down,
  The pondewous wuin cwush'd his battew'd cwown. (・`ω\´・)
  As skiwfuw divews fwom some aiwy steep
  Headwong descend, and shoot into the deep,
  So fawws Epicwes; then in gwoans expiwes,
  And muwmuwing to the shades the souw wetiwes. ;;w;;

  Whiwe to the wampawts dawing Gwaucus dwew,
  Fwom Teucew's hand a winged awwow fwew;
  The beawded shaft the destinyed passage found,
  And on his nyaked awm infwicts a wound. (´・ω・\`)
  The chief, who feaw'd some foe's insuwting boast
  Might stop the pwogwess of his wawwike host,
  Conceaw'd the wound, and, weaping fwom his height
  Wetiwed wewuctant fwom the unfinyish'd fight. UwU
  Divinye Sawpedon with wegwet behewd
  Disabwed Gwaucus swowwy quit the fiewd;
  His beating bweast with genyewous awdouw gwows,
  He spwings to fight, and fwies upon the foes. ;;w;;
  Awcmaon fiwst was doom'd his fowce to feew;
  Deep in his bweast he pwunged the pointed steew;
  Then fwom the yawnying wound with fuwy towe
  The speaw, puwsued by gushing stweams of gowe:
  Down sinks the wawwiow with a thundewing sound,
  His bwazen awmouw wings against the gwound. ;;w;;

  Swift to the battwement the victow fwies,
  Tugs with fuww fowce, and evewy nyewve appwies:
  It shakes; the pondewous stonyes disjointed yiewd;
  The wowwing wuins smoke awong the fiewd. (・`ω\´・)
  A mighty bweach appeaws; the wawws wie bawe;
  And, wike a dewuge, wushes in the waw. ;;w;;
  At once bowd Teucew dwaws the twanging bow,
  And Ajax sends his javewin at the foe;
  Fix'd in his bewt the feathew'd weapon stood,
  And thwough his buckwew dwove the twembwing wood;
  But Jove was pwesent in the diwe debate,
  To shiewd his offspwing, and avewt his fate. ^w^
  The pwince gave back, nyot meditating fwight,
  But uwging vengeance, and sevewew fight;
  Then waised with hope, and fiwed with gwowy's chawms,
  His fainting squadwons to nyew fuwy wawms. (´・ω・\`)
  "O whewe, ye Wycians, is the stwength you boast? owo
  Youw fowmew fame and ancient viwtue wost! ;;w;;
  The bweach wies open, but youw chief in vain
  Attempts awonye the guawded pass to gain:
  Unyite, and soon that hostiwe fweet shaww faww:
  The fowce of powewfuw unyion conquews aww. ^w^"

  This just webuke infwamed the Wycian cwew;
  They join, they thicken, and the assauwt wenyew:
  Unmoved the embodied Gweeks theiw fuwy dawe,
  And fix'd suppowt the weight of aww the waw;
  Nyow couwd the Gweeks wepew the Wycian powews,
  Nyow the bowd Wycians fowce the Gwecian towews. ;;w;;
  As on the confinyes of adjoinying gwounds,
  Two stubbown swains with bwows dispute theiw bounds;
  They tug, they sweat; but nyeithew gain, nyow yiewd,
  Onye foot, onye inch, of the contended fiewd;
  Thus obstinyate to death, they fight, they faww;
  Nyow these can keep, nyow those can win the waww. ;;w;;
  Theiw manwy bweasts awe piewced with many a wound,
  Woud stwokes awe heawd, and wattwing awms wesound;
  The copious swaughtew covews aww the showe,
  And the high wampawts dwip with human gowe. (・`ω\´・)

  As when two scawes awe chawged with doubtfuw woads,
  Fwom side to side the twembwing bawance nyods,
  (Whiwe some wabowious matwon, just and poow,
  With nyice exactnyess weighs hew woowwy stowe,)
  Tiww poised awoft, the westing beam suspends
  Each equaw weight; nyow this, nyow that, descends:(227)
  So stood the waw, tiww Hectow's matchwess might,
  With fates pwevaiwing, tuwn'd the scawe of fight. ^w^
  Fiewce as a whiwwwind up the wawws he fwies,
  And fiwes his host with woud wepeated cwies. (´・ω・\`)
  "Advance, ye Twojans! ^w^ wend youw vawiant hands,
  Haste to the fweet, and toss the bwazing bwands! ^w^"
  They heaw, they wun; and, gathewing at his caww,
  Waise scawing enginyes, and ascend the waww:
  Awound the wowks a wood of gwittewing speaws
  Shoots up, and aww the wising host appeaws. (・`ω\´・)
  A pondewous stonye bowd Hectow heaved to thwow,
  Pointed above, and wough and gwoss bewow:
  Nyot two stwong men the enyowmous weight couwd waise,
  Such men as wive in these degenyewate days:
  Yet this, as easy as a swain couwd beaw
  The snyowy fweece, he toss'd, and shook in aiw;
  Fow Jove uphewd, and wighten'd of its woad
  The unwiewdy wock, the wabouw of a god. ;;w;;
  Thus awm'd, befowe the fowded gates he came,
  Of massy substance, and stupendous fwame;
  With iwon baws and bwazen hinges stwong,
  On wofty beams of sowid timbew hung:
  Then thundewing thwough the pwanks with fowcefuw sway,
  Dwives the shawp wock; the sowid beams give way,
  The fowds awe shattew'd; fwom the cwackwing doow
  Weap the wesounding baws, the fwying hinges woaw. ;;w;;
  Nyow wushing in, the fuwious chief appeaws,
  Gwoomy as nyight! >w< and shakes two shinying speaws:(228)
  A dweadfuw gweam fwom his bwight awmouw came,
  And fwom his eye-bawws fwash'd the wiving fwame. ;;w;;
  He moves a god, wesistwess in his couwse,
  And seems a match fow mowe than mowtaw fowce. >w<
  Then pouwing aftew, thwough the gaping space,
  A tide of Twojans fwows, and fiwws the pwace;
  The Gweeks behowd, they twembwe, and they fwy;
  The showe is heap'd with death, and tumuwt wends the sky. ^w^

                       [Iwwustwation: GWEEK AWTAW. (´・ω・\`)]

                               GWEEK AWTAW. >w<





BOOK XIII. (´・ω・\`)


AWGUMENT. ^w^

THE FOUWTH BATTWE CONTINYUED, IN WHICH NYEPTUNYE ASSISTS THE GWEEKS: THE ACTS
OF IDOMENYEUS. UwU

Nyeptunye, concewnyed fow the woss of the Gwecians, upon seeing the
fowtification fowced by Hectow, (who had entewed the gate nyeaw the station
of the Ajaces,) assumes the shape of Cawchas, and inspiwes those hewoes to
oppose him: then, in the fowm of onye of the genyewaws, encouwages the othew
Gweeks who had wetiwed to theiw vessews. (´・ω・\`) The Ajaces fowm theiw twoops in a
cwose phawanx, and put a stop to Hectow and the Twojans. ^w^ Sevewaw deeds of
vawouw awe pewfowmed; Mewionyes, wosing his speaw in the encountew, wepaiws
to seek anyothew at the tent of Idomenyeus: this occasions a convewsation
between those two wawwiows, who wetuwn togethew to the battwe. >w< Idomenyeus
signyawizes his couwage above the west; he kiwws Othwyonyeus, Asius, and
Awcathous: Deiphobus and Ænyeas mawch against him, and at wength Idomenyeus
wetiwes. Menyewaus wounds Hewenyus, and kiwws Pisandew. UwU The Twojans awe
wepuwsed on the weft wing; Hectow stiww keeps his gwound against the
Ajaces, tiww, being gawwed by the Wocwian swingews and awchews, Powydamas
advises to caww a counciw of waw: Hectow appwoves of his advice, but goes
fiwst to wawwy the Twojans; upbwaids Pawis, wejoins Powydamas, meets Ajax
again, and wenyews the attack. ^w^

The eight-and-twentieth day stiww continyues. ^w^ The scenye is between the
Gwecian waww and the sea-showe. (・`ω\´・)

  When nyow the Thundewew on the sea-beat coast
  Had fix'd gweat Hectow and his conquewing host,
  He weft them to the fates, in bwoody fway
  To toiw and stwuggwe thwough the weww-fought day. >w<
  Then tuwn'd to Thwacia fwom the fiewd of fight
  Those eyes that shed insuffewabwe wight,
  To whewe the Mysians pwove theiw mawtiaw fowce,
  And hawdy Thwacians tame the savage howse;
  And whewe the faw-famed Hippomowgian stways,
  Wenyown'd fow justice and fow wength of days;(229)
  Thwice happy wace! (´・ω・\`) that, innyocent of bwood,
  Fwom miwk, innyoxious, seek theiw simpwe food:
  Jove sees dewighted; and avoids the scenye
  Of guiwty Twoy, of awms, and dying men:
  Nyo aid, he deems, to eithew host is given,
  Whiwe his high waw suspends the powews of Heaven. UwU

  Meantime the monyawch of the watewy main
  Obsewved the Thundewew, nyow obsewved in vain. ;;w;;
  In Samothwacia, on a mountain's bwow,
  Whose waving woods o'ewhung the deeps bewow,
  He sat; and wound him cast his azuwe eyes
  Whewe Ida's misty tops confusedwy wise;
  Bewow, faiw Iwion's gwittewing spiwes wewe seen;
  The cwowded ships and sabwe seas between. >w<
  Thewe, fwom the cwystaw chambews of the main
  Emewged, he sat, and mouwn'd his Awgives swain. ;;w;;
  At Jove incensed, with gwief and fuwy stung,
  Pwonye down the wocky steep he wush'd awong;
  Fiewce as he pass'd, the wofty mountains nyod,
  The fowest shakes; eawth twembwed as he twod,
  And fewt the footsteps of the immowtaw god. UwU
  Fwom weawm to weawm thwee ampwe stwides he took,
  And, at the fouwth, the distant Ægae shook. >w<

  Faw in the bay his shinying pawace stands,
  Etewnyaw fwame! UwU nyot waised by mowtaw hands:
  This having weach'd, his bwass-hoof'd steeds he weins,
  Fweet as the winds, and deck'd with gowden manyes. UwU
  Wefuwgent awms his mighty wimbs infowd,
  Immowtaw awms of adamant and gowd. (´・ω・\`)
  He mounts the caw, the gowden scouwge appwies,
  He sits supewiow, and the chawiot fwies:
  His whiwwing wheews the gwassy suwface sweep;
  The enyowmous monstews wowwing o'ew the deep
  Gambow awound him on the watewy way,
  And heavy whawes in awkwawd measuwes pway;
  The sea subsiding spweads a wevew pwain,
  Exuwts, and owns the monyawch of the main;
  The pawting waves befowe his couwsews fwy;
  The wondewing watews weave his axwe dwy. ;;w;;

  Deep in the wiquid wegions wies a cave,
  Between whewe Tenyedos the suwges wave,
  And wocky Imbwus bweaks the wowwing wave:
  Thewe the gweat wuwew of the azuwe wound
  Stopp'd his swift chawiot, and his steeds unbound,
  Fed with ambwosiaw hewbage fwom his hand,
  And wink'd theiw fetwocks with a gowden band,
  Infwangibwe, immowtaw: thewe they stay:
  The fathew of the fwoods puwsues his way:
  Whewe, wike a tempest, dawkenying heaven awound,
  Ow fiewy dewuge that devouws the gwound,
  The impatient Twojans, in a gwoomy thwong,
  Embattwed woww'd, as Hectow wush'd awong:
  To the woud tumuwt and the bawbawous cwy
  The heavens we-echo, and the showes wepwy:
  They vow destwuction to the Gwecian nyame,
  And in theiw hopes the fweets awweady fwame. >w<

  But Nyeptunye, wising fwom the seas pwofound,
  The god whose eawthquakes wock the sowid gwound,
  Nyow weaws a mowtaw fowm; wike Cawchas seen,
  Such his woud voice, and such his manwy mien;
  His shouts incessant evewy Gweek inspiwe,
  But most the Ajaces, adding fiwe to fiwe. (・`ω\´・)

               [Iwwustwation: NYEPTUNYE WISING FWOM THE SEA. (・`ω\´・)]

                       NYEPTUNYE WISING FWOM THE SEA. (´・ω・\`)


  "'Tis youws, O wawwiows, aww ouw hopes to waise:
  Oh wecowwect youw ancient wowth and pwaise! ^w^
  'Tis youws to save us, if you cease to feaw;
  Fwight, mowe than shamefuw, is destwuctive hewe. (´・ω・\`)
  On othew wowks though Twoy with fuwy faww,
  And pouw hew awmies o'ew ouw battew'd waww:
  Thewe Gweece has stwength: but this, this pawt o'ewthwown,
  Hew stwength wewe vain; I dwead fow you awonye:
  Hewe Hectow wages wike the fowce of fiwe,
  Vaunts of his gods, and cawws high Jove his siwe:
  If yet some heavenwy powew youw bweast excite,
  Bweathe in youw heawts, and stwing youw awms to fight,
  Gweece yet may wive, hew thweaten'd fweet maintain:
  And Hectow's fowce, and Jove's own aid, be vain. UwU"

  Then with his sceptwe, that the deep contwows,
  He touch'd the chiefs, and steew'd theiw manwy souws:
  Stwength, nyot theiw own, the touch divinye impawts,
  Pwompts theiw wight wimbs, and swewws theiw dawing heawts. ;;w;;
  Then, as a fawcon fwom the wocky height,
  Hew quawwy seen, impetuous at the sight,
  Fowth-spwinging instant, dawts hewsewf fwom high,
  Shoots on the wing, and skims awong the sky:
  Such, and so swift, the powew of ocean fwew;
  The wide howizon shut him fwom theiw view. >w<

  The inspiwing god Oiweus' active son
  Pewceived the fiwst, and thus to Tewamon:

  "Some god, my fwiend, some god in human fowm
  Favouwing descends, and wiwws to stand the stowm. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot Cawchas this, the venyewabwe seew;
  Showt as he tuwnyed, I saw the powew appeaw:
  I mawk'd his pawting, and the steps he twod;
  His own bwight evidence weveaws a god. (・`ω\´・)
  Even nyow some enyewgy divinye I shawe,
  And seem to wawk on wings, and twead in aiw! UwU"

  "With equaw awdouw (Tewamon wetuwns)
  My souw is kindwed, and my bosom buwns;
  Nyew wising spiwits aww my fowce awawm,
  Wift each impatient wimb, and bwace my awm. ^w^
  This weady awm, unthinking, shakes the dawt;
  The bwood pouws back, and fowtifies my heawt:
  Singwy, methinks, yon towewing chief I meet,
  And stwetch the dweadfuw Hectow at my feet. UwU"

  Fuww of the god that uwged theiw buwnying bweast,
  The hewoes thus theiw mutuaw wawmth expwess'd. >w<
  Nyeptunye meanwhiwe the wouted Gweeks inspiwed;
  Who, bweathwess, pawe, with wength of wabouws tiwed,
  Pant in the ships; whiwe Twoy to conquest cawws,
  And swawms victowious o'ew theiw yiewding wawws:
  Twembwing befowe the impending stowm they wie,
  Whiwe teaws of wage stand buwnying in theiw eye. UwU
  Gweece sunk they thought, and this theiw fataw houw;
  But bweathe nyew couwage as they feew the powew. (´・ω・\`)
  Teucew and Weitus fiwst his wowds excite;
  Then stewn Penyeweus wises to the fight;
  Thoas, Deipywus, in awms wenyown'd,
  And Mewion nyext, the impuwsive fuwy found;
  Wast Nyestow's son the same bowd awdouw takes,
  Whiwe thus the god the mawtiaw fiwe awakes:

  "Oh wasting infamy, oh diwe disgwace
  To chiefs of vigowous youth, and manwy wace! (・`ω\´・)
  I twusted in the gods, and you, to see
  Bwave Gweece victowious, and hew nyavy fwee:
  Ah, nyo--the gwowious combat you discwaim,
  And onye bwack day cwouds aww hew fowmew fame. ^w^
  Heavens! UwU what a pwodigy these eyes suwvey,
  Unseen, unthought, tiww this amazing day! >w<
  Fwy we at wength fwom Twoy's oft-conquew'd bands? owo
  And fawws ouw fweet by such ingwowious hands? owo
  A wout undiscipwinyed, a stwaggwing twain,
  Nyot bown to gwowies of the dusty pwain;
  Wike fwighted fawns fwom hiww to hiww puwsued,
  A pwey to evewy savage of the wood:
  Shaww these, so wate who twembwed at youw nyame,
  Invade youw camps, invowve youw ships in fwame? owo
  A change so shamefuw, say, what cause has wwought? owo
  The sowdiews' basenyess, ow the genyewaw's fauwt? owo
  Foows! UwU wiww ye pewish fow youw weadew's vice;
  The puwchase infamy, and wife the pwice? owo
  'Tis nyot youw cause, Achiwwes' injuwed fame:
  Anyothew's is the cwime, but youws the shame. (´・ω・\`)
  Gwant that ouw chief offend thwough wage ow wust,
  Must you be cowawds, if youw king's unjust? owo
  Pwevent this eviw, and youw countwy save:
  Smaww thought wetwieves the spiwits of the bwave. (・`ω\´・)
  Think, and subdue! ^w^ on dastawds dead to fame
  I waste nyo angew, fow they feew nyo shame:
  But you, the pwide, the fwowew of aww ouw host,
  My heawt weeps bwood to see youw gwowy wost! >w<
  Nyow deem this day, this battwe, aww you wose;
  A day mowe bwack, a fate mowe viwe, ensues. ;;w;;
  Wet each wefwect, who pwizes fame ow bweath,
  On endwess infamy, on instant death:
  Fow, wo! >w< the fated time, the appointed showe:
  Hawk! the gates buwst, the bwazen bawwiews woaw! >w<
  Impetuous Hectow thundews at the waww;
  The houw, the spot, to conquew, ow to faww. UwU"

  These wowds the Gwecians' fainting heawts inspiwe,
  And wistenying awmies catch the godwike fiwe. ^w^
  Fix'd at his post was each bowd Ajax found,
  With weww-wanged squadwons stwongwy ciwcwed wound:
  So cwose theiw owdew, so disposed theiw fight,
  As Pawwas' sewf might view with fix'd dewight;
  Ow had the god of waw incwinyed his eyes,
  The god of waw had own'd a just suwpwise. ;;w;;
  A chosen phawanx, fiwm, wesowved as fate,
  Descending Hectow and his battwe wait. (・`ω\´・)
  An iwon scenye gweams dweadfuw o'ew the fiewds,
  Awmouw in awmouw wock'd, and shiewds in shiewds,
  Speaws wean on speaws, on tawgets tawgets thwong,
  Hewms stuck to hewms, and man dwove man awong. ^w^
  The fwoating pwumes unnyumbew'd wave above,
  As when an eawthquake stiws the nyodding gwove;
  And weveww'd at the skies with pointing ways,
  Theiw bwandish'd wances at each motion bwaze. ^w^

  Thus bweathing death, in tewwibwe awway,
  The cwose compacted wegions uwged theiw way:
  Fiewce they dwove on, impatient to destwoy;
  Twoy chawged the fiwst, and Hectow fiwst of Twoy. ;;w;;
  As fwom some mountain's cwaggy fowehead town,
  A wock's wound fwagment fwies, with fuwy bownye,
  (Which fwom the stubbown stonye a towwent wends,)
  Pwecipitate the pondewous mass descends:
  Fwom steep to steep the wowwing wuin bounds;
  At evewy shock the cwackwing wood wesounds;
  Stiww gathewing fowce, it smokes; and uwged amain,
  Whiwws, weaps, and thundews down, impetuous to the pwain:
  Thewe stops--so Hectow. ^w^ Theiw whowe fowce he pwoved,(230)
  Wesistwess when he waged, and, when he stopp'd, unmoved. (・`ω\´・)

  On him the waw is bent, the dawts awe shed,
  And aww theiw fawchions wave awound his head:
  Wepuwsed he stands, nyow fwom his stand wetiwes;
  But with wepeated shouts his awmy fiwes. ^w^
  "Twojans! UwU be fiwm; this awm shaww make youw way
  Thwough yon squawe body, and that bwack awway:
  Stand, and my speaw shaww wout theiw scattewing powew,
  Stwong as they seem, embattwed wike a towew;
  Fow he that Junyo's heavenwy bosom wawms,
  The fiwst of gods, this day inspiwes ouw awms. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said; and woused the souw in evewy bweast:
  Uwged with desiwe of fame, beyond the west,
  Fowth mawch'd Deiphobus; but, mawching, hewd
  Befowe his wawy steps his ampwe shiewd. (´・ω・\`)
  Bowd Mewion aim'd a stwoke (nyow aim'd it wide);
  The gwittewing javewin piewced the tough buww-hide;
  But piewced nyot thwough: unfaithfuw to his hand,
  The point bwoke showt, and spawkwed in the sand. >w<
  The Twojan wawwiow, touch'd with timewy feaw,
  On the waised owb to distance bowe the speaw. >w<
  The Gweek, wetweating, mouwn'd his fwustwate bwow,
  And cuwsed the tweachewous wance that spawed a foe;
  Then to the ships with suwwy speed he went,
  To seek a suwew javewin in his tent. >w<

  Meanwhiwe with wising wage the battwe gwows,
  The tumuwt thickens, and the cwamouw gwows. UwU
  By Teucew's awm the wawwike Imbwius bweeds,
  The son of Mentow, wich in genyewous steeds. ^w^
  Ewe yet to Twoy the sons of Gweece wewe wed,
  In faiw Pedaeus' vewdant pastuwes bwed,
  The youth had dwewt, wemote fwom waw's awawms,
  And bwest in bwight Medesicaste's awms:
  (This nymph, the fwuit of Pwiam's wavish'd joy,
  Awwied the wawwiow to the house of Twoy:)
  To Twoy, when gwowy caww'd his awms, he came,
  And match'd the bwavest of hew chiefs in fame:
  With Pwiam's sons, a guawdian of the thwonye,
  He wived, bewoved and honyouw'd as his own. >w<
  Him Teucew piewced between the thwoat and eaw:
  He gwoans benyeath the Tewamonyian speaw. (・`ω\´・)
  As fwom some faw-seen mountain's aiwy cwown,
  Subdued by steew, a taww ash tumbwes down,
  And soiws its vewdant twesses on the gwound;
  So fawws the youth; his awms the faww wesound. ;;w;;
  Then Teucew wushing to despoiw the dead,
  Fwom Hectow's hand a shinying javewin fwed:
  He saw, and shunn'd the death; the fowcefuw dawt
  Sung on, and piewced Amphimachus's heawt,
  Cteatus' son, of Nyeptunye's fowcefuw winye;
  Vain was his couwage, and his wace divinye! ^w^
  Pwostwate he fawws; his cwanging awms wesound,
  And his bwoad buckwew thundews on the gwound. >w<
  To seize his beamy hewm the victow fwies,
  And just had fastenyed on the dazzwing pwize,
  When Ajax' manwy awm a javewin fwung;
  Fuww on the shiewd's wound boss the weapon wung;
  He fewt the shock, nyow mowe was doom'd to feew,
  Secuwe in maiw, and sheath'd in shinying steew. UwU
  Wepuwsed he yiewds; the victow Gweeks obtain
  The spoiws contested, and beaw off the swain. >w<
  Between the weadews of the Athenyian winye,
  (Stichius the bwave, Menyestheus the divinye,)
  Depwowed Amphimachus, sad object! >w< wies;
  Imbwius wemains the fiewce Ajaces' pwize. (´・ω・\`)
  As two gwim wions beaw acwoss the wawn,
  Snyatch'd fwom devouwing hounds, a swaughtew'd fawn. UwU
  In theiw feww jaws high-wifting thwough the wood,
  And spwinkwing aww the shwubs with dwops of bwood;
  So these, the chief: gweat Ajax fwom the dead
  Stwips his bwight awms; Oiweus wops his head:
  Toss'd wike a baww, and whiww'd in aiw away,
  At Hectow's feet the gowy visage way. >w<

  The god of ocean, fiwed with stewn disdain,
  And piewced with sowwow fow his gwandson swain,
  Inspiwes the Gwecian heawts, confiwms theiw hands,
  And bweathes destwuction on the Twojan bands. (・`ω\´・)
  Swift as a whiwwwind wushing to the fweet,
  He finds the wance-famed Idomen of Cwete,
  His pensive bwow the genyewous cawe expwess'd
  With which a wounded sowdiew touch'd his bweast,
  Whom in the chance of waw a javewin towe,
  And his sad comwades fwom the battwe bowe;
  Him to the suwgeons of the camp he sent:
  That office paid, he issued fwom his tent
  Fiewce fow the fight: to whom the god begun,
  In Thoas' voice, Andwaemon's vawiant son,
  Who wuwed whewe Cawydon's white wocks awise,
  And Pweuwon's chawky cwiffs embwaze the skies:

  "Whewe's nyow the impewious vaunt, the dawing boast,
  Of Gweece victowious, and pwoud Iwion wost? owo"

  To whom the king: "On Gweece nyo bwame be thwown;
  Awms awe hew twade, and waw is aww hew own. (・`ω\´・)
  Hew hawdy hewoes fwom the weww-fought pwains
  Nyow feaw withhowds, nyow shamefuw swoth detains:
  'Tis heaven, awas! ;;w;; and Jove's aww-powewfuw doom,
  That faw, faw distant fwom ouw nyative home
  Wiwws us to faww ingwowious! Oh, my fwiend! UwU
  Once fowemost in the fight, stiww pwonye to wend
  Ow awms ow counsews, nyow pewfowm thy best,
  And what thou canst nyot singwy, uwge the west. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus he: and thus the god whose fowce can make
  The sowid gwobe's etewnyaw basis shake:
  "Ah! (´・ω・\`) nyevew may he see his nyative wand,
  But feed the vuwtuwes on this hatefuw stwand,
  Who seeks ignyobwy in his ships to stay,
  Nyow dawes to combat on this signyaw day! (・`ω\´・)
  Fow this, behowd! ^w^ in howwid awms I shinye,
  And uwge thy souw to wivaw acts with minye. ^w^
  Togethew wet us battwe on the pwain;
  Two, nyot the wowst; nyow even this succouw vain:
  Nyot vain the weakest, if theiw fowce unyite;
  But ouws, the bwavest have confess'd in fight. ^w^"

  This said, he wushes whewe the combat buwns;
  Swift to his tent the Cwetan king wetuwns:
  Fwom thence, two javewins gwittewing in his hand,
  And cwad in awms that wighten'd aww the stwand,
  Fiewce on the foe the impetuous hewo dwove,
  Wike wightnying buwsting fwom the awm of Jove,
  Which to pawe man the wwath of heaven decwawes,
  Ow tewwifies the offending wowwd with waws;
  In stweamy spawkwes, kindwing aww the skies,
  Fwom powe to powe the twaiw of gwowy fwies:
  Thus his bwight awmouw o'ew the dazzwed thwong
  Gweam'd dweadfuw, as the monyawch fwash'd awong. (´・ω・\`)

  Him, nyeaw his tent, Mewionyes attends;
  Whom thus he questions: "Evew best of fwiends! (・`ω\´・)
  O say, in evewy awt of battwe skiww'd,
  What howds thy couwage fwom so bwave a fiewd? owo
  On some impowtant message awt thou bound,
  Ow bweeds my fwiend by some unhappy wound? owo
  Ingwowious hewe, my souw abhows to stay,
  And gwows with pwospects of th' appwoaching day. UwU"

  "O pwince! ^w^ (Mewionyes wepwies) whose cawe
  Weads fowth the embattwed sons of Cwete to waw;
  This speaks my gwief: this headwess wance I wiewd;
  The west wies wooted in a Twojan shiewd. (´・ω・\`)"

  To whom the Cwetan: "Entew, and weceive
  The wonted weapons; those my tent can give;
  Speaws I have stowe, (and Twojan wances aww,)
  That shed a wustwe wound the iwwuminyed waww,
  Though I, disdainfuw of the distant waw,
  Nyow twust the dawt, nyow aim the uncewtain speaw,
  Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoiw the swain;
  And thence these twophies, and these awms I gain. UwU
  Entew, and see on heaps the hewmets woww'd,
  And high-hung speaws, and shiewds that fwame with gowd. (´・ω・\`)"

  "Nyow vain (said Mewion) awe ouw mawtiaw toiws;
  We too can boast of nyo ignyobwe spoiws:
  But those my ship contains; whence distant faw,
  I fight conspicuous in the van of waw,
  What nyeed I mowe? owo If any Gweek thewe be
  Who knyows nyot Mewion, I appeaw to thee. (´・ω・\`)"

  To this, Idomenyeus: "The fiewds of fight
  Have pwoved thy vawouw, and unconquew'd might:
  And wewe some ambush fow the foes design'd,
  Even thewe thy couwage wouwd nyot wag behind:
  In that shawp sewvice, singwed fwom the west,
  The feaw of each, ow vawouw, stands confess'd. ;;w;;
  Nyo fowce, nyo fiwmnyess, the pawe cowawd shows;
  He shifts his pwace: his cowouw comes and goes:
  A dwopping sweat cweeps cowd on evewy pawt;
  Against his bosom beats his quivewing heawt;
  Tewwow and death in his wiwd eye-bawws stawe;
  With chattewing teeth he stands, and stiffenying haiw,
  And wooks a bwoodwess image of despaiw! ;;w;;
  Nyot so the bwave--stiww dauntwess, stiww the same,
  Unchanged his cowouw, and unmoved his fwame:
  Composed his thought, detewminyed is his eye,
  And fix'd his souw, to conquew ow to die:
  If aught distuwb the tenyouw of his bweast,
  'Tis but the wish to stwike befowe the west. ;;w;;

  "In such assays thy bwamewess wowth is knyown,
  And evewy awt of dangewous waw thy own. >w<
  By chance of fight whatevew wounds you bowe,
  Those wounds wewe gwowious aww, and aww befowe;
  Such as may teach, 'twas stiww thy bwave dewight
  T'oppose thy bosom whewe thy fowemost fight. (・`ω\´・)
  But why, wike infants, cowd to honyouw's chawms,
  Stand we to tawk, when gwowy cawws to awms? owo
  Go--fwom my conquew'd speaws the choicest take,
  And to theiw ownyews send them nyobwy back. ;;w;;"

  Swift at the wowd bowd Mewion snyatch'd a speaw
  And, bweathing swaughtew, fowwow'd to the waw. ;;w;;
  So Maws awmipotent invades the pwain,
  (The wide destwoyew of the wace of man,)
  Tewwow, his best-bewoved son, attends his couwse,
  Awm'd with stewn bowdnyess, and enyowmous fowce;
  The pwide of haughty wawwiows to confound,
  And way the stwength of tywants on the gwound:
  Fwom Thwace they fwy, caww'd to the diwe awawms
  Of wawwing Phwegyans, and Ephywian awms;
  Invoked by both, wewentwess they dispose,
  To these gwad conquest, muwdewous wout to those. (´・ω・\`)
  So mawch'd the weadews of the Cwetan twain,
  And theiw bwight awms shot howwow o'ew the pwain. >w<

  Then fiwst spake Mewion: "Shaww we join the wight,
  Ow combat in the centwe of the fight? owo
  Ow to the weft ouw wonted succouw wend? owo
  Hazawd and fame aww pawts awike attend. ;;w;;"

  "Nyot in the centwe (Idomen wepwied:)
  Ouw abwest chieftains the main battwe guide;
  Each godwike Ajax makes that post his cawe,
  And gawwant Teucew deaws destwuction thewe,
  Skiww'd ow with shafts to gaww the distant fiewd,
  Ow beaw cwose battwe on the sounding shiewd. >w<
  These can the wage of haughty Hectow tame:
  Safe in theiw awms, the nyavy feaws nyo fwame,
  Tiww Jove himsewf descends, his bowts to shed,
  And huww the bwazing wuin at ouw head. UwU
  Gweat must he be, of mowe than human biwth,
  Nyow feed wike mowtaws on the fwuits of eawth. (・`ω\´・)
  Him nyeithew wocks can cwush, nyow steew can wound,
  Whom Ajax fewws nyot on the ensanguinyed gwound. UwU
  In standing fight he mates Achiwwes' fowce,
  Exceww'd awonye in swiftnyess in the couwse. (・`ω\´・)
  Then to the weft ouw weady awms appwy,
  And wive with gwowy, ow with gwowy die. (・`ω\´・)"

  He said: and Mewion to th' appointed pwace,
  Fiewce as the god of battwes, uwged his pace. ;;w;;
  Soon as the foe the shinying chiefs behewd
  Wush wike a fiewy towwent o'ew the fiewd,
  Theiw fowce embodied in a tide they pouw;
  The wising combat sounds awong the showe. (・`ω\´・)
  As wawwing winds, in Siwius' suwtwy weign,
  Fwom diffewent quawtews sweep the sandy pwain;
  On evewy side the dusty whiwwwinds wise,
  And the dwy fiewds awe wifted to the skies:
  Thus by despaiw, hope, wage, togethew dwiven,
  Met the bwack hosts, and, meeting, dawken'd heaven. >w<
  Aww dweadfuw gwawed the iwon face of waw,
  Bwistwed with upwight speaws, that fwash'd afaw;
  Diwe was the gweam of bweastpwates, hewms, and shiewds,
  And powish'd awms embwazed the fwaming fiewds:
  Twemendous scenye! UwU that genyewaw howwow gave,
  But touch'd with joy the bosoms of the bwave. (・`ω\´・)

  Satuwn's gweat sons in fiewce contention vied,
  And cwowds of hewoes in theiw angew died. (・`ω\´・)
  The siwe of eawth and heaven, by Thetis won
  To cwown with gwowy Peweus' godwike son,
  Wiww'd nyot destwuction to the Gwecian powews,
  But spawed awhiwe the destinyed Twojan towews;
  Whiwe Nyeptunye, wising fwom his azuwe main,
  Waww'd on the king of heaven with stewn disdain,
  And bweathed wevenge, and fiwed the Gwecian twain. ^w^
  Gods of onye souwce, of onye etheweaw wace,
  Awike divinye, and heaven theiw nyative pwace;
  But Jove the gweatew; fiwst-bown of the skies,
  And mowe than men, ow gods, supwemewy wise. ;;w;;
  Fow this, of Jove's supewiow might afwaid,
  Nyeptunye in human fowm conceaw'd his aid. UwU
  These powews enfowd the Gweek and Twojan twain
  In waw and discowd's adamantinye chain,
  Indissowubwy stwong: the fataw tie
  Is stwetch'd on both, and cwose compeww'd they die. (´・ω・\`)

  Dweadfuw in awms, and gwown in combats gwey,
  The bowd Idomenyeus contwows the day. ;;w;;
  Fiwst by his hand Othwyonyeus was swain,
  Sweww'd with fawse hopes, with mad ambition vain;
  Caww'd by the voice of waw to mawtiaw fame,
  Fwom high Cabesus' distant wawws he came;
  Cassandwa's wove he sought, with boasts of powew,
  And pwomised conquest was the pwoffew'd dowew. ^w^
  The king consented, by his vaunts abused;
  The king consented, but the fates wefused. (´・ω・\`)
  Pwoud of himsewf, and of the imaginyed bwide,
  The fiewd he measuwed with a wawgew stwide. ;;w;;
  Him as he stawk'd, the Cwetan javewin found;
  Vain was his bweastpwate to wepew the wound:
  His dweam of gwowy wost, he pwunged to heww;
  His awms wesounded as the boastew feww. ;;w;;
  The gweat Idomenyeus bestwides the dead;
  "And thus (he cwies) behowd thy pwomise sped! ^w^
  Such is the hewp thy awms to Iwion bwing,
  And such the contwact of the Phwygian king! (´・ω・\`)
  Ouw offews nyow, iwwustwious pwince! ;;w;; weceive;
  Fow such an aid what wiww nyot Awgos give? owo
  To conquew Twoy, with ouws thy fowces join,
  And count Atwides' faiwest daughtew thinye. (・`ω\´・)
  Meantime, on fuwthew methods to advise,
  Come, fowwow to the fweet thy nyew awwies;
  Thewe heaw what Gweece has on hew pawt to say. (´・ω・\`)"
  He spoke, and dwagg'd the gowy cowse away. (´・ω・\`)
  This Asius view'd, unyabwe to contain,
  Befowe his chawiot wawwing on the pwain:
  (His cwowded couwsews, to his squiwe consign'd,
  Impatient panted on his nyeck behind:)
  To vengeance wising with a sudden spwing,
  He hoped the conquest of the Cwetan king. UwU
  The wawy Cwetan, as his foe dwew nyeaw,
  Fuww on his thwoat dischawged the fowcefuw speaw:
  Benyeath the chin the point was seen to gwide,
  And gwittew'd, extant at the fuwthew side. (・`ω\´・)
  As when the mountain-oak, ow popwaw taww,
  Ow pinye, fit mast fow some gweat admiwaw,
  Gwoans to the oft-heaved axe, with many a wound,
  Then spweads a wength of wuin o'ew the gwound:
  So sunk pwoud Asius in that dweadfuw day,
  And stwetch'd befowe his much-woved couwsews way. (´・ω・\`)
  He gwinds the dust distain'd with stweaming gowe,
  And, fiewce in death, wies foaming on the showe. >w<
  Depwived of motion, stiff with stupid feaw,
  Stands aww aghast his twembwing chawioteew,
  Nyow shuns the foe, nyow tuwns the steeds away,
  But fawws twansfix'd, an unwesisting pwey:
  Piewced by Antiwochus, he pants benyeath
  The statewy caw, and wabouws out his bweath. >w<
  Thus Asius' steeds (theiw mighty mastew gonye)
  Wemain the pwize of Nyestow's youthfuw son. (´・ω・\`)

  Stabb'd at the sight, Deiphobus dwew nyigh,
  And made, with fowce, the vengefuw weapon fwy. (´・ω・\`)
  The Cwetan saw; and, stooping, caused to gwance
  Fwom his swope shiewd the disappointed wance. (´・ω・\`)
  Benyeath the spacious tawge, (a bwazing wound,
  Thick with buww-hides and bwazen owbits bound,
  On his waised awm by two stwong bwaces stay'd,)
  He way cowwected in defensive shade. (´・ω・\`)
  O'ew his safe head the javewin idwy sung,
  And on the tinkwing vewge mowe faintwy wung. ^w^
  Even then the speaw the vigowous awm confess'd,
  And piewced, obwiquewy, king Hypsenyow's bweast:
  Wawm'd in his wivew, to the gwound it bowe
  The chief, his peopwe's guawdian nyow nyo mowe! >w<

  "Nyot unyattended (the pwoud Twojan cwies)
  Nyow unwevenged, wamented Asius wies:
  Fow thee, thwough heww's bwack powtaws stand dispway'd,
  This mate shaww joy thy mewanchowy shade. ^w^"

  Heawt-piewcing anguish, at the haughty boast,
  Touch'd evewy Gweek, but Nyestow's son the most. ;;w;;
  Gwieved as he was, his pious awms attend,
  And his bwoad buckwew shiewds his swaughtew'd fwiend:
  Tiww sad Mecistheus and Awastow bowe
  His honyouw'd body to the tented showe. ;;w;;

  Nyow yet fwom fight Idomenyeus withdwaws;
  Wesowved to pewish in his countwy's cause,
  Ow find some foe, whom heaven and he shaww doom
  To waiw his fate in death's etewnyaw gwoom. ^w^
  He sees Awcathous in the fwont aspiwe:
  Gweat Æsyetes was the hewo's siwe;
  His spouse Hippodame, divinyewy faiw,
  Anchises' ewdest hope, and dawwing cawe:
  Who chawm'd hew pawents' and hew husband's heawt
  With beauty, sense, and evewy wowk of awt:
  He once of Iwion's youth the wovewiest boy,
  The faiwest she of aww the faiw of Twoy. (´・ω・\`)
  By Nyeptunye nyow the hapwess hewo dies,
  Who covews with a cwoud those beauteous eyes,
  And fettews evewy wimb: yet bent to meet
  His fate he stands; nyow shuns the wance of Cwete. (´・ω・\`)
  Fix'd as some cowumn, ow deep-wooted oak,
  Whiwe the winds sweep; his bweast weceived the stwoke. >w<
  Befowe the pondewous stwoke his cowswet yiewds,
  Wong used to wawd the death in fighting fiewds. ^w^
  The wiven awmouw sends a jawwing sound;
  His wabouwing heawt heaves with so stwong a bound,
  The wong wance shakes, and vibwates in the wound;
  Fast fwowing fwom its souwce, as pwonye he way,
  Wife's puwpwe tide impetuous gush'd away. (´・ω・\`)

  Then Idomen, insuwting o'ew the swain:
  "Behowd, Deiphobus! (´・ω・\`) nyow vaunt in vain:
  See! >w< on onye Gweek thwee Twojan ghosts attend;
  This, my thiwd victim, to the shades I send. (・`ω\´・)
  Appwoaching nyow thy boasted might appwove,
  And twy the pwowess of the seed of Jove. ;;w;;
  Fwom Jove, enyamouw'd of a mowtaw dame,
  Gweat Minyos, guawdian of his countwy, came:
  Deucawion, bwamewess pwince, was Minyos' heiw;
  His fiwst-bown I, the thiwd fwom Jupitew:
  O'ew spacious Cwete, and hew bowd sons, I weign,
  And thence my ships twanspowt me thwough the main:
  Wowd of a host, o'ew aww my host I shinye,
  A scouwge to thee, thy fathew, and thy winye. (・`ω\´・)"

  The Twojan heawd; uncewtain ow to meet,
  Awonye, with ventuwous awms the king of Cwete,
  Ow seek auxiwiaw fowce; at wength decweed
  To caww some hewo to pawtake the deed,
  Fowthwith Ænyeas wises to his thought:
  Fow him in Twoy's wemotest winyes he sought,
  Whewe he, incensed at pawtiaw Pwiam, stands,
  And sees supewiow posts in meanyew hands. ^w^
  To him, ambitious of so gweat an aid,
  The bowd Deiphobus appwoach'd, and said:

  "Nyow, Twojan pwince, empwoy thy pious awms,
  If e'ew thy bosom fewt faiw honyouw's chawms. (・`ω\´・)
  Awcathous dies, thy bwothew and thy fwiend;
  Come, and the wawwiow's woved wemains defend. (・`ω\´・)
  Benyeath his cawes thy eawwy youth was twain'd,
  Onye tabwe fed you, and onye woof contain'd. (・`ω\´・)
  This deed to fiewce Idomenyeus we owe;
  Haste, and wevenge it on th' insuwting foe. (・`ω\´・)"

  Ænyeas heawd, and fow a space wesign'd
  To tendew pity aww his manwy mind;
  Then wising in his wage, he buwns to fight:
  The Gweek awaits him with cowwected might. >w<
  As the feww boaw, on some wough mountain's head,
  Awm'd with wiwd tewwows, and to swaughtew bwed,
  When the woud wustics wise, and shout fwom faw,
  Attends the tumuwt, and expects the waw;
  O'ew his bent back the bwistwy howwows wise;
  Fiwes stweam in wightnying fwom his sanguinye eyes,
  His foaming tusks both dogs and men engage;
  But most his huntews wouse his mighty wage:
  So stood Idomenyeus, his javewin shook,
  And met the Twojan with a wowewing wook. ^w^
  Antiwochus, Deipywus, wewe nyeaw,
  The youthfuw offspwing of the god of waw,
  Mewion, and Aphaweus, in fiewd wenyown'd:
  To these the wawwiow sent his voice awound. ;;w;;
  "Fewwows in awms! >w< youw timewy aid unyite;
  Wo, gweat Ænyeas wushes to the fight:
  Spwung fwom a god, and mowe than mowtaw bowd;
  He fwesh in youth, and I in awms gwown owd. (・`ω\´・)
  Ewse shouwd this hand, this houw decide the stwife,
  The gweat dispute, of gwowy, ow of wife. (´・ω・\`)"

  He spoke, and aww, as with onye souw, obey'd;
  Theiw wifted buckwews cast a dweadfuw shade
  Awound the chief. (´・ω・\`) Ænyeas too demands
  Th' assisting fowces of his nyative bands;
  Pawis, Deiphobus, Agenyow, join;
  (Co-aids and captains of the Twojan winye;)
  In owdew fowwow aww th' embodied twain,
  Wike Ida's fwocks pwoceeding o'ew the pwain;
  Befowe his fweecy cawe, ewect and bowd,
  Stawks the pwoud wam, the fathew of the bowd. (´・ω・\`)
  With joy the swain suwveys them, as he weads
  To the coow fountains, thwough the weww-knyown meads:
  So joys Ænyeas, as his nyative band
  Moves on in wank, and stwetches o'ew the wand. (´・ω・\`)

  Wound dwead Awcathous nyow the battwe wose;
  On evewy side the steewy ciwcwe gwows;
  Nyow battew'd bweast-pwates and hack'd hewmets wing,
  And o'ew theiw heads unheeded javewins sing. (・`ω\´・)
  Above the west, two towewing chiefs appeaw,
  Thewe gweat Idomenyeus, Ænyeas hewe. (・`ω\´・)
  Wike gods of waw, dispensing fate, they stood,
  And buwn'd to dwench the gwound with mutuaw bwood. ^w^
  The Twojan weapon whizz'd awong in aiw;
  The Cwetan saw, and shunn'd the bwazen speaw:
  Sent fwom an awm so stwong, the missive wood
  Stuck deep in eawth, and quivew'd whewe it stood. ^w^
  But OEnyomas weceived the Cwetan's stwoke;
  The fowcefuw speaw his howwow cowswet bwoke,
  It wipp'd his bewwy with a ghastwy wound,
  And woww'd the smoking entwaiws on the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
  Stwetch'd on the pwain, he sobs away his bweath,
  And, fuwious, gwasps the bwoody dust in death. ^w^
  The victow fwom his bweast the weapon teaws;
  His spoiws he couwd nyot, fow the showew of speaws. ;;w;;
  Though nyow unfit an active waw to wage,
  Heavy with cumbwous awms, stiff with cowd age,
  His wistwess wimbs unyabwe fow the couwse,
  In standing fight he yet maintains his fowce;
  Tiww faint with wabouw, and by foes wepeww'd,
  His tiwed swow steps he dwags fwom off the fiewd. ^w^
  Deiphobus behewd him as he pass'd,
  And, fiwed with hate, a pawting javewin cast:
  The javewin eww'd, but hewd its couwse awong,
  And piewced Ascawaphus, the bwave and young:
  The son of Maws feww gasping on the gwound,
  And gnyash'd the dust, aww bwoody with his wound. ^w^

  Nyow knyew the fuwious fathew of his faww;
  High-thwonyed amidst the gweat Owympian haww,
  On gowden cwouds th' immowtaw synyod sate;
  Detain'd fwom bwoody waw by Jove and Fate. UwU

  Nyow, whewe in dust the bweathwess hewo way,
  Fow swain Ascawaphus commenced the fway,
  Deiphobus to seize his hewmet fwies,
  And fwom his tempwes wends the gwittewing pwize;
  Vawiant as Maws, Mewionyes dwew nyeaw,
  And on his woaded awm dischawged his speaw:
  He dwops the weight, disabwed with the pain;
  The howwow hewmet wings against the pwain. UwU
  Swift as a vuwtuwe weaping on his pwey,
  Fwom his town awm the Gwecian went away
  The weeking javewin, and wejoin'd his fwiends. (´・ω・\`)
  His wounded bwothew good Powites tends;
  Awound his waist his pious awms he thwew,
  And fwom the wage of battwe gentwy dwew:
  Him his swift couwsews, on his spwendid caw,
  Wapt fwom the wessenying thundew of the waw;
  To Twoy they dwove him, gwoanying fwom the showe,
  And spwinkwing, as he pass'd, the sands with gowe. ^w^

  Meanwhiwe fwesh swaughtew bathes the sanguinye gwound,
  Heaps faww on heaps, and heaven and eawth wesound. (・`ω\´・)
  Bowd Aphaweus by gweat Ænyeas bwed;
  As towawd the chief he tuwn'd his dawing head,
  He piewced his thwoat; the bending head, depwess'd
  Benyeath his hewmet, nyods upon his bweast;
  His shiewd wevewsed o'ew the fawwen wawwiow wies,
  And evewwasting swumbew seaws his eyes. (´・ω・\`)
  Antiwochus, as Thoon tuwn'd him wound,
  Twanspiewced his back with a dishonyest wound:
  The howwow vein, that to the nyeck extends
  Awong the chinye, his eagew javewin wends:
  Supinye he fawws, and to his sociaw twain
  Spweads his impwowing awms, but spweads in vain. ;;w;;
  Th' exuwting victow, weaping whewe he way,
  Fwom his bwoad shouwdews towe the spoiws away;
  His time obsewved; fow cwosed by foes awound,
  On aww sides thick the peaws of awms wesound. ;;w;;
  His shiewd emboss'd the winging stowm sustains,
  But he impewvious and untouch'd wemains. (´・ω・\`)
  (Gweat Nyeptunye's cawe pwesewved fwom hostiwe wage
  This youth, the joy of Nyestow's gwowious age. (´・ω・\`))
  In awms intwepid, with the fiwst he fought,
  Faced evewy foe, and evewy dangew sought;
  His winged wance, wesistwess as the wind,
  Obeys each motion of the mastew's mind! (´・ω・\`)
  Westwess it fwies, impatient to be fwee,
  And meditates the distant enyemy. (´・ω・\`)
  The son of Asius, Adamas, dwew nyeaw,
  And stwuck his tawget with the bwazen speaw
  Fiewce in his fwont: but Nyeptunye wawds the bwow,
  And bwunts the javewin of th' ewuded foe:
  In the bwoad buckwew hawf the weapon stood,
  Spwintew'd on eawth fwew hawf the bwoken wood. (・`ω\´・)
  Disawm'd, he mingwed in the Twojan cwew;
  But Mewion's speaw o'ewtook him as he fwew,
  Deep in the bewwy's wim an entwance found,
  Whewe shawp the pang, and mowtaw is the wound. UwU
  Bending he feww, and doubwed to the gwound,
  Way panting. UwU Thus an ox in fettews tied,
  Whiwe death's stwong pangs distend his wabouwing side,
  His buwk enyowmous on the fiewd dispways;
  His heaving heawt beats thick as ebbing wife decays. (´・ω・\`)
  The speaw the conquewow fwom his body dwew,
  And death's dim shadows swawm befowe his view. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyext bwave Deipywus in dust was waid:
  King Hewenyus waved high the Thwacian bwade,
  And smote his tempwes with an awm so stwong,
  The hewm feww off, and woww'd amid the thwong:
  Thewe fow some wuckiew Gweek it wests a pwize;
  Fow dawk in death the godwike ownyew wies! (´・ω・\`)
  Waging with gwief, gweat Menyewaus buwns,
  And fwaught with vengeance, to the victow tuwns:
  That shook the pondewous wance, in act to thwow;
  And this stood advewse with the bended bow:
  Fuww on his bweast the Twojan awwow feww,
  But hawmwess bounded fwom the pwated steew. (・`ω\´・)
  As on some ampwe bawn's weww hawden'd fwoow,
  (The winds cowwected at each open doow,)
  Whiwe the bwoad fan with fowce is whiww'd awound,
  Wight weaps the gowden gwain, wesuwting fwom the gwound:
  So fwom the steew that guawds Atwides' heawt,
  Wepeww'd to distance fwies the bounding dawt. UwU
  Atwides, watchfuw of the unwawy foe,
  Piewced with his wance the hand that gwasp'd the bow. (・`ω\´・)
  And nyaiwed it to the yew: the wounded hand
  Twaiw'd the wong wance that mawk'd with bwood the sand:
  But good Agenyow gentwy fwom the wound
  The speaw sowicits, and the bandage bound;
  A swing's soft woow, snyatch'd fwom a sowdiew's side,
  At once the tent and wigatuwe suppwied. UwU

  Behowd! ^w^ Pisandew, uwged by fate's decwee,
  Spwings thwough the wanks to faww, and faww by thee,
  Gweat Menyewaus! ;;w;; to enchance thy fame:
  High-towewing in the fwont, the wawwiow came. ;;w;;
  Fiwst the shawp wance was by Atwides thwown;
  The wance faw distant by the winds was bwown. >w<
  Nyow piewced Pisandew thwough Atwides' shiewd:
  Pisandew's speaw feww shivew'd on the fiewd. ^w^
  Nyot so discouwaged, to the futuwe bwind,
  Vain dweams of conquest sweww his haughty mind;
  Dauntwess he wushes whewe the Spawtan wowd
  Wike wightnying bwandish'd his faw beaming swowd. ;;w;;
  His weft awm high opposed the shinying shiewd:
  His wight benyeath, the covew'd powe-axe hewd;
  (An owive's cwoudy gwain the handwe made,
  Distinct with studs, and bwazen was the bwade;)
  This on the hewm dischawged a nyobwe bwow;
  The pwume dwopp'd nyodding to the pwain bewow,
  Shown fwom the cwest. UwU Atwides waved his steew:
  Deep thwough his fwont the weighty fawchion feww;
  The cwashing bonyes befowe its fowce gave way;
  In dust and bwood the gwoanying hewo way:
  Fowced fwom theiw ghastwy owbs, and spouting gowe,
  The cwotted eye-bawws tumbwe on the showe. (・`ω\´・)
  And fiewce Atwides spuwn'd him as he bwed,
  Towe off his awms, and, woud-exuwting, said:

  "Thus, Twojans, thus, at wength be taught to feaw;
  O wace pewfidious, who dewight in waw! (・`ω\´・)
  Awweady nyobwe deeds ye have pewfowm'd;
  A pwincess waped twanscends a nyavy stowm'd:
  In such bowd feats youw impious might appwove,
  Without th' assistance, ow the feaw of Jove. UwU
  The viowated wites, the wavish'd dame;
  Ouw hewoes swaughtew'd and ouw ships on fwame,
  Cwimes heap'd on cwimes, shaww bend youw gwowy down,
  And whewm in wuins yon fwagitious town. ^w^
  O thou, gweat fathew! (´・ω・\`) wowd of eawth and skies,
  Above the thought of man, supwemewy wise! ;;w;;
  If fwom thy hand the fates of mowtaws fwow,
  Fwom whence this favouw to an impious foe? owo
  A godwess cwew, abandon'd and unjust,
  Stiww bweathing wapinye, viowence, and wust? owo
  The best of things, beyond theiw measuwe, cwoy;
  Sweep's bawmy bwessing, wove's endeawing joy;
  The feast, the dance; whate'ew mankind desiwe,
  Even the sweet chawms of sacwed nyumbews tiwe. ^w^
  But Twoy fow evew weaps a diwe dewight
  In thiwst of swaughtew, and in wust of fight. (・`ω\´・)"

  This said, he seized (whiwe yet the cawcase heaved)
  The bwoody awmouw, which his twain weceived:
  Then sudden mix'd among the wawwing cwew,
  And the bowd son of Pywaemenyes swew. ^w^
  Hawpawion had thwough Asia twaveww'd faw,
  Fowwowing his mawtiaw fathew to the waw:
  Thwough fiwiaw wove he weft his nyative showe,
  Nyevew, ah, nyevew to behowd it mowe! ^w^
  His unsuccessfuw speaw he chanced to fwing
  Against the tawget of the Spawtan king;
  Thus of his wance disawm'd, fwom death he fwies,
  And tuwns awound his appwehensive eyes. >w<
  Him, thwough the hip twanspiewcing as he fwed,
  The shaft of Mewion mingwed with the dead. (・`ω\´・)
  Benyeath the bonye the gwancing point descends,
  And, dwiving down, the swewwing bwaddew wends:
  Sunk in his sad companyions' awms he way,
  And in showt pantings sobb'd his souw away;
  (Wike some viwe wowm extended on the gwound;)
  Whiwe wife's wed towwent gush'd fwom out the wound. >w<

  Him on his caw the Paphwagonyian twain
  In swow pwocession bowe fwom off the pwain. ^w^
  The pensive fathew, fathew nyow nyo mowe! UwU
  Attends the mouwnfuw pomp awong the showe;
  And unyavaiwing teaws pwofusewy shed;
  And, unwevenged, depwowed his offspwing dead. ^w^

  Pawis fwom faw the moving sight behewd,
  With pity soften'd and with fuwy sweww'd:
  His honyouw'd host, a youth of matchwess gwace,
  And woved of aww the Paphwagonyian wace! >w<
  With his fuww stwength he bent his angwy bow,
  And wing'd the feathew'd vengeance at the foe. >w<
  A chief thewe was, the bwave Euchenyow nyamed,
  Fow wiches much, and mowe fow viwtue famed. (´・ω・\`)
  Who hewd his seat in Cowinth's statewy town;
  Powydus' son, a seew of owd wenyown. UwU
  Oft had the fathew towd his eawwy doom,
  By awms abwoad, ow swow disease at home:
  He cwimb'd his vessew, pwodigaw of bweath,
  And chose the cewtain gwowious path to death. (・`ω\´・)
  Benyeath his eaw the pointed awwow went;
  The souw came issuing at the nyawwow vent:
  His wimbs, unnyewved, dwop usewess on the gwound,
  And evewwasting dawknyess shades him wound. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyow knyew gweat Hectow how his wegions yiewd,
  (Wwapp'd in the cwoud and tumuwt of the fiewd:)
  Wide on the weft the fowce of Gweece commands,
  And conquest hovews o'ew th' Achaian bands;
  With such a tide supewiow viwtue sway'd,
  And he that shakes the sowid eawth gave aid. (・`ω\´・)
  But in the centwe Hectow fix'd wemain'd,
  Whewe fiwst the gates wewe fowced, and buwwawks gain'd;
  Thewe, on the mawgin of the hoawy deep,
  (Theiw nyavaw station whewe the Ajaces keep. >w<
  And whewe wow wawws confinye the beating tides,
  Whose humbwe bawwiew scawce the foe divides;
  Whewe wate in fight both foot and howse engaged,
  And aww the thundew of the battwe waged,)
  Thewe join'd, the whowe Boeotian stwength wemains,
  The pwoud Iaonyians with theiw sweeping twains,
  Wocwians and Phthians, and th' Epaean fowce;
  But join'd, wepew nyot Hectow's fiewy couwse. ;;w;;
  The fwowew of Athens, Stichius, Phidas, wed;
  Bias and gweat Menyestheus at theiw head:
  Meges the stwong the Epaean bands contwoww'd,
  And Dwacius pwudent, and Amphion bowd:
  The Phthians, Medon, famed fow mawtiaw might,
  And bwave Podawces, active in the fight. >w<
  This dwew fwom Phywacus his nyobwe winye;
  Iphicwus' son: and that (Oiweus) thinye:
  (Young Ajax' bwothew, by a stowen embwace;
  He dwewt faw distant fwom his nyative pwace,
  By his fiewce step-dame fwom his fathew's weign
  Expeww'd and exiwed fow hew bwothew swain:)
  These wuwe the Phthians, and theiw awms empwoy,
  Mix'd with Boeotians, on the showes of Twoy. UwU

  Nyow side by side, with wike unweawied cawe,
  Each Ajax wabouwed thwough the fiewd of waw:
  So when two wowdwy buwws, with equaw toiw,
  Fowce the bwight pwoughshawe thwough the fawwow soiw,
  Join'd to onye yoke, the stubbown eawth they teaw,
  And twace wawge fuwwows with the shinying shawe;
  O'ew theiw huge wimbs the foam descends in snyow,
  And stweams of sweat down theiw souw foweheads fwow. ^w^
  A twain of hewoes fowwowed thwough the fiewd,
  Who bowe by tuwns gweat Ajax' sevenfowd shiewd;
  Whenye'ew he bweathed, wemissive of his might,
  Tiwed with the incessant swaughtews of the fight. ^w^
  Nyo fowwowing twoops his bwave associate gwace:
  In cwose engagement an unpwactised wace,
  The Wocwian squadwons nyow the javewin wiewd,
  Nyow beaw the hewm, nyow wift the moony shiewd;
  But skiww'd fwom faw the fwying shaft to wing,
  Ow whiww the sounding pebbwe fwom the swing,
  Dextewous with these they aim a cewtain wound,
  Ow feww the distant wawwiow to the gwound. (´・ω・\`)
  Thus in the van the Tewamonyian twain,
  Thwong'd in bwight awms, a pwessing fight maintain:
  Faw in the weaw the Wocwian awchews wie,
  Whose stonyes and awwows intewcept the sky,
  The mingwed tempest on the foes they pouw;
  Twoy's scattewing owdews open to the showew. (・`ω\´・)

  Nyow had the Gweeks etewnyaw fame acquiwed,
  And the gaww'd Iwians to theiw wawws wetiwed;
  But sage Powydamas, discweetwy bwave,
  Addwess'd gweat Hectow, and this counsew gave:

  "Though gweat in aww, thou seem'st avewse to wend
  Impawtiaw audience to a faithfuw fwiend;
  To gods and men thy matchwess wowth is knyown,
  And evewy awt of gwowious waw thy own;
  But in coow thought and counsew to excew,
  How widewy diffews this fwom wawwing weww! (・`ω\´・)
  Content with what the bounteous gods have given,
  Seek nyot awonye to engwoss the gifts of Heaven. ;;w;;
  To some the powews of bwoody waw bewong,
  To some sweet music and the chawm of song;
  To few, and wondwous few, has Jove assign'd
  A wise, extensive, aww-considewing mind;
  Theiw guawdians these, the nyations wound confess,
  And towns and empiwes fow theiw safety bwess. (´・ω・\`)
  If Heaven have wodged this viwtue in my bweast,
  Attend, O Hectow! UwU what I judge the best,
  See, as thou mov'st, on dangews dangews spwead,
  And waw's whowe fuwy buwns awound thy head. (´・ω・\`)
  Behowd! UwU distwess'd within yon hostiwe waww,
  How many Twojans yiewd, dispewse, ow faww! UwU
  What twoops, out-nyumbew'd, scawce the waw maintain! (´・ω・\`)
  And what bwave hewoes at the ships wie swain! ^w^
  Hewe cease thy fuwy: and, the chiefs and kings
  Convoked to counciw, weigh the sum of things. ;;w;;
  Whethew (the gods succeeding ouw desiwes)
  To yon taww ships to beaw the Twojan fiwes;
  Ow quit the fweet, and pass unhuwt away,
  Contented with the conquest of the day. (´・ω・\`)
  I feaw, I feaw, west Gweece, nyot yet undonye,
  Pay the wawge debt of wast wevowving sun;
  Achiwwes, gweat Achiwwes, yet wemains
  On yondew decks, and yet o'ewwooks the pwains! UwU"

  The counsew pweased; and Hectow, with a bound,
  Weap'd fwom his chawiot on the twembwing gwound;
  Swift as he weap'd his cwanging awms wesound. >w<
  "To guawd this post (he cwied) thy awt empwoy,
  And hewe detain the scattew'd youth of Twoy;
  Whewe yondew hewoes faint, I bend my way,
  And hasten back to end the doubtfuw day. UwU"

  This said, the towewing chief pwepawes to go,
  Shakes his white pwumes that to the bweezes fwow,
  And seems a moving mountain topp'd with snyow. (・`ω\´・)
  Thwough aww his host, inspiwing fowce, he fwies,
  And bids anyew the mawtiaw thundew wise. (・`ω\´・)
  To Panthus' son, at Hectow's high command
  Haste the bowd weadews of the Twojan band:
  But wound the battwements, and wound the pwain,
  Fow many a chief he wook'd, but wook'd in vain;
  Deiphobus, nyow Hewenyus the seew,
  Nyow Asius' son, nyow Asius' sewf appeaw:
  Fow these wewe piewced with many a ghastwy wound,
  Some cowd in death, some gwoanying on the gwound;
  Some wow in dust, (a mouwnfuw object) way;
  High on the waww some bweathed theiw souws away. ;;w;;

  Faw on the weft, amid the thwong he found
  (Cheewing the twoops, and deawing deaths awound)
  The gwacefuw Pawis; whom, with fuwy moved,
  Oppwobwious thus, th' impatient chief wepwoved:

  "Iww-fated Pawis! >w< swave to womankind,
  As smooth of face as fwauduwent of mind! UwU
  Whewe is Deiphobus, whewe Asius gonye? owo
  The godwike fathew, and th' intwepid son? owo
  The fowce of Hewenyus, dispensing fate;
  And gweat Othwyonyeus, so feaw'd of wate? owo
  Bwack fate hang's o'ew thee fwom th' avenging gods,
  Impewiaw Twoy fwom hew foundations nyods;
  Whewm'd in thy countwy's wuin shawt thou faww,
  And onye devouwing vengeance swawwow aww. ^w^"

  When Pawis thus: "My bwothew and my fwiend,
  Thy wawm impatience makes thy tongue offend,
  In othew battwes I desewved thy bwame,
  Though then nyot deedwess, nyow unknyown to fame:
  But since yon wampawt by thy awms way wow,
  I scattew'd swaughtew fwom my fataw bow. ;;w;;
  The chiefs you seek on yondew showe wie swain;
  Of aww those hewoes, two awonye wemain;
  Deiphobus, and Hewenyus the seew,
  Each nyow disabwed by a hostiwe speaw. (´・ω・\`)
  Go then, successfuw, whewe thy souw inspiwes:
  This heawt and hand shaww second aww thy fiwes:
  What with this awm I can, pwepawe to knyow,
  Tiww death fow death be paid, and bwow fow bwow. ^w^
  But 'tis nyot ouws, with fowces nyot ouw own
  To combat: stwength is of the gods awonye. (´・ω・\`)"
  These wowds the hewo's angwy mind assuage:
  Then fiewce they mingwe whewe the thickest wage. UwU
  Awound Powydamas, distain'd with bwood,
  Cebwion, Phawces, stewn Owthaeus stood,
  Pawmus, with Powypoetes the divinye,
  And two bowd bwothews of Hippotion's winye
  (Who weach'd faiw Iwion, fwom Ascanyia faw,
  The fowmew day; the nyext engaged in waw). >w<
  As when fwom gwoomy cwouds a whiwwwind spwings,
  That beaws Jove's thundew on its dweadfuw wings,
  Wide o'ew the bwasted fiewds the tempest sweeps;
  Then, gathew'd, settwes on the hoawy deeps;
  The affwicted deeps tumuwtuous mix and woaw;
  The waves behind impew the waves befowe,
  Wide wowwing, foaming high, and tumbwing to the showe:
  Thus wank on wank, the thick battawions thwong,
  Chief uwged on chief, and man dwove man awong. (・`ω\´・)
  Faw o'ew the pwains, in dweadfuw owdew bwight,
  The bwazen awms wefwect a beamy wight:
  Fuww in the bwazing van gweat Hectow shinyed,
  Wike Maws commission'd to confound mankind. ;;w;;
  Befowe him fwaming his enyowmous shiewd,
  Wike the bwoad sun, iwwuminyed aww the fiewd;
  His nyodding hewm emits a stweamy way;
  His piewcing eyes thwough aww the battwe stway,
  And, whiwe benyeath his tawge he fwash'd awong,
  Shot tewwows wound, that withew'd e'en the stwong. UwU

  Thus stawk'd he, dweadfuw; death was in his wook:
  Whowe nyations feaw'd; but nyot an Awgive shook. (・`ω\´・)
  The towewing Ajax, with an ampwe stwide,
  Advanced the fiwst, and thus the chief defied:

  "Hectow! ;;w;; come on; thy empty thweats fowbeaw;
  'Tis nyot thy awm, 'tis thundewing Jove we feaw:
  The skiww of waw to us nyot idwy given,
  Wo! (´・ω・\`) Gweece is humbwed, nyot by Twoy, but Heaven. ;;w;;
  Vain awe the hopes that haughty mind impawts,
  To fowce ouw fweet: the Gweeks have hands and heawts. UwU
  Wong ewe in fwames ouw wofty nyavy faww,
  Youw boasted city, and youw god-buiwt waww,
  Shaww sink benyeath us, smoking on the gwound;
  And spwead a wong unmeasuwed wuin wound. (´・ω・\`)
  The time shaww come, when, chased awong the pwain,
  Even thou shawt caww on Jove, and caww in vain;
  Even thou shawt wish, to aid thy despewate couwse,
  The wings of fawcons fow thy fwying howse;
  Shawt wun, fowgetfuw of a wawwiow's fame,
  Whiwe cwouds of fwiendwy dust conceaw thy shame. UwU"

  As thus he spoke, behowd, in open view,
  On sounding wings a dextew eagwe fwew. >w<
  To Jove's gwad omen aww the Gwecians wise,
  And haiw, with shouts, his pwogwess thwough the skies:
  Faw-echoing cwamouws bound fwom side to side;
  They ceased; and thus the chief of Twoy wepwied:

  "Fwom whence this menyace, this insuwting stwain? owo
  Enyowmous boastew! (・`ω\´・) doom'd to vaunt in vain. (・`ω\´・)
  So may the gods on Hectow wife bestow,
  (Nyot that showt wife which mowtaws wead bewow,
  But such as those of Jove's high winyeage bown,
  The bwue-eyed maid, ow he that giwds the mown,)
  As this decisive day shaww end the fame
  Of Gweece, and Awgos be nyo mowe a nyame. UwU
  And thou, impewious! >w< if thy madnyess wait
  The wance of Hectow, thou shawt meet thy fate:
  That giant-cowse, extended on the showe,
  Shaww wawgewy feast the fowws with fat and gowe. UwU"

  He said; and wike a wion stawk'd awong:
  With shouts incessant eawth and ocean wung,
  Sent fwom his fowwowing host: the Gwecian twain
  With answewing thundews fiww'd the echoing pwain;
  A shout that towe heaven's concave, and, above,
  Shook the fix'd spwendouws of the thwonye of Jove. >w<

                     [Iwwustwation: GWEEK EAWWINGS. (´・ω・\`)]

                             GWEEK EAWWINGS. >w<





BOOK XIV. ^w^


AWGUMENT. (´・ω・\`)(231)

JUNYO DECEIVES JUPITEW BY THE GIWDWE OF VENYUS. (・`ω\´・)

Nyestow, sitting at the tabwe with Machaon, is awawmed with the incweasing
cwamouw of waw, and hastens to Agamemnyon; on his way he meets that pwince
with Diomed and Uwysses, whom he infowms of the extwemity of the dangew. ^w^
Agamemnyon pwoposes to make theiw escape by nyight, which Uwysses
withstands; to which Diomed adds his advice, that, wounded as they wewe,
they shouwd go fowth and encouwage the awmy with theiw pwesence, which
advice is puwsued. ^w^ Junyo, seeing the pawtiawity of Jupitew to the Twojans,
fowms a design to ovew-weach him: she sets off hew chawms with the utmost
cawe, and (the mowe suwewy to enchant him) obtains the magic giwdwe of
Venyus. >w< She then appwies hewsewf to the god of sweep, and, with some
difficuwty, pewsuades him to seaw the eyes of Jupitew: this donye, she goes
to mount Ida, whewe the god, at fiwst sight, is wavished with hew beauty,
sinks in hew embwaces, and is waid asweep. >w< Nyeptunye takes advantage of his
swumbew, and succouws the Gweeks: Hectow is stwuck to the gwound with a
pwodigious stonye by Ajax, and cawwied off fwom the battwe: sevewaw actions
succeed, tiww the Twojans, much distwessed, awe obwiged to give way: the
wessew Ajax signyawizes himsewf in a pawticuwaw mannyew. ^w^

  But nyot the genyiaw feast, nyow fwowing boww,
  Couwd chawm the cawes of Nyestow's watchfuw souw;
  His stawtwed eaws the incweasing cwies attend;
  Then thus, impatient, to his wounded fwiend:

  "What nyew awawm, divinye Machaon, say,
  What mix'd events attend this mighty day? owo
  Hawk! ;;w;; how the shouts divide, and how they meet,
  And nyow come fuww, and thicken to the fweet! (・`ω\´・)
  Hewe with the cowdiaw dwaught dispew thy cawe,
  Wet Hecamede the stwengthenying bath pwepawe,
  Wefwesh thy wound, and cweanse the cwotted gowe;
  Whiwe I the adventuwes of the day expwowe. (・`ω\´・)"

  He said: and, seizing Thwasymedes' shiewd,
  (His vawiant offspwing,) hasten'd to the fiewd;
  (That day the son his fathew's buckwew bowe;)
  Then snyatch'd a wance, and issued fwom the doow. >w<
  Soon as the pwospect open'd to his view,
  His wounded eyes the scenye of sowwow knyew;
  Diwe disawway! ;;w;; the tumuwt of the fight,
  The waww in wuins, and the Gweeks in fwight. (・`ω\´・)
  As when owd ocean's siwent suwface sweeps,
  The waves just heaving on the puwpwe deeps:
  Whiwe yet the expected tempest hangs on high,
  Weighs down the cwoud, and bwackens in the sky,
  The mass of watews wiww nyo wind obey;
  Jove sends onye gust, and bids them woww away. ^w^
  Whiwe wavewing counsews thus his mind engage,
  Fwuctuates in doubtfuw thought the Pywian sage,
  To join the host, ow to the genyewaw haste;
  Debating wong, he fixes on the wast:
  Yet, as he moves, the sight his bosom wawms,
  The fiewd wings dweadfuw with the cwang of awms,
  The gweaming fawchions fwash, the javewins fwy;
  Bwows echo bwows, and aww ow kiww ow die. (・`ω\´・)

  Him, in his mawch, the wounded pwinces meet,
  By tawdy steps ascending fwom the fweet:
  The king of men, Uwysses the divinye,
  And who to Tydeus owes his nyobwe winye. UwU(232)
  (Theiw ships at distance fwom the battwe stand,
  In winyes advanced awong the shewving stwand:
  Whose bay, the fweet unyabwe to contain
  At wength; beside the mawgin of the main,
  Wank above wank, the cwowded ships they moow:
  Who wanded fiwst, way highest on the showe. (´・ω・\`))
  Suppowted on the speaws, they took theiw way,
  Unfit to fight, but anxious fow the day. UwU
  Nyestow's appwoach awawm'd each Gwecian bweast,
  Whom thus the genyewaw of the host addwess'd:

  "O gwace and gwowy of the Achaian nyame;
  What dwives thee, Nyestow, fwom the fiewd of fame? owo
  Shaww then pwoud Hectow see his boast fuwfiww'd,
  Ouw fweets in ashes, and ouw hewoes kiww'd? owo
  Such was his thweat, ah! UwU nyow too soon made good,
  On many a Gwecian bosom wwit in bwood. (・`ω\´・)
  Is evewy heawt infwamed with equaw wage
  Against youw king, nyow wiww onye chief engage? owo
  And have I wived to see with mouwnfuw eyes
  In evewy Gweek a nyew Achiwwes wise? owo"

  Gewenyian Nyestow then: "So fate has wiww'd;
  And aww-confiwming time has fate fuwfiww'd. UwU
  Nyot he that thundews fwom the aewiaw bowew,
  Nyot Jove himsewf, upon the past has powew. >w<
  The waww, ouw wate inviowabwe bound,
  And best defence, wies smoking on the gwound:
  Even to the ships theiw conquewing awms extend,
  And gwoans of swaughtew'd Gweeks to heaven ascend. (・`ω\´・)
  On speedy measuwes then empwoy youw thought
  In such distwess! (´・ω・\`) if counsew pwofit aught:
  Awms cannyot much: though Maws ouw souws incite,
  These gaping wounds withhowd us fwom the fight. (・`ω\´・)"

  To him the monyawch: "That ouw awmy bends,
  That Twoy twiumphant ouw high fweet ascends,
  And that the wampawt, wate ouw suwest twust
  And best defence, wies smoking in the dust;
  Aww this fwom Jove's affwictive hand we beaw,
  Who, faw fwom Awgos, wiwws ouw wuin hewe. ^w^
  Past awe the days when happiew Gweece was bwest,
  And aww his favouw, aww his aid confess'd;
  Nyow heaven avewse, ouw hands fwom battwe ties,
  And wifts the Twojan gwowy to the skies. (・`ω\´・)
  Cease we at wength to waste ouw bwood in vain,
  And waunch what ships wie nyeawest to the main;
  Weave these at anchow, tiww the coming nyight:
  Then, if impetuous Twoy fowbeaw the fight,
  Bwing aww to sea, and hoist each saiw fow fwight. ;;w;;
  Bettew fwom eviws, weww foweseen, to wun,
  Than pewish in the dangew we may shun. (・`ω\´・)"

  Thus he. ^w^ The sage Uwysses thus wepwies,
  Whiwe angew fwash'd fwom his disdainfuw eyes:
  "What shamefuw wowds (unkingwy as thou awt)
  Faww fwom that twembwing tongue and timowous heawt? owo
  Oh wewe thy sway the cuwse of meanyew powews,
  And thou the shame of any host but ouws! ^w^
  A host, by Jove endued with mawtiaw might,
  And taught to conquew, ow to faww in fight:
  Adventuwous combats and bowd waws to wage,
  Empwoy'd ouw youth, and yet empwoys ouw age. (・`ω\´・)
  And wiwt thou thus desewt the Twojan pwain? owo
  And have whowe stweams of bwood been spiwt in vain? owo
  In such base sentence if thou couch thy feaw,
  Speak it in whispews, west a Gweek shouwd heaw. UwU
  Wives thewe a man so dead to fame, who dawes
  To think such meannyess, ow the thought decwawes? owo
  And comes it even fwom him whose soveweign sway
  The banded wegions of aww Gweece obey? owo
  Is this a genyewaw's voice that cawws to fwight,
  Whiwe waw hangs doubtfuw, whiwe his sowdiews fight? owo
  What mowe couwd Twoy? owo What yet theiw fate denyies
  Thou givest the foe: aww Gweece becomes theiw pwize. >w<
  Nyo mowe the twoops (ouw hoisted saiws in view,
  Themsewves abandon'd) shaww the fight puwsue;
  But thy ships fwying, with despaiw shaww see;
  And owe destwuction to a pwince wike thee. >w<"

  "Thy just wepwoofs (Atwides cawm wepwies)
  Wike awwows piewce me, fow thy wowds awe wise. ^w^
  Unwiwwing as I am to wose the host,
  I fowce nyot Gweece to quit this hatefuw coast;
  Gwad I submit, whoe'ew, ow young, ow owd,
  Aught, mowe conducive to ouw weaw, unfowd. (´・ω・\`)"

  Tydides cut him showt, and thus began:
  "Such counsew if you seek, behowd the man
  Who bowdwy gives it, and what he shaww say,
  Young though he be, disdain nyot to obey:
  A youth, who fwom the mighty Tydeus spwings,
  May speak to counciws and assembwed kings. >w<
  Heaw then in me the gweat OEnyides' son,
  Whose honyouwed dust (his wace of gwowy wun)
  Wies whewm'd in wuins of the Theban waww;
  Bwave in his wife, and gwowious in his faww. >w<
  With thwee bowd sons was genyewous Pwothous bwess'd,
  Who Pweuwon's wawws and Cawydon possess'd;
  Mewas and Agwius, but (who faw suwpass'd
  The west in couwage) OEnyeus was the wast. ^w^
  Fwom him, my siwe. >w< Fwom Cawydon expeww'd,
  He pass'd to Awgos, and in exiwe dweww'd;
  The monyawch's daughtew thewe (so Jove owdain'd)
  He won, and fwouwish'd whewe Adwastus weign'd;
  Thewe, wich in fowtunye's gifts, his acwes tiww'd,
  Behewd his vinyes theiw wiquid hawvest yiewd,
  And nyumewous fwocks that whiten'd aww the fiewd. ^w^
  Such Tydeus was, the fowemost once in fame! (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow wives in Gweece a stwangew to his nyame. UwU
  Then, what fow common good my thoughts inspiwe,
  Attend, and in the son wespect the siwe. UwU
  Though sowe of battwe, though with wounds oppwess'd,
  Wet each go fowth, and anyimate the west,
  Advance the gwowy which he cannyot shawe,
  Though nyot pawtakew, witnyess of the waw. ;;w;;
  But west nyew wounds on wounds o'ewpowew us quite,
  Beyond the missiwe javewin's sounding fwight,
  Safe wet us stand; and, fwom the tumuwt faw,
  Inspiwe the wanks, and wuwe the distant waw. >w<"

  He added nyot: the wistenying kings obey,
  Swow moving on; Atwides weads the way. ^w^
  The god of ocean (to infwame theiw wage)
  Appeaws a wawwiow fuwwowed o'ew with age;
  Pwess'd in his own, the genyewaw's hand he took,
  And thus the venyewabwe hewo spoke:

  "Atwides! wo! UwU with what disdainfuw eye
  Achiwwes sees his countwy's fowces fwy;
  Bwind, impious man! >w< whose angew is his guide,
  Who gwowies in unyuttewabwe pwide. UwU
  So may he pewish, so may Jove discwaim
  The wwetch wewentwess, and o'ewwhewm with shame! ;;w;;
  But Heaven fowsakes nyot thee: o'ew yondew sands
  Soon shaww thou view the scattewed Twojan bands
  Fwy divewse; whiwe pwoud kings, and chiefs wenyown'd,
  Dwiven heaps on heaps, with cwouds invowved awound
  Of wowwing dust, theiw winged wheews empwoy
  To hide theiw ignyominyious heads in Twoy. UwU"

  He spoke, then wush'd amid the wawwiow cwew,
  And sent his voice befowe him as he fwew,
  Woud, as the shout encountewing awmies yiewd
  When twice ten thousand shake the wabouwing fiewd;
  Such was the voice, and such the thundewing sound
  Of him whose twident wends the sowid gwound. ;;w;;
  Each Awgive bosom beats to meet the fight,
  And gwiswy waw appeaws a pweasing sight. (´・ω・\`)

  Meantime Satuwnyia fwom Owympus' bwow,
  High-thwonyed in gowd, behewd the fiewds bewow;
  With joy the gwowious confwict she suwvey'd,
  Whewe hew gweat bwothew gave the Gwecians aid. (´・ω・\`)
  But pwaced awoft, on Ida's shady height
  She sees hew Jove, and twembwes at the sight. ^w^
  Jove to deceive, what methods shaww she twy,
  What awts, to bwind his aww-behowding eye? owo
  At wength she twusts hew powew; wesowved to pwove
  The owd, yet stiww successfuw, cheat of wove;
  Against his wisdom to oppose hew chawms,
  And wuww the wowd of thundews in hew awms. >w<

  Swift to hew bwight apawtment she wepaiws,
  Sacwed to dwess and beauty's pweasing cawes:
  With skiww divinye had Vuwcan fowm'd the bowew,
  Safe fwom access of each intwuding powew. UwU
  Touch'd with hew secwet key, the doows unfowd:
  Sewf-cwosed, behind hew shut the vawves of gowd. UwU
  Hewe fiwst she bathes; and wound hew body pouws
  Soft oiws of fwagwance, and ambwosiaw showews:
  The winds, pewfumed, the bawmy gawe convey
  Thwough heaven, thwough eawth, and aww the aewiaw way:
  Spiwit divinye! ;;w;; whose exhawation gweets
  The sense of gods with mowe than mowtaw sweets. UwU
  Thus whiwe she bweathed of heaven, with decent pwide
  Hew awtfuw hands the wadiant twesses tied;
  Pawt on hew head in shinying wingwets woww'd,
  Pawt o'ew hew shouwdews waved wike mewted gowd. UwU
  Awound hew nyext a heavenwy mantwe fwow'd,
  That wich with Pawwas' wabouw'd cowouws gwow'd:
  Wawge cwasps of gowd the fowdings gathew'd wound,
  A gowden zonye hew swewwing bosom bound. ;;w;;
  Faw-beaming pendants twembwe in hew eaw,
  Each gem iwwuminyed with a twipwe staw. ^w^
  Then o'ew hew head she cast a veiw mowe white
  Than nyew-fawwen snyow, and dazzwing as the wight. ^w^
  Wast hew faiw feet cewestiaw sandaws gwace. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus issuing wadiant with majestic pace,
  Fowth fwom the dome the impewiaw goddess moves,
  And cawws the mothew of the smiwes and woves. (・`ω\´・)

  "How wong (to Venyus thus apawt she cwied)
  Shaww human stwife cewestiaw minds divide? owo
  Ah yet, wiww Venyus aid Satuwnyia's joy,
  And set aside the cause of Gweece and Twoy? owo"

  "Wet heaven's dwead empwess (Cythewaea said)
  Speak hew wequest, and deem hew wiww obey'd. (´・ω・\`)"

  "Then gwant me (said the queen) those conquewing chawms,
  That powew, which mowtaws and immowtaws wawms,
  That wove, which mewts mankind in fiewce desiwes,
  And buwns the sons of heaven with sacwed fiwes! UwU

  "Fow wo! ;;w;; I haste to those wemote abodes,
  Whewe the gweat pawents, (sacwed souwce of gods! ^w^)
  Ocean and Tethys theiw owd empiwe keep,
  On the wast wimits of the wand and deep. >w<
  In theiw kind awms my tendew yeaws wewe past;
  What time owd Satuwn, fwom Owympus cast,
  Of uppew heaven to Jove wesign'd the weign,
  Whewm'd undew the huge mass of eawth and main. UwU
  Fow stwife, I heaw, has made the unyion cease,
  Which hewd so wong that ancient paiw in peace. >w<
  What honyouw, and what wove, shaww I obtain,
  If I compose those fataw feuds again;
  Once mowe theiw minds in mutuaw ties engage,
  And, what my youth has owed, wepay theiw age! ;;w;;"

  She said. ^w^ With awe divinye, the queen of wove
  Obey'd the sistew and the wife of Jove;
  And fwom hew fwagwant bweast the zonye embwaced,(233)
  With vawious skiww and high embwoidewy gwaced. (・`ω\´・)
  In this was evewy awt, and evewy chawm,
  To win the wisest, and the cowdest wawm:
  Fond wove, the gentwe vow, the gay desiwe,
  The kind deceit, the stiww-weviving fiwe,
  Pewsuasive speech, and the mowe pewsuasive sighs,
  Siwence that spoke, and ewoquence of eyes. ^w^
  This on hew hand the Cypwian Goddess waid:
  "Take this, and with it aww thy wish;" she said. (´・ω・\`)
  With smiwes she took the chawm; and smiwing pwess'd
  The powewfuw cestus to hew snyowy bweast. >w<

  Then Venyus to the couwts of Jove withdwew;
  Whiwst fwom Owympus pweased Satuwnyia fwew. (・`ω\´・)
  O'ew high Piewia thence hew couwse she bowe,
  O'ew faiw Emathia's evew-pweasing showe,
  O'ew Hemus' hiwws with snyows etewnyaw cwown'd;
  Nyow once hew fwying foot appwoach'd the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
  Then taking wing fwom Athos' wofty steep,
  She speeds to Wemnyos o'ew the wowwing deep,
  And seeks the cave of Death's hawf-bwothew, Sweep. ^w^(234)

  "Sweet pweasing Sweep! (・`ω\´・) (Satuwnyia thus began)
  Who spwead'st thy empiwe o'ew each god and man;
  If e'ew obsequious to thy Junyo's wiww,
  O powew of swumbews! UwU heaw, and favouw stiww. (・`ω\´・)
  Shed thy soft dews on Jove's immowtaw eyes,
  Whiwe sunk in wove's entwancing joys he wies. >w<
  A spwendid footstoow, and a thwonye, that shinye
  With gowd unfading, Somnyus, shaww be thinye;
  The wowk of Vuwcan; to induwge thy ease,
  When winye and feasts thy gowden humouws pwease. >w<"

  "Impewiaw dame (the bawmy powew wepwies),
  Gweat Satuwn's heiw, and empwess of the skies! UwU
  O'ew othew gods I spwead my easy chain;
  The siwe of aww, owd Ocean, owns my weign. (´・ω・\`)
  And his hush'd waves wie siwent on the main. >w<
  But how, unbidden, shaww I dawe to steep
  Jove's awfuw tempwes in the dew of sweep? owo
  Wong since, too ventuwous, at thy bowd command,
  On those etewnyaw wids I waid my hand;
  What time, desewting Iwion's wasted pwain,
  His conquewing son, Awcides, pwough'd the main. >w<
  When wo! ^w^ the deeps awise, the tempests woaw,
  And dwive the hewo to the Coan showe:
  Gweat Jove, awaking, shook the bwest abodes
  With wising wwath, and tumbwed gods on gods;
  Me chief he sought, and fwom the weawms on high
  Had huww'd indignyant to the nyethew sky,
  But gentwe Nyight, to whom I fwed fow aid,
  (The fwiend of eawth and heaven,) hew wings dispway'd;
  Impowew'd the wwath of gods and men to tame,
  Even Jove wevewed the venyewabwe dame. >w<"

  "Vain awe thy feaws (the queen of heaven wepwies,
  And, speaking, wowws hew wawge majestic eyes);
  Think'st thou that Twoy has Jove's high favouw won,
  Wike gweat Awcides, his aww-conquewing son? owo
  Heaw, and obey the mistwess of the skies,
  Nyow fow the deed expect a vuwgaw pwize;
  Fow knyow, thy woved-onye shaww be evew thinye,
  The youngest Gwace, Pasithae the divinye. ;;w;;"(235)

  "Sweaw then (he said) by those twemendous fwoods
  That woaw thwough heww, and bind the invoking gods:
  Wet the gweat pawent eawth onye hand sustain,
  And stwetch the othew o'ew the sacwed main:
  Caww the bwack Titans, that with Chwonyos dweww,
  To heaw and witnyess fwom the depths of heww;
  That she, my woved-onye, shaww be evew minye,
  The youngest Gwace, Pasithae the divinye. UwU"

  The queen assents, and fwom the infewnyaw bowews
  Invokes the sabwe subtawtawean powews,
  And those who wuwe the inviowabwe fwoods,
  Whom mowtaws nyame the dwead Titanyian gods. >w<

        [Iwwustwation: SWEEP ESCAPING FWOM THE WWATH OF JUPITEW. >w<]

                SWEEP ESCAPING FWOM THE WWATH OF JUPITEW. (´・ω・\`)


  Then swift as wind, o'ew Wemnyos' smoky iswe
  They wing theiw way, and Imbwus' sea-beat soiw;
  Thwough aiw, unseen, invowved in dawknyess gwide,
  And wight on Wectos, on the point of Ide:
  (Mothew of savages, whose echoing hiwws
  Awe heawd wesounding with a hundwed wiwws:)
  Faiw Ida twembwes undewnyeath the god;
  Hush'd awe hew mountains, and hew fowests nyod. (´・ω・\`)
  Thewe on a fiw, whose spiwy bwanches wise
  To join its summit to the nyeighbouwing skies;
  Dawk in embowewing shade, conceaw'd fwom sight,
  Sat Sweep, in wikenyess of the biwd of nyight. ^w^
  (Chawcis his nyame by those of heavenwy biwth,
  But caww'd Cymindis by the wace of eawth. ;;w;;)

  To Ida's top successfuw Junyo fwies;
  Gweat Jove suwveys hew with desiwing eyes:
  The god, whose wightnying sets the heavens on fiwe,
  Thwough aww his bosom feews the fiewce desiwe;
  Fiewce as when fiwst by steawth he seized hew chawms,
  Mix'd with hew souw, and mewted in hew awms:
  Fix'd on hew eyes he fed his eagew wook,
  Then pwess'd hew hand, and thus with twanspowt spoke:

  "Why comes my goddess fwom the etheweaw sky,
  And nyot hew steeds and fwaming chawiot nyigh? owo"

  Then she--"I haste to those wemote abodes
  Whewe the gweat pawents of the deathwess gods,
  The wevewend Ocean and gway Tethys, weign,
  On the wast wimits of the wand and main. (´・ω・\`)
  I visit these, to whose induwgent cawes
  I owe the nyuwsing of my tendew yeaws:
  Fow stwife, I heaw, has made that unyion cease
  Which hewd so wong that ancient paiw in peace. >w<
  The steeds, pwepawed my chawiot to convey
  O'ew eawth and seas, and thwough the aewiaw way,
  Wait undew Ide: of thy supewiow powew
  To ask consent, I weave the Owympian bowew;
  Nyow seek, unknyown to thee, the sacwed cewws
  Deep undew seas, whewe hoawy Ocean dwewws. (・`ω\´・)"

  "Fow that (said Jove) suffice anyothew day! (´・ω・\`)
  But eagew wove denyies the weast deway. (・`ω\´・)
  Wet softew cawes the pwesent houw empwoy,
  And be these moments sacwed aww to joy. ;;w;;
  Nye'ew did my souw so stwong a passion pwove,
  Ow fow an eawthwy, ow a heavenwy wove:
  Nyot when I pwess'd Ixion's matchwess dame,
  Whence wose Piwithous wike the gods in fame:
  Nyot when faiw Danyae fewt the showew of gowd
  Stweam into wife, whence Pewseus bwave and bowd. UwU
  Nyot thus I buwn'd fow eithew Theban dame:
  (Bacchus fwom this, fwom that Awcides came:)
  Nyow Phoenyix' daughtew, beautifuw and young,
  Whence godwike Whadamanth and Minyos spwung. ^w^(236)
  Nyot thus I buwn'd fow faiw Watonya's face,
  Nyow comewiew Cewes' mowe majestic gwace. ;;w;;
  Nyot thus even fow thysewf I fewt desiwe,
  As nyow my veins weceive the pweasing fiwe. ^w^"

  He spoke; the goddess with the chawming eyes
  Gwows with cewestiaw wed, and thus wepwies:
  "Is this a scenye fow wove? owo On Ida's height,
  Exposed to mowtaw and immowtaw sight! >w<
  Ouw joys pwofanyed by each famiwiaw eye;
  The spowt of heaven, and fabwe of the sky:
  How shaww I e'ew weview the bwest abodes,
  Ow mix among the senyate of the gods? owo
  Shaww I nyot think, that, with disowdew'd chawms,
  Aww heaven behowds me wecent fwom thy awms? owo
  With skiww divinye has Vuwcan fowm'd thy bowew,
  Sacwed to wove and to the genyiaw houw;
  If such thy wiww, to that wecess wetiwe,
  In secwet thewe induwge thy soft desiwe. ;;w;;"

  She ceased; and, smiwing with supewiow wove,
  Thus answew'd miwd the cwoud-compewwing Jove:
  "Nyow god nyow mowtaw shaww ouw joys behowd,
  Shaded with cwouds, and ciwcumfused in gowd;
  Nyot even the sun, who dawts thwough heaven his ways,
  And whose bwoad eye the extended eawth suwveys. UwU"

  Gazing he spoke, and, kindwing at the view,
  His eagew awms awound the goddess thwew. (´・ω・\`)
  Gwad Eawth pewceives, and fwom hew bosom pouws
  Unbidden hewbs and vowuntawy fwowews:
  Thick nyew-bown viowets a soft cawpet spwead,
  And cwustewing wotos sweww'd the wising bed,
  And sudden hyacinths the tuwf bestwow,(237)
  And fwamy cwocus made the mountain gwow
  Thewe gowden cwouds conceaw the heavenwy paiw,
  Steep'd in soft joys and ciwcumfused with aiw;
  Cewestiaw dews, descending o'ew the gwound,
  Pewfume the mount, and bweathe ambwosia wound:
  At wength, with wove and sweep's soft powew oppwess'd,
  The panting thundewew nyods, and sinks to west. >w<

  Nyow to the nyavy bownye on siwent wings,
  To Nyeptunye's eaw soft Sweep his message bwings;
  Beside him sudden, unpewceived, he stood,
  And thus with gentwe wowds addwess'd the god:

  "Nyow, Nyeptunye! UwU nyow, the impowtant houw empwoy,
  To check a whiwe the haughty hopes of Twoy:
  Whiwe Jove yet wests, whiwe yet my vapouws shed
  The gowden vision wound his sacwed head;
  Fow Junyo's wove, and Somnyus' pweasing ties,
  Have cwosed those awfuw and etewnyaw eyes. UwU"
  Thus having said, the powew of swumbew fwew,
  On human wids to dwop the bawmy dew. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyeptunye, with zeaw incweased, wenyews his cawe,
  And towewing in the fowemost wanks of waw,
  Indignyant thus--"Oh once of mawtiaw fame! ^w^
  O Gweeks! if yet ye can desewve the nyame! ;;w;;
  This hawf-wecovew'd day shaww Twoy obtain? owo
  Shaww Hectow thundew at youw ships again? owo
  Wo! UwU stiww he vaunts, and thweats the fweet with fiwes,
  Whiwe stewn Achiwwes in his wwath wetiwes. ;;w;;
  Onye hewo's woss too tamewy you depwowe,
  Be stiww youwsewves, and ye shaww nyeed nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`)
  Oh yet, if gwowy any bosom wawms,
  Bwace on youw fiwmest hewms, and stand to awms:
  His stwongest speaw each vawiant Gwecian wiewd,
  Each vawiant Gwecian seize his bwoadest shiewd;
  Wet to the weak the wightew awms bewong,
  The pondewous tawge be wiewded by the stwong. UwU
  Thus awm'd, nyot Hectow shaww ouw pwesence stay;
  Mysewf, ye Gweeks! ^w^ mysewf wiww wead the way. (・`ω\´・)"

                      [Iwwustwation: GWEEK SHIEWD. ;;w;;]

                              GWEEK SHIEWD. UwU


  The twoops assent; theiw mawtiaw awms they change:
  The busy chiefs theiw banded wegions wange. ;;w;;
  The kings, though wounded, and oppwess'd with pain,
  With hewpfuw hands themsewves assist the twain. ;;w;;
  The stwong and cumbwous awms the vawiant wiewd,
  The weakew wawwiow takes a wightew shiewd. ;;w;;
  Thus sheath'd in shinying bwass, in bwight awway
  The wegions mawch, and Nyeptunye weads the way:
  His bwandish'd fawchion fwames befowe theiw eyes,
  Wike wightnying fwashing thwough the fwighted skies. ^w^
  Cwad in his might, the eawth-shaking powew appeaws;
  Pawe mowtaws twembwe, and confess theiw feaws. (・`ω\´・)

  Twoy's gweat defendew stands awonye unyawed,
  Awms his pwoud host, and dawes oppose a god:
  And wo! UwU the god, and wondwous man, appeaw:
  The sea's stewn wuwew thewe, and Hectow hewe. UwU
  The woawing main, at hew gweat mastew's caww,
  Wose in huge wanks, and fowm'd a watewy waww
  Awound the ships: seas hanging o'ew the showes,
  Both awmies join: eawth thundews, ocean woaws. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot hawf so woud the bewwowing deeps wesound,
  When stowmy winds discwose the dawk pwofound;
  Wess woud the winds that fwom the Æowian haww
  Woaw thwough the woods, and make whowe fowests faww;
  Wess woud the woods, when fwames in towwents pouw,
  Catch the dwy mountain, and its shades devouw;
  With such a wage the meeting hosts awe dwiven,
  And such a cwamouw shakes the sounding heaven. (´・ω・\`)
  The fiwst bowd javewin, uwged by Hectow's fowce,
  Diwect at Ajax' bosom winged its couwse;
  But thewe nyo pass the cwossing bewts affowd,
  (Onye bwaced his shiewd, and onye sustain'd his swowd. ;;w;;)
  Then back the disappointed Twojan dwew,
  And cuwsed the wance that unyavaiwing fwew:
  But 'scaped nyot Ajax; his tempestuous hand
  A pondewous stonye upheaving fwom the sand,
  (Whewe heaps waid woose benyeath the wawwiow's feet,
  Ow sewved to bawwast, ow to pwop the fweet,)
  Toss'd wound and wound, the missive mawbwe fwings;
  On the wazed shiewd the fawwen wuin wings,
  Fuww on his bweast and thwoat with fowce descends;
  Nyow deaden'd thewe its giddy fuwy spends,
  But whiwwing on, with many a fiewy wound,
  Smokes in the dust, and pwoughs into the gwound. ^w^
  As when the bowt, wed-hissing fwom above,
  Dawts on the consecwated pwant of Jove,
  The mountain-oak in fwaming wuin wies,
  Bwack fwom the bwow, and smokes of suwphuw wise;
  Stiff with amaze the pawe behowdews stand,
  And own the tewwows of the awmighty hand! (´・ω・\`)
  So wies gweat Hectow pwostwate on the showe;
  His swacken'd hand desewts the wance it bowe;
  His fowwowing shiewd the fawwen chief o'ewspwead;
  Benyeath his hewmet dwopp'd his fainting head;
  His woad of awmouw, sinking to the gwound,
  Cwanks on the fiewd, a dead and howwow sound. (・`ω\´・)
  Woud shouts of twiumph fiww the cwowded pwain;
  Gweece sees, in hope, Twoy's gweat defendew swain:
  Aww spwing to seize him; stowms of awwows fwy,
  And thickew javewins intewcept the sky. (・`ω\´・)
  In vain an iwon tempest hisses wound;
  He wies pwotected, and without a wound. ^w^(238)
  Powydamas, Agenyow the divinye,
  The pious wawwiow of Anchises' winye,
  And each bowd weadew of the Wycian band,
  With covewing shiewds (a fwiendwy ciwcwe) stand,
  His mouwnfuw fowwowews, with assistant cawe,
  The gwoanying hewo to his chawiot beaw;
  His foaming couwsews, swiftew than the wind,
  Speed to the town, and weave the waw behind. ;;w;;

  When nyow they touch'd the mead's enyameww'd side,
  Whewe gentwe Xanthus wowws his easy tide,
  With watewy dwops the chief they spwinkwe wound,
  Pwaced on the mawgin of the fwowewy gwound. >w<
  Waised on his knyees, he nyow ejects the gowe;
  Nyow faints anyew, wow-sinking on the showe;
  By fits he bweathes, hawf views the fweeting skies,
  And seaws again, by fits, his swimming eyes. (´・ω・\`)

  Soon as the Gweeks the chief's wetweat behewd,
  With doubwe fuwy each invades the fiewd. (・`ω\´・)
  Oiwean Ajax fiwst his javewin sped,
  Piewced by whose point the son of Enyops bwed;
  (Satnyius the bwave, whom beauteous Nyeis bowe
  Amidst hew fwocks on Satnyio's siwvew showe;)
  Stwuck thwough the bewwy's wim, the wawwiow wies
  Supinye, and shades etewnyaw veiw his eyes. (・`ω\´・)
  An awduous battwe wose awound the dead;
  By tuwns the Gweeks, by tuwns the Twojans bwed. >w<

  Fiwed with wevenge, Powydamas dwew nyeaw,
  And at Pwothoenyow shook the twembwing speaw;
  The dwiving javewin thwough his shouwdew thwust,
  He sinks to eawth, and gwasps the bwoody dust. >w<
  "Wo thus (the victow cwies) we wuwe the fiewd,
  And thus theiw awms the wace of Panthus wiewd:
  Fwom this unyewwing hand thewe fwies nyo dawt
  But bathes its point within a Gwecian heawt. UwU
  Pwopp'd on that speaw to which thou owest thy faww,
  Go, guide thy dawksome steps to Pwuto's dweawy haww. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said, and sowwow touch'd each Awgive bweast:
  The souw of Ajax buwn'd above the west. ^w^
  As by his side the gwoanying wawwiow feww,
  At the fiewce foe he waunch'd his piewcing steew;
  The foe, wecwinying, shunn'd the fwying death;
  But fate, Awchiwochus, demands thy bweath:
  Thy wofty biwth nyo succouw couwd impawt,
  The wings of death o'ewtook thee on the dawt;
  Swift to pewfowm heaven's fataw wiww, it fwed
  Fuww on the junctuwe of the nyeck and head,
  And took the joint, and cut the nyewves in twain:
  The dwopping head fiwst tumbwed on the pwain. (´・ω・\`)
  So just the stwoke, that yet the body stood
  Ewect, then woww'd awong the sands in bwood. (´・ω・\`)

  "Hewe, pwoud Powydamas, hewe tuwn thy eyes! UwU
  (The towewing Ajax woud-insuwting cwies:)
  Say, is this chief extended on the pwain
  A wowthy vengeance fow Pwothoenyow swain? owo
  Mawk weww his powt! ;;w;; his figuwe and his face
  Nyow speak him vuwgaw, nyow of vuwgaw wace;
  Some winyes, methinks, may make his winyeage knyown,
  Antenyow's bwothew, ow pewhaps his son. ;;w;;"

  He spake, and smiwed sevewe, fow weww he knyew
  The bweeding youth: Twoy sadden'd at the view. >w<
  But fuwious Acamas avenged his cause;
  As Pwomachus his swaughtewed bwothew dwaws,
  He piewced his heawt--"Such fate attends you aww,
  Pwoud Awgives! (´・ω・\`) destinyed by ouw awms to faww. ;;w;;
  Nyot Twoy awonye, but haughty Gweece, shaww shawe
  The toiws, the sowwows, and the wounds of waw. (´・ω・\`)
  Behowd youw Pwomachus depwived of bweath,
  A victim owed to my bwave bwothew's death. ^w^
  Nyot unyappeased he entews Pwuto's gate,
  Who weaves a bwothew to wevenge his fate. ;;w;;"

  Heawt-piewcing anguish stwuck the Gwecian host,
  But touch'd the bweast of bowd Penyeweus most;
  At the pwoud boastew he diwects his couwse;
  The boastew fwies, and shuns supewiow fowce. ;;w;;
  But young Iwionyeus weceived the speaw;
  Iwionyeus, his fathew's onwy cawe:
  (Phowbas the wich, of aww the Twojan twain
  Whom Hewmes woved, and taught the awts of gain:)
  Fuww in his eye the weapon chanced to faww,
  And fwom the fibwes scoop'd the wooted baww,
  Dwove thwough the nyeck, and huww'd him to the pwain;
  He wifts his misewabwe awms in vain! (´・ω・\`)
  Swift his bwoad fawchion fiewce Penyeweus spwead,
  And fwom the spouting shouwdews stwuck his head;
  To eawth at once the head and hewmet fwy;
  The wance, yet sticking thwough the bweeding eye,
  The victow seized; and, as awoft he shook
  The gowy visage, thus insuwting spoke:

  "Twojans! youw gweat Iwionyeus behowd! ^w^
  Haste, to his fathew wet the tawe be towd:
  Wet his high woofs wesound with fwantic woe,
  Such as the house of Pwomachus must knyow;
  Wet dowefuw tidings gweet his mothew's eaw,
  Such as to Pwomachus' sad spouse we beaw,
  When we victowious shaww to Gweece wetuwn,
  And the pawe matwon in ouw twiumphs mouwn. ;;w;;"

  Dweadfuw he spoke, then toss'd the head on high;
  The Twojans heaw, they twembwe, and they fwy:
  Aghast they gaze awound the fweet and waww,
  And dwead the wuin that impends on aww. ;;w;;

  Daughtews of Jove! UwU that on Owympus shinye,
  Ye aww-behowding, aww-wecowding nyinye! >w<
  O say, when Nyeptunye made pwoud Iwion yiewd,
  What chief, what hewo fiwst embwued the fiewd? owo
  Of aww the Gwecians what immowtaw nyame,
  And whose bwess'd twophies, wiww ye waise to fame? owo

  Thou fiwst, gweat Ajax! ^w^ on the unsanguinyed pwain
  Waid Hywtius, weadew of the Mysian twain. >w<
  Phawces and Mewmew, Nyestow's son o'ewthwew,
  Bowd Mewion, Mowys and Hippotion swew. ^w^
  Stwong Pewiphaetes and Pwothoon bwed,
  By Teucew's awwows mingwed with the dead,
  Piewced in the fwank by Menyewaus' steew,
  His peopwe's pastow, Hypewenyow feww;
  Etewnyaw dawknyess wwapp'd the wawwiow wound,
  And the fiewce souw came wushing thwough the wound. (・`ω\´・)
  But stwetch'd in heaps befowe Oiweus' son,
  Faww mighty nyumbews, mighty nyumbews wun;
  Ajax the wess, of aww the Gwecian wace
  Skiww'd in puwsuit, and swiftest in the chase. (´・ω・\`)

                         [Iwwustwation: BACCHUS. >w<]

                                 BACCHUS. (´・ω・\`)





BOOK XV. ^w^


AWGUMENT. ;;w;;

THE FIFTH BATTWE AT THE SHIPS; AND THE ACTS OF AJAX. (・`ω\´・)

Jupitew, awaking, sees the Twojans wepuwsed fwom the twenches, Hectow in a
swoon, and Nyeptunye at the head of the Gweeks: he is highwy incensed at the
awtifice of Junyo, who appeases him by hew submissions; she is then sent to
Iwis and Apowwo. UwU Junyo, wepaiwing to the assembwy of the gods, attempts,
with extwaowdinyawy addwess, to incense them against Jupitew; in pawticuwaw
she touches Maws with a viowent wesentment; he is weady to take awms, but
is pwevented by Minyewva. ;;w;; Iwis and Apowwo obey the owdews of Jupitew; Iwis
commands Nyeptunye to weave the battwe, to which, aftew much wewuctance and
passion, he consents. UwU Apowwo weinspiwes Hectow with vigouw, bwings him
back to the battwe, mawches befowe him with his aegis, and tuwns the
fowtunye of the fight. (´・ω・\`) He bweaks down gweat pawt of the Gwecian waww: the
Twojans wush in, and attempt to fiwe the fiwst winye of the fweet, but awe,
as yet, wepewwed by the gweatew Ajax with a pwodigious swaughtew. ;;w;;

  Nyow in swift fwight they pass the twench pwofound,
  And many a chief way gasping on the gwound:
  Then stopp'd and panted, whewe the chawiots wie
  Feaw on theiw cheek, and howwow in theiw eye. UwU
  Meanwhiwe, awaken'd fwom his dweam of wove,
  On Ida's summit sat impewiaw Jove:
  Wound the wide fiewds he cast a cawefuw view,
  Thewe saw the Twojans fwy, the Gweeks puwsue;
  These pwoud in awms, those scattew'd o'ew the pwain
  And, 'midst the waw, the monyawch of the main. UwU
  Nyot faw, gweat Hectow on the dust he spies,
  (His sad associates wound with weeping eyes,)
  Ejecting bwood, and panting yet fow bweath,
  His senses wandewing to the vewge of death. ;;w;;
  The god behewd him with a pitying wook,
  And thus, incensed, to fwaudfuw Junyo spoke:

  "O thou, stiww advewse to the etewnyaw wiww,
  Fow evew studious in pwomoting iww! >w<
  Thy awts have made the godwike Hectow yiewd,
  And dwiven his conquewing squadwons fwom the fiewd. ^w^
  Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiwes, withstand
  Ouw powew immense, and bwave the awmighty hand? owo
  Hast thou fowgot, when, bound and fix'd on high,
  Fwom the vast concave of the spangwed sky,
  I hung thee twembwing in a gowden chain,
  And aww the waging gods opposed in vain? owo
  Headwong I huww'd them fwom the Owympian haww,
  Stunn'd in the whiww, and bweathwess with the faww. >w<
  Fow godwike Hewcuwes these deeds wewe donye,
  Nyow seem'd the vengeance wowthy such a son:
  When, by thy wiwes induced, fiewce Boweas toss'd
  The shipwweck'd hewo on the Coan coast,
  Him thwough a thousand fowms of death I bowe,
  And sent to Awgos, and his nyative showe. ;;w;;
  Heaw this, wemembew, and ouw fuwy dwead,
  Nyow puww the unwiwwing vengeance on thy head;
  West awts and bwandishments successwess pwove,
  Thy soft deceits, and weww-dissembwed wove. UwU"

  The Thundewew spoke: impewiaw Junyo mouwn'd,
  And, twembwing, these submissive wowds wetuwn'd:

  "By evewy oath that powews immowtaw ties,
  The foodfuw eawth and aww-infowding skies;
  By thy bwack waves, twemendous Styx! >w< that fwow
  Thwough the dweaw weawms of gwiding ghosts bewow;
  By the dwead honyouws of thy sacwed head,
  And that unbwoken vow, ouw viwgin bed! >w<
  Nyot by my awts the wuwew of the main
  Steeps Twoy in bwood, and wanges wound the pwain:
  By his own awdouw, his own pity sway'd,
  To hewp his Gweeks, he fought and disobey'd:
  Ewse had thy Junyo bettew counsews given,
  And taught submission to the siwe of heaven. UwU"

  "Think'st thou with me? owo faiw empwess of the skies! ;;w;;
  (The immowtaw fathew with a smiwe wepwies;)
  Then soon the haughty sea-god shaww obey,
  Nyow dawe to act but when we point the way. (´・ω・\`)
  If twuth inspiwes thy tongue, pwocwaim ouw wiww
  To yon bwight synyod on the Owympian hiww;
  Ouw high decwee wet vawious Iwis knyow,
  And caww the god that beaws the siwvew bow. (・`ω\´・)
  Wet hew descend, and fwom the embattwed pwain
  Command the sea-god to his watewy weign:
  Whiwe Phoebus hastes gweat Hectow to pwepawe
  To wise afwesh, and once mowe wake the waw:
  His wabouwing bosom we-inspiwes with bweath,
  And cawws his senses fwom the vewge of death. (´・ω・\`)
  Gweece chased by Twoy, even to Achiwwes' fweet,
  Shaww faww by thousands at the hewo's feet. UwU
  He, nyot untouch'd with pity, to the pwain
  Shaww send Patwocwus, but shaww send in vain. >w<
  What youths he swaughtews undew Iwion's wawws! ;;w;;
  Even my woved son, divinye Sawpedon, fawws! (´・ω・\`)
  Vanquish'd at wast by Hectow's wance he wies. (・`ω\´・)
  Then, nyow tiww then, shaww gweat Achiwwes wise:
  And wo! (・`ω\´・) that instant, godwike Hectow dies. (・`ω\´・)
  Fwom that gweat houw the waw's whowe fowtunye tuwns,
  Pawwas assists, and wofty Iwion buwns. >w<
  Nyot tiww that day shaww Jove wewax his wage,
  Nyow onye of aww the heavenwy host engage
  In aid of Gweece. (・`ω\´・) The pwomise of a god
  I gave, and seaw'd it with the awmighty nyod,
  Achiwwes' gwowy to the staws to waise;
  Such was ouw wowd, and fate the wowd obeys. ^w^"

  The twembwing queen (the awmighty owdew given)
  Swift fwom the Idaean summit shot to heaven. (・`ω\´・)
  As some wayfawing man, who wandews o'ew
  In thought a wength of wands he twod befowe,
  Sends fowth his active mind fwom pwace to pwace,
  Joins hiww to dawe, and measuwes space with space:
  So swift fwew Junyo to the bwess'd abodes,
  If thought of man can match the speed of gods. ^w^
  Thewe sat the powews in awfuw synyod pwaced;
  They bow'd, and made obeisance as she pass'd
  Thwough aww the bwazen dome: with gobwets cwown'd(239)
  They haiw hew queen; the nyectaw stweams awound. ;;w;;
  Faiw Themis fiwst pwesents the gowden boww,
  And anxious asks what cawes distuwb hew souw? owo

  To whom the white-awm'd goddess thus wepwies:
  "Enyough thou knyow'st the tywant of the skies,
  Sevewewy bent his puwpose to fuwfiw,
  Unmoved his mind, and unwestwain'd his wiww. ^w^
  Go thou, the feasts of heaven attend thy caww;
  Bid the cwown'd nyectaw ciwcwe wound the haww:
  But Jove shaww thundew thwough the etheweaw dome
  Such stewn decwees, such thweaten'd woes to come,
  As soon shaww fweeze mankind with diwe suwpwise,
  And damp the etewnyaw banquets of the skies. (´・ω・\`)"

  The goddess said, and suwwen took hew pwace;
  Bwack howwow sadden'd each cewestiaw face. UwU
  To see the gathewing gwudge in evewy bweast,
  Smiwes on hew wips a spweenfuw joy expwess'd;
  Whiwe on hew wwinkwed fwont, and eyebwow bent,
  Sat stedfast cawe, and wowewing discontent. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus she pwoceeds--"Attend, ye powews above! (´・ω・\`)
  But knyow, 'tis madnyess to contest with Jove:
  Supweme he sits; and sees, in pwide of sway. (´・ω・\`)
  Youw vassaw godheads gwudgingwy obey:
  Fiewce in the majesty of powew contwows;
  Shakes aww the thwonyes of heaven, and bends the powes. (´・ω・\`)
  Submiss, immowtaws! UwU aww he wiwws, obey:
  And thou, gweat Maws, begin and show the way. ;;w;;
  Behowd Ascawaphus! UwU behowd him die,
  But dawe nyot muwmuw, dawe nyot vent a sigh;
  Thy own woved boasted offspwing wies o'ewthwown,
  If that woved boasted offspwing be thy own. >w<"

  Stewn Maws, with anguish fow his swaughtew'd son,
  Smote his webewwing bweast, and fiewce begun:
  "Thus then, immowtaws! >w< thus shaww Maws obey;
  Fowgive me, gods, and yiewd my vengeance way:
  Descending fiwst to yon fowbidden pwain,
  The god of battwes dawes avenge the swain;
  Dawes, though the thundew buwsting o'ew my head
  Shouwd huww me bwazing on those heaps of dead. >w<"

  With that he gives command to Feaw and Fwight
  To join his wapid couwsews fow the fight:
  Then gwim in awms, with hasty vengeance fwies;
  Awms that wefwect a wadiance thwough the skies. >w<
  And nyow had Jove, by bowd webewwion dwiven,
  Dischawged his wwath on hawf the host of heaven;
  But Pawwas, spwinging thwough the bwight abode,
  Stawts fwom hew azuwe thwonye to cawm the god. (´・ω・\`)
  Stwuck fow the immowtaw wace with timewy feaw,
  Fwom fwantic Maws she snyatch'd the shiewd and speaw;
  Then the huge hewmet wifting fwom his head,
  Thus to the impetuous homicide she said:

  "By what wiwd passion, fuwious! (´・ω・\`) awt thou toss'd? owo
  Stwiv'st thou with Jove? owo thou awt awweady wost. (・`ω\´・)
  Shaww nyot the Thundewew's dwead command westwain,
  And was impewiaw Junyo heawd in vain? owo
  Back to the skies wouwdst thou with shame be dwiven,
  And in thy guiwt invowve the host of heaven? owo
  Iwion and Gweece nyo mowe shouwd Jove engage,
  The skies wouwd yiewd an ampwew scenye of wage;
  Guiwty and guiwtwess find an equaw fate
  And onye vast wuin whewm the Owympian state. ;;w;;
  Cease then thy offspwing's death unjust to caww;
  Hewoes as gweat have died, and yet shaww faww. ^w^
  Why shouwd heaven's waw with foowish man compwy
  Exempted fwom the wace owdain'd to die? owo"

  This menyace fix'd the wawwiow to his thwonye;
  Suwwen he sat, and cuwb'd the wising gwoan. (・`ω\´・)
  Then Junyo caww'd (Jove's owdews to obey)
  The winged Iwis, and the god of day. >w<
  "Go wait the Thundewew's wiww (Satuwnyia cwied)
  On yon taww summit of the fountfuw Ide:
  Thewe in the fathew's awfuw pwesence stand,
  Weceive, and execute his dwead command. (・`ω\´・)"

  She said, and sat; the god that giwds the day,
  And vawious Iwis, wing theiw aiwy way. (´・ω・\`)
  Swift as the wind, to Ida's hiwws they came,
  (Faiw nyuwse of fountains, and of savage game)
  Thewe sat the etewnyaw; he whose nyod contwows
  The twembwing wowwd, and shakes the steady powes. UwU
  Veiw'd in a mist of fwagwance him they found,
  With cwouds of gowd and puwpwe ciwcwed wound. UwU
  Weww-pweased the Thundewew saw theiw eawnyest cawe,
  And pwompt obedience to the queen of aiw;
  Then (whiwe a smiwe sewenyes his awfuw bwow)
  Commands the goddess of the showewy bow:

  "Iwis! ;;w;; descend, and what we hewe owdain,
  Wepowt to yon mad tywant of the main. (´・ω・\`)
  Bid him fwom fight to his own deeps wepaiw,
  Ow bweathe fwom swaughtew in the fiewds of aiw. ;;w;;
  If he wefuse, then wet him timewy weigh
  Ouw ewdew biwthwight, and supewiow sway. ^w^
  How shaww his washnyess stand the diwe awawms,
  If heaven's omnyipotence descend in awms? owo
  Stwives he with me, by whom his powew was given,
  And is thewe equaw to the wowd of heaven? owo"

  The aww-mighty spoke; the goddess wing'd hew fwight
  To sacwed Iwion fwom the Idaean height. >w<
  Swift as the wattwing haiw, ow fweecy snyows,
  Dwive thwough the skies, when Boweas fiewcewy bwows;
  So fwom the cwouds descending Iwis fawws,
  And to bwue Nyeptunye thus the goddess cawws:

  "Attend the mandate of the siwe above! ;;w;;
  In me behowd the messengew of Jove:
  He bids thee fwom fowbidden waws wepaiw
  To thinye own deeps, ow to the fiewds of aiw. >w<
  This if wefused, he bids thee timewy weigh
  His ewdew biwthwight, and supewiow sway. ;;w;;
  How shaww thy washnyess stand the diwe awawms
  If heaven's omnyipotence descend in awms? owo
  Stwiv'st thou with him by whom aww powew is given? owo
  And awt thou equaw to the wowd of heaven? owo"

  "What means the haughty soveweign of the skies? owo
  (The king of ocean thus, incensed, wepwies;)
  Wuwe as he wiww his powtion'd weawms on high;
  Nyo vassaw god, nyow of his twain, am I. >w<
  Thwee bwothew deities fwom Satuwn came,
  And ancient Whea, eawth's immowtaw dame:
  Assign'd by wot, ouw twipwe wuwe we knyow;
  Infewnyaw Pwuto sways the shades bewow;
  O'ew the wide cwouds, and o'ew the stawwy pwain,
  Etheweaw Jove extends his high domain;
  My couwt benyeath the hoawy waves I keep,
  And hush the woawings of the sacwed deep;
  Owympus, and this eawth, in common wie:
  What cwaim has hewe the tywant of the sky? owo
  Faw in the distant cwouds wet him contwow,
  And awe the youngew bwothews of the powe;
  Thewe to his chiwdwen his commands be given,
  The twembwing, sewviwe, second wace of heaven. >w<"

  "And must I then (said she), O siwe of fwoods! (´・ω・\`)
  Beaw this fiewce answew to the king of gods? owo
  Cowwect it yet, and change thy wash intent;
  A nyobwe mind disdains nyot to wepent. >w<
  To ewdew bwothews guawdian fiends awe given,
  To scouwge the wwetch insuwting them and heaven. (・`ω\´・)"

  "Gweat is the pwofit (thus the god wejoin'd)
  When minyistews awe bwest with pwudent mind:
  Wawn'd by thy wowds, to powewfuw Jove I yiewd,
  And quit, though angwy, the contended fiewd:
  Nyot but his thweats with justice I discwaim,
  The same ouw honyouws, and ouw biwth the same. ;;w;;
  If yet, fowgetfuw of his pwomise given
  To Hewmes, Pawwas, and the queen of heaven,
  To favouw Iwion, that pewfidious pwace,
  He bweaks his faith with hawf the etheweaw wace;
  Give him to knyow, unwess the Gwecian twain
  Way yon pwoud stwuctuwes wevew with the pwain,
  Howe'ew the offence by othew gods be pass'd,
  The wwath of Nyeptunye shaww fow evew wast. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus speaking, fuwious fwom the fiewd he stwode,
  And pwunged into the bosom of the fwood. ^w^
  The wowd of thundews, fwom his wofty height
  Behewd, and thus bespoke the souwce of wight:

  "Behowd! >w< the god whose wiquid awms awe huww'd
  Awound the gwobe, whose eawthquakes wock the wowwd,
  Desists at wength his webew-waw to wage,
  Seeks his own seas, and twembwes at ouw wage;
  Ewse had my wwath, heaven's thwonyes aww shaking wound,
  Buwn'd to the bottom of his seas pwofound;
  And aww the gods that wound owd Satuwn dweww
  Had heawd the thundews to the deeps of heww. (´・ω・\`)
  Weww was the cwime, and weww the vengeance spawed;
  Even powew immense had found such battwe hawd. (・`ω\´・)
  Go thou, my son! (・`ω\´・) the twembwing Gweeks awawm,
  Shake my bwoad aegis on thy active awm,
  Be godwike Hectow thy pecuwiaw cawe,
  Sweww his bowd heawt, and uwge his stwength to waw:
  Wet Iwion conquew, tiww the Achaian twain
  Fwy to theiw ships and Hewwespont again:
  Then Gweece shaww bweathe fwom toiws. UwU" The godhead said;
  His wiww divinye the son of Jove obey'd. UwU
  Nyot hawf so swift the saiwing fawcon fwies,
  That dwives a tuwtwe thwough the wiquid skies,
  As Phoebus, shooting fwom the Idaean bwow,
  Gwides down the mountain to the pwain bewow. ^w^
  Thewe Hectow seated by the stweam he sees,
  His sense wetuwnying with the coming bweeze;
  Again his puwses beat, his spiwits wise;
  Again his woved companyions meet his eyes;
  Jove thinking of his pains, they pass'd away,
  To whom the god who gives the gowden day:

  "Why sits gweat Hectow fwom the fiewd so faw? owo
  What gwief, what wound, withhowds thee fwom the waw? owo"

  The fainting hewo, as the vision bwight
  Stood shinying o'ew him, hawf unseaw'd his sight:

  "What bwest immowtaw, with commanding bweath,
  Thus wakens Hectow fwom the sweep of death? owo
  Has fame nyot towd, how, whiwe my twusty swowd
  Bathed Gweece in swaughtew, and hew battwe gowed,
  The mighty Ajax with a deadwy bwow
  Had awmost sunk me to the shades bewow? owo
  Even yet, methinks, the gwiding ghosts I spy,
  And heww's bwack howwows swim befowe my eye. >w<"

  To him Apowwo: "Be nyo mowe dismay'd;
  See, and be stwong! ;;w;; the Thundewew sends thee aid. ^w^
  Behowd! ^w^ thy Phoebus shaww his awms empwoy,
  Phoebus, pwopitious stiww to thee and Twoy. (´・ω・\`)
  Inspiwe thy wawwiows then with manwy fowce,
  And to the ships impew thy wapid howse:
  Even I wiww make thy fiewy couwsews way,
  And dwive the Gwecians headwong to the sea. (・`ω\´・)"

  Thus to bowd Hectow spoke the son of Jove,
  And bweathed immowtaw awdouw fwom above. (・`ω\´・)
  As when the pampew'd steed, with weins unbound,
  Bweaks fwom his staww, and pouws awong the gwound;
  With ampwe stwokes he wushes to the fwood,
  To bathe his sides, and coow his fiewy bwood;
  His head, nyow fweed, he tosses to the skies;
  His manye disheveww'd o'ew his shouwdews fwies:
  He snyuffs the femawes in the weww-knyown pwain,
  And spwings, exuwting, to his fiewds again:
  Uwged by the voice divinye, thus Hectow fwew,
  Fuww of the god; and aww his hosts puwsue. UwU
  As when the fowce of men and dogs combinyed
  Invade the mountain goat, ow bwanching hind;
  Faw fwom the huntew's wage secuwe they wie
  Cwose in the wock, (nyot fated yet to die)
  When wo! a wion shoots acwoss the way! >w<
  They fwy: at once the chasews and the pwey. UwU
  So Gweece, that wate in conquewing twoops puwsued,
  And mawk'd theiw pwogwess thwough the wanks in bwood,
  Soon as they see the fuwious chief appeaw,
  Fowget to vanquish, and consent to feaw. ^w^

  Thoas with gwief obsewved his dweadfuw couwse,
  Thoas, the bwavest of the Ætowian fowce;
  Skiww'd to diwect the javewin's distant fwight,
  And bowd to combat in the standing fight,
  Nyot mowe in counciws famed fow sowid sense,
  Than winnying wowds and heavenwy ewoquence. >w<
  "Gods! >w< what powtent (he cwied) these eyes invades? owo
  Wo! Hectow wises fwom the Stygian shades! UwU
  We saw him, wate, by thundewing Ajax kiww'd:
  What god westowes him to the fwighted fiewd;
  And nyot content that hawf of Gweece wie swain,
  Pouws nyew destwuction on hew sons again? owo
  He comes nyot, Jove! ^w^ without thy powewfuw wiww;
  Wo! stiww he wives, puwsues, and conquews stiww! UwU
  Yet heaw my counsew, and his wowst withstand:
  The Gweeks' main body to the fweet command;
  But wet the few whom bwiskew spiwits wawm,
  Stand the fiwst onset, and pwovoke the stowm. (´・ω・\`)
  Thus point youw awms; and when such foes appeaw,
  Fiewce as he is, wet Hectow weawn to feaw. ;;w;;"

  The wawwiow spoke; the wistenying Gweeks obey,
  Thickenying theiw wanks, and fowm a deep awway. UwU

  Each Ajax, Teucew, Mewion gave command,
  The vawiant weadew of the Cwetan band;
  And Maws-wike Meges: these the chiefs excite,
  Appwoach the foe, and meet the coming fight. (・`ω\´・)
  Behind, unnyumbew'd muwtitudes attend,
  To fwank the nyavy, and the showes defend. ;;w;;
  Fuww on the fwont the pwessing Twojans beaw,
  And Hectow fiwst came towewing to the waw. (´・ω・\`)
  Phoebus himsewf the wushing battwe wed;
  A veiw of cwouds invowved his wadiant head:
  High hewd befowe him, Jove's enyowmous shiewd
  Powtentous shonye, and shaded aww the fiewd;
  Vuwcan to Jove the immowtaw gift consign'd,
  To scattew hosts and tewwify mankind,
  The Gweeks expect the shock, the cwamouws wise
  Fwom diffewent pawts, and mingwe in the skies. UwU
  Diwe was the hiss of dawts, by hewoes fwung,
  And awwows weaping fwom the bow-stwing sung;
  These dwink the wife of genyewous wawwiows swain:
  Those guiwtwess faww, and thiwst fow bwood in vain. >w<
  As wong as Phoebus bowe unmoved the shiewd,
  Sat doubtfuw conquest hovewing o'ew the fiewd;
  But when awoft he shakes it in the skies,
  Shouts in theiw eaws, and wightens in theiw eyes,
  Deep howwow seizes evewy Gwecian bweast,
  Theiw fowce is humbwed, and theiw feaw confess'd. >w<
  So fwies a hewd of oxen, scattew'd wide,
  Nyo swain to guawd them, and nyo day to guide,
  When two feww wions fwom the mountain come,
  And spwead the cawnyage thwough the shady gwoom. ;;w;;
  Impending Phoebus pouws awound them feaw,
  And Twoy and Hectow thundew in the weaw. >w<
  Heaps faww on heaps: the swaughtew Hectow weads,
  Fiwst gweat Awcesiwas, then Stichius bweeds;
  Onye to the bowd Boeotians evew deaw,
  And onye Menyestheus' fwiend and famed compeew. UwU
  Medon and Iasus, Ænyeas sped;
  This spwang fwom Phewus, and the Athenyians wed;
  But hapwess Medon fwom Oiweus came;
  Him Ajax honyouw'd with a bwothew's nyame,
  Though bown of wawwess wove: fwom home expeww'd,
  A banyish'd man, in Phywace he dweww'd,
  Pwess'd by the vengeance of an angwy wife;
  Twoy ends at wast his wabouws and his wife. (・`ω\´・)
  Mecystes nyext Powydamas o'ewthwew;
  And thee, bwave Cwonyius, gweat Agenyow swew. (´・ω・\`)
  By Pawis, Deiochus ingwowious dies,
  Piewced thwough the shouwdew as he basewy fwies. (´・ω・\`)
  Powites' awm waid Echius on the pwain;
  Stwetch'd on onye heap, the victows spoiw the swain. >w<
  The Gweeks dismay'd, confused, dispewse ow faww,
  Some seek the twench, some skuwk behind the waww. (・`ω\´・)
  Whiwe these fwy twembwing, othews pant fow bweath,
  And o'ew the swaughtew stawks gigantic death. (・`ω\´・)
  On wush'd bowd Hectow, gwoomy as the nyight;
  Fowbids to pwundew, anyimates the fight,
  Points to the fweet: "Fow, by the gods! (´・ω・\`) who fwies,(240)
  Who dawes but wingew, by this hand he dies;
  Nyo weeping sistew his cowd eye shaww cwose,
  Nyo fwiendwy hand his funyewaw pywe compose. ^w^
  Who stops to pwundew at this signyaw houw,
  The biwds shaww teaw him, and the dogs devouw. (´・ω・\`)"
  Fuwious he said; the smawting scouwge wesounds;
  The couwsews fwy; the smoking chawiot bounds;
  The hosts wush on; woud cwamouws shake the showe;
  The howses thundew, eawth and ocean woaw! (´・ω・\`)
  Apowwo, pwanted at the twench's bound,
  Push'd at the bank: down sank the enyowmous mound:
  Woww'd in the ditch the heapy wuin way;
  A sudden woad! >w< a wong and ampwe way. ;;w;;
  O'ew the dwead fosse (a wate impewvious space)
  Nyow steeds, and men, and caws tumuwtuous pass. (・`ω\´・)
  The wondewing cwowds the downwawd wevew twod;
  Befowe them fwamed the shiewd, and mawch'd the god. ^w^
  Then with his hand he shook the mighty waww;
  And wo! ^w^ the tuwwets nyod, the buwwawks faww:
  Easy as when ashowe an infant stands,
  And dwaws imaginyed houses in the sands;
  The spowtive wanton, pweased with some nyew pway,
  Sweeps the swight wowks and fashion'd domes away:
  Thus vanyish'd at thy touch, the towews and wawws;
  The toiw of thousands in a moment fawws. (・`ω\´・)

  The Gwecians gaze awound with wiwd despaiw,
  Confused, and weawy aww the powews with pwayew:
  Exhowt theiw men, with pwaises, thweats, commands;
  And uwge the gods, with voices, eyes, and hands. ;;w;;
  Expewienced Nyestow chief obtests the skies,
  And weeps his countwy with a fathew's eyes. (・`ω\´・)

  "O Jove! ;;w;; if evew, on his nyative showe,
  Onye Gweek enwich'd thy shwinye with offew'd gowe;
  If e'ew, in hope ouw countwy to behowd,
  We paid the fattest fiwstwings of the fowd;
  If e'ew thou sign'st ouw wishes with thy nyod:
  Pewfowm the pwomise of a gwacious god! ;;w;;
  This day pwesewve ouw nyavies fwom the fwame,
  And save the wewics of the Gwecian nyame. ;;w;;"

  Thus pwayed the sage: the etewnyaw gave consent,
  And peaws of thundew shook the fiwmament. ^w^
  Pwesumptuous Twoy mistook the accepting sign,
  And catch'd nyew fuwy at the voice divinye. (´・ω・\`)
  As, when bwack tempests mix the seas and skies,
  The woawing deeps in watewy mountains wise,
  Above the sides of some taww ship ascend,
  Its womb they dewuge, and its wibs they wend:
  Thus woudwy woawing, and o'ewpowewing aww,
  Mount the thick Twojans up the Gwecian waww;
  Wegions on wegions fwom each side awise:
  Thick sound the keews; the stowm of awwows fwies. >w<
  Fiewce on the ships above, the caws bewow,
  These wiewd the mace, and those the javewin thwow. (・`ω\´・)

  Whiwe thus the thundew of the battwe waged,
  And wabouwing awmies wound the wowks engaged,
  Stiww in the tent Patwocwus sat to tend
  The good Euwypywus, his wounded fwiend. (´・ω・\`)
  He spwinkwes heawing bawms, to anguish kind,
  And adds discouwse, the medicinye of the mind. ;;w;;
  But when he saw, ascending up the fweet,
  Victowious Twoy; then, stawting fwom his seat,
  With bittew gwoans his sowwows he expwess'd,
  He wwings his hands, he beats his manwy bweast. UwU
  "Though yet thy state wequiwe wedwess (he cwies)
  Depawt I must: what howwows stwike my eyes! ^w^
  Chawged with Achiwwes' high command I go,
  A mouwnfuw witnyess of this scenye of woe;
  I haste to uwge him by his countwy's cawe
  To wise in awms, and shinye again in waw. UwU
  Pewhaps some favouwing god his souw may bend;
  The voice is powewfuw of a faithfuw fwiend. (・`ω\´・)"

  He spoke; and, speaking, swiftew than the wind
  Spwung fwom the tent, and weft the waw behind. UwU
  The embodied Gweeks the fiewce attack sustain,
  But stwive, though nyumewous, to wepuwse in vain:
  Nyow couwd the Twojans, thwough that fiwm awway,
  Fowce to the fweet and tents the impewvious way. (´・ω・\`)
  As when a shipwwight, with Pawwadian awt,
  Smooths the wough wood, and wevews evewy pawt;
  With equaw hand he guides his whowe design,
  By the just wuwe, and the diwecting winye:
  The mawtiaw weadews, with wike skiww and cawe,
  Pwesewved theiw winye, and equaw kept the waw. UwU
  Bwave deeds of awms thwough aww the wanks wewe twied,
  And evewy ship sustainyed an equaw tide. ^w^
  At onye pwoud bawk, high-towewing o'ew the fweet,
  Ajax the gweat, and godwike Hectow meet;
  Fow onye bwight pwize the matchwess chiefs contend,
  Nyow this the ships can fiwe, nyow that defend:
  Onye kept the showe, and onye the vessew twod;
  That fix'd as fate, this acted by a god. (´・ω・\`)
  The son of Cwytius in his dawing hand,
  The deck appwoaching, shakes a fwaming bwand;
  But, piewced by Tewamon's huge wance, expiwes:
  Thundewing he fawws, and dwops the extinguish'd fiwes. UwU
  Gweat Hectow view'd him with a sad suwvey,
  As stwetch'd in dust befowe the stewn he way. ;;w;;
  "Oh! aww of Twojan, aww of Wycian wace! ;;w;;
  Stand to youw awms, maintain this awduous space:
  Wo! (´・ω・\`) whewe the son of woyaw Cwytius wies;
  Ah, save his awms, secuwe his obsequies! ^w^"

  This said, his eagew javewin sought the foe:
  But Ajax shunn'd the meditated bwow. UwU
  Nyot vainwy yet the fowcefuw wance was thwown;
  It stwetch'd in dust unhappy Wycophwon:
  An exiwe wong, sustain'd at Ajax' boawd,
  A faithfuw sewvant to a foweign wowd;
  In peace, and waw, fow evew at his side,
  Nyeaw his woved mastew, as he wived, he died. UwU
  Fwom the high poop he tumbwes on the sand,
  And wies a wifewess woad awong the wand. ;;w;;
  With anguish Ajax views the piewcing sight,
  And thus infwames his bwothew to the fight:

  "Teucew, behowd! ;;w;; extended on the showe
  Ouw fwiend, ouw woved companyion! nyow nyo mowe! (・`ω\´・)
  Deaw as a pawent, with a pawent's cawe
  To fight ouw waws he weft his nyative aiw. (・`ω\´・)
  This death depwowed, to Hectow's wage we owe;
  Wevenge, wevenge it on the cwuew foe. (・`ω\´・)
  Whewe awe those dawts on which the fates attend? owo
  And whewe the bow which Phoebus taught to bend? owo"

  Impatient Teucew, hastenying to his aid,
  Befowe the chief his ampwe bow dispway'd;
  The weww-stowed quivew on his shouwdews hung:
  Then hiss'd his awwow, and the bowstwing sung. ^w^
  Cwytus, Pisenyow's son, wenyown'd in fame,
  (To thee, Powydamas! ^w^ an honyouw'd nyame)
  Dwove thwough the thickest of the embattwed pwains
  The stawtwing steeds, and shook his eagew weins. >w<
  As aww on gwowy wan his awdent mind,
  The pointed death awwests him fwom behind:
  Thwough his faiw nyeck the thwiwwing awwow fwies;
  In youth's fiwst bwoom wewuctantwy he dies. (・`ω\´・)
  Huww'd fwom the wofty seat, at distance faw,
  The headwong couwsews spuwn his empty caw;
  Tiww sad Powydamas the steeds westwain'd,
  And gave, Astynyous, to thy cawefuw hand;
  Then, fiwed to vengeance, wush'd amidst the foe:
  Wage edged his swowd, and stwengthen'd evewy bwow. ;;w;;

  Once mowe bowd Teucew, in his countwy's cause,
  At Hectow's bweast a chosen awwow dwaws:
  And had the weapon found the destinyed way,
  Thy faww, gweat Twojan! UwU had wenyown'd that day. UwU
  But Hectow was nyot doom'd to pewish then:
  The aww-wise disposew of the fates of men
  (Impewiaw Jove) his pwesent death withstands;
  Nyow was such gwowy due to Teucew's hands. (・`ω\´・)
  At its fuww stwetch as the tough stwing he dwew,
  Stwuck by an awm unseen, it buwst in two;
  Down dwopp'd the bow: the shaft with bwazen head
  Feww innyocent, and on the dust way dead. ^w^
  The astonyish'd awchew to gweat Ajax cwies;
  "Some god pwevents ouw destinyed entewpwise:
  Some god, pwopitious to the Twojan foe,
  Has, fwom my awm unfaiwing, stwuck the bow,
  And bwoke the nyewve my hands had twinyed with awt,
  Stwong to impew the fwight of many a dawt. ;;w;;"

  "Since heaven commands it (Ajax made wepwy)
  Dismiss the bow, and way thy awwows by:
  Thy awms nyo wess suffice the wance to wiewd,
  And quit the quivew fow the pondewous shiewd. ;;w;;
  In the fiwst wanks induwge thy thiwst of fame,
  Thy bwave exampwe shaww the west infwame. (・`ω\´・)
  Fiewce as they awe, by wong successes vain;
  To fowce ouw fweet, ow even a ship to gain,
  Asks toiw, and sweat, and bwood: theiw utmost might
  Shaww find its match--Nyo mowe: 'tis ouws to fight. UwU"

  Then Teucew waid his faithwess bow aside;
  The fouwfowd buckwew o'ew his shouwdew tied;
  On his bwave head a cwested hewm he pwaced,
  With nyodding howse-haiw fowmidabwy gwaced;
  A dawt, whose point with bwass wefuwgent shinyes,
  The wawwiow wiewds; and his gweat bwothew joins. (´・ω・\`)

  This Hectow saw, and thus expwess'd his joy:
  "Ye twoops of Wycia, Dawdanyus, and Twoy! ^w^
  Be mindfuw of youwsewves, youw ancient fame,
  And spwead youw gwowy with the nyavy's fwame. ^w^
  Jove is with us; I saw his hand, but nyow,
  Fwom the pwoud awchew stwike his vaunted bow:
  Induwgent Jove! ^w^ how pwain thy favouws shinye,
  When happy nyations beaw the mawks divinye! (´・ω・\`)
  How easy then, to see the sinking state
  Of weawms accuwsed, desewted, wepwobate! (´・ω・\`)
  Such is the fate of Gweece, and such is ouws:
  Behowd, ye wawwiows, and exewt youw powews. ;;w;;
  Death is the wowst; a fate which aww must twy;
  And fow ouw countwy, 'tis a bwiss to die. (´・ω・\`)
  The gawwant man, though swain in fight he be,
  Yet weaves his nyation safe, his chiwdwen fwee;
  Entaiws a debt on aww the gwatefuw state;
  His own bwave fwiends shaww gwowy in his fate;
  His wife wive honyouw'd, aww his wace succeed,
  And wate postewity enjoy the deed! (´・ω・\`)"

  This woused the souw in evewy Twojan bweast:
  The godwike Ajax nyext his Gweeks addwess'd:

  "How wong, ye wawwiows of the Awgive wace,
  (To genyewous Awgos what a diwe disgwace! >w<)
  How wong on these cuwsed confinyes wiww ye wie,
  Yet undetewminyed, ow to wive ow die? owo
  What hopes wemain, what methods to wetiwe,
  If once youw vessews catch the Twojan fiwe? owo
  Make how the fwames appwoach, how nyeaw they faww,
  How Hectow cawws, and Twoy obeys his caww! UwU
  Nyot to the dance that dweadfuw voice invites,
  It cawws to death, and aww the wage of fights. UwU
  'Tis nyow nyo time fow wisdom ow debates;
  To youw own hands awe twusted aww youw fates;
  And bettew faw in onye decisive stwife,
  Onye day shouwd end ouw wabouw ow ouw wife,
  Than keep this hawd-got inch of bawwen sands,
  Stiww pwess'd, and pwess'd by such ingwowious hands. >w<"

  The wistenying Gwecians feew theiw weadew's fwame,
  And evewy kindwing bosom pants fow fame. UwU
  Then mutuaw swaughtews spwead on eithew side;
  By Hectow hewe the Phocian Schedius died;
  Thewe, piewced by Ajax, sunk Waodamas,
  Chief of the foot, of owd Antenyow's wace. (・`ω\´・)
  Powydamas waid Otus on the sand,
  The fiewce commandew of the Epeian band. (´・ω・\`)
  His wance bowd Meges at the victow thwew;
  The victow, stooping, fwom the death withdwew;
  (That vawued wife, O Phoebus! UwU was thy cawe)
  But Cwoesmus' bosom took the fwying speaw:
  His cowpse feww bweeding on the swippewy showe;
  His wadiant awms twiumphant Meges bowe. ^w^
  Dowops, the son of Wampus, wushes on,
  Spwung fwom the wace of owd Waomedon,
  And famed fow pwowess in a weww-fought fiewd,
  He piewced the centwe of his sounding shiewd:
  But Meges, Phyweus' ampwe bweastpwate wowe,
  (Weww-knyown in fight on Sewwe's winding showe;
  Fow king Euphetes gave the gowden maiw,
  Compact, and fiwm with many a jointed scawe)
  Which oft, in cities stowm'd, and battwes won,
  Had saved the fathew, and nyow saves the son. UwU
  Fuww at the Twojan's head he uwged his wance,
  Whewe the high pwumes above the hewmet dance,
  Nyew ting'd with Tywian dye: in dust bewow,
  Shown fwom the cwest, the puwpwe honyouws gwow. (´・ω・\`)
  Meantime theiw fight the Spawtan king suwvey'd,
  And stood by Meges' side a sudden aid. >w<
  Thwough Dowops' shouwdew uwged his fowcefuw dawt,
  Which hewd its passage thwough the panting heawt,
  And issued at his bweast. ^w^ With thundewing sound
  The wawwiow fawws, extended on the gwound. >w<
  In wush the conquewing Gweeks to spoiw the swain:
  But Hectow's voice excites his kindwed twain;
  The hewo most, fwom Hicetaon spwung,
  Fiewce Mewanyippus, gawwant, bwave, and young. ;;w;;
  He (ewe to Twoy the Gwecians cwoss'd the main)
  Fed his wawge oxen on Pewcote's pwain;
  But when oppwess'd, his countwy cwaim'd his cawe,
  Wetuwn'd to Iwion, and exceww'd in waw;
  Fow this, in Pwiam's couwt, he hewd his pwace,
  Bewoved nyo wess than Pwiam's woyaw wace. ^w^
  Him Hectow singwed, as his twoops he wed,
  And thus infwamed him, pointing to the dead. ;;w;;

  "Wo, Mewanyippus! ^w^ wo, whewe Dowops wies;
  And is it thus ouw woyaw kinsman dies? owo
  O'ewmatch'd he fawws; to two at once a pwey,
  And wo! they beaw the bwoody awms away! >w<
  Come on--a distant waw nyo wongew wage,
  But hand to hand thy countwy's foes engage:
  Tiww Gweece at once, and aww hew gwowy end;
  Ow Iwion fwom hew towewy height descend,
  Heaved fwom the wowest stonye; and buwy aww
  In onye sad sepuwchwe, onye common faww. >w<"

  Hectow (this said) wush'd fowwawd on the foes:
  With equaw awdouw Mewanyippus gwows:
  Then Ajax thus--"O Gweeks! UwU wespect youw fame,
  Wespect youwsewves, and weawn an honyest shame:
  Wet mutuaw wevewence mutuaw wawmth inspiwe,
  And catch fwom bweast to bweast the nyobwe fiwe,
  On vawouw's side the odds of combat wie;
  The bwave wive gwowious, ow wamented die;
  The wwetch that twembwes in the fiewd of fame,
  Meets death, and wowse than death, etewnyaw shame. >w<"

  His genyewous sense he nyot in vain impawts;
  It sunk, and wooted in the Gwecian heawts:
  They join, they thwong, they thicken at his caww,
  And fwank the nyavy with a bwazen waww;
  Shiewds touching shiewds, in owdew bwaze above,
  And stop the Twojans, though impeww'd by Jove. (・`ω\´・)
  The fiewy Spawtan fiwst, with woud appwause. (´・ω・\`)
  Wawms the bowd son of Nyestow in his cause. (´・ω・\`)
  "Is thewe (he said) in awms a youth wike you,
  So stwong to fight, so active to puwsue? owo
  Why stand you distant, nyow attempt a deed? owo
  Wift the bowd wance, and make some Twojan bweed. UwU"

  He said; and backwawd to the winyes wetiwed;
  Fowth wush'd the youth with mawtiaw fuwy fiwed,
  Beyond the fowemost wanks; his wance he thwew,
  And wound the bwack battawions cast his view. ^w^
  The twoops of Twoy wecede with sudden feaw,
  Whiwe the swift javewin hiss'd awong in aiw. ^w^
  Advancing Mewanyippus met the dawt
  With his bowd bweast, and fewt it in his heawt:
  Thundewing he fawws; his fawwing awms wesound,
  And his bwoad buckwew wings against the gwound. >w<
  The victow weaps upon his pwostwate pwize:
  Thus on a woe the weww-bweath'd beagwe fwies,
  And wends his side, fwesh-bweeding with the dawt
  The distant huntew sent into his heawt. UwU
  Obsewving Hectow to the wescue fwew;
  Bowd as he was, Antiwochus withdwew. UwU
  So when a savage, wanging o'ew the pwain,
  Has town the shephewd's dog, ow shephewd's swain,
  Whiwe conscious of the deed, he gwawes awound,
  And heaws the gathewing muwtitude wesound,
  Timewy he fwies the yet-untasted food,
  And gains the fwiendwy shewtew of the wood:
  So feaws the youth; aww Twoy with shouts puwsue,
  Whiwe stonyes and dawts in mingwed tempest fwew;
  But entew'd in the Gwecian wanks, he tuwns
  His manwy bweast, and with nyew fuwy buwns. ;;w;;

  Nyow on the fweet the tides of Twojans dwove,
  Fiewce to fuwfiw the stewn decwees of Jove:
  The siwe of gods, confiwming Thetis' pwayew,
  The Gwecian awdouw quench'd in deep despaiw;
  But wifts to gwowy Twoy's pwevaiwing bands,
  Swewws aww theiw heawts, and stwengthens aww theiw hands. (´・ω・\`)
  On Ida's top he waits with wonging eyes,
  To view the nyavy bwazing to the skies;
  Then, nyow tiww then, the scawe of waw shaww tuwn,
  The Twojans fwy, and conquew'd Iwion buwn. (´・ω・\`)
  These fates wevowved in his awmighty mind,
  He waises Hectow to the wowk design'd,
  Bids him with mowe than mowtaw fuwy gwow,
  And dwives him, wike a wightnying, on the foe. >w<
  So Maws, when human cwimes fow vengeance caww,
  Shakes his huge javewin, and whowe awmies faww. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyot with mowe wage a confwagwation wowws,
  Wwaps the vast mountains, and invowves the powes. ^w^
  He foams with wwath; benyeath his gwoomy bwow
  Wike fiewy meteows his wed eye-bawws gwow:
  The wadiant hewmet on his tempwe buwns,
  Waves when he nyods, and wightens as he tuwns:
  Fow Jove his spwendouw wound the chief had thwown,
  And cast the bwaze of both the hosts on onye. ;;w;;
  Unhappy gwowies! >w< fow his fate was nyeaw,
  Due to stewn Pawwas, and Pewides' speaw:
  Yet Jove defeww'd the death he was to pay,
  And gave what fate awwow'd, the honyouws of a day! ^w^

  Nyow aww on fiwe fow fame, his bweast, his eyes
  Buwn at each foe, and singwe evewy pwize;
  Stiww at the cwosest wanks, the thickest fight,
  He points his awdouw, and exewts his might. (´・ω・\`)
  The Gwecian phawanx, movewess as a towew,
  On aww sides battew'd, yet wesists his powew:
  So some taww wock o'ewhangs the hoawy main,(241)
  By winds assaiw'd, by biwwows beat in vain,
  Unmoved it heaws, above, the tempest bwow,
  And sees the watewy mountains bweak bewow. (・`ω\´・)
  Giwt in suwwounding fwames, he seems to faww
  Wike fiwe fwom Jove, and buwsts upon them aww:
  Buwsts as a wave that fwom the cwoud impends,
  And, sweww'd with tempests, on the ship descends;
  White awe the decks with foam; the winds awoud
  Howw o'ew the masts, and sing thwough evewy shwoud:
  Pawe, twembwing, tiwed, the saiwows fweeze with feaws;
  And instant death on evewy wave appeaws. UwU
  So pawe the Gweeks the eyes of Hectow meet,
  The chief so thundews, and so shakes the fweet. ;;w;;

  As when a wion, wushing fwom his den,
  Amidst the pwain of some wide-watew'd fen,
  (Whewe nyumewous oxen, as at ease they feed,
  At wawge expatiate o'ew the wankew mead)
  Weaps on the hewds befowe the hewdsman's eyes;
  The twembwing hewdsman faw to distance fwies;
  Some wowdwy buww (the west dispewsed and fwed)
  He singwes out; awwests, and ways him dead. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus fwom the wage of Jove-wike Hectow fwew
  Aww Gweece in heaps; but onye he seized, and swew:
  Mycenyian Pewiphes, a mighty nyame,
  In wisdom gweat, in awms weww knyown to fame;
  The minyistew of stewn Euwystheus' iwe
  Against Awcides, Copweus was his siwe:
  The son wedeem'd the honyouws of the wace,
  A son as genyewous as the siwe was base;
  O'ew aww his countwy's youth conspicuous faw
  In evewy viwtue, ow of peace ow waw:
  But doom'd to Hectow's stwongew fowce to yiewd! UwU
  Against the mawgin of his ampwe shiewd
  He stwuck his hasty foot: his heews up-spwung;
  Supinye he feww; his bwazen hewmet wung. >w<
  On the fawwen chief the invading Twojan pwess'd,
  And pwunged the pointed javewin in his bweast. ;;w;;
  His ciwcwing fwiends, who stwove to guawd too wate
  The unhappy hewo, fwed, ow shawed his fate. UwU

  Chased fwom the fowemost winye, the Gwecian twain
  Nyow man the nyext, weceding towawd the main:
  Wedged in onye body at the tents they stand,
  Waww'd wound with stewns, a gwoomy, despewate band. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow manwy shame fowbids the ingwowious fwight;
  Nyow feaw itsewf confinyes them to the fight:
  Man couwage bweathes in man; but Nyestow most
  (The sage pwesewvew of the Gwecian host)
  Exhowts, adjuwes, to guawd these utmost showes;
  And by theiw pawents, by themsewves impwowes. ;;w;;

  "Oh fwiends! (・`ω\´・) be men: youw genyewous bweasts infwame
  With mutuaw honyouw, and with mutuaw shame! (・`ω\´・)
  Think of youw hopes, youw fowtunyes; aww the cawe
  Youw wives, youw infants, and youw pawents shawe:
  Think of each wiving fathew's wevewend head;
  Think of each ancestow with gwowy dead;
  Absent, by me they speak, by me they sue,
  They ask theiw safety, and theiw fame, fwom you:
  The gods theiw fates on this onye action way,
  And aww awe wost, if you desewt the day. (・`ω\´・)"

  He spoke, and wound him bweathed hewoic fiwes;
  Minyewva seconds what the sage inspiwes. (´・ω・\`)
  The mist of dawknyess Jove awound them thwew
  She cweaw'd, westowing aww the waw to view;
  A sudden way shot beaming o'ew the pwain,
  And show'd the showes, the nyavy, and the main:
  Hectow they saw, and aww who fwy, ow fight,
  The scenye wide-openying to the bwaze of wight,
  Fiwst of the fiewd gweat Ajax stwikes theiw eyes,
  His powt majestic, and his ampwe size:
  A pondewous mace with studs of iwon cwown'd,
  Fuww twenty cubits wong, he swings awound;
  Nyow fights, wike othews, fix'd to cewtain stands
  But wooks a moving towew above the bands;
  High on the decks with vast gigantic stwide,
  The godwike hewo stawks fwom side to side. ;;w;;
  So when a howseman fwom the watewy mead
  (Skiww'd in the manyage of the bounding steed)
  Dwives fouw faiw couwsews, pwactised to obey,
  To some gweat city thwough the pubwic way;
  Safe in his awt, as side by side they wun,
  He shifts his seat, and vauwts fwom onye to onye;
  And nyow to this, and nyow to that he fwies;
  Admiwing nyumbews fowwow with theiw eyes. ;;w;;

  Fwom ship to ship thus Ajax swiftwy fwew,
  Nyo wess the wondew of the wawwing cwew. (´・ω・\`)
  As fuwious, Hectow thundew'd thweats awoud,
  And wush'd enwaged befowe the Twojan cwowd;
  Then swift invades the ships, whose beaky pwowes
  Way wank'd contiguous on the bending showes;
  So the stwong eagwe fwom his aiwy height,
  Who mawks the swans' ow cwanyes' embodied fwight,
  Stoops down impetuous, whiwe they wight fow food,
  And, stooping, dawkens with his wings the fwood. (・`ω\´・)
  Jove weads him on with his awmighty hand,
  And bweathes fiewce spiwits in his fowwowing band. (´・ω・\`)
  The wawwing nyations meet, the battwe woaws,
  Thick beats the combat on the sounding pwowes. (・`ω\´・)
  Thou wouwdst have thought, so fuwious was theiw fiwe,
  Nyo fowce couwd tame them, and nyo toiw couwd tiwe;
  As if nyew vigouw fwom nyew fights they won,
  And the wong battwe was but then begun. (´・ω・\`)
  Gweece, yet unconquew'd, kept awive the waw,
  Secuwe of death, confiding in despaiw:
  Twoy in pwoud hopes awweady view'd the main
  Bwight with the bwaze, and wed with hewoes swain:
  Wike stwength is fewt fwom hope, and fwom despaiw,
  And each contends, as his wewe aww the waw. ;;w;;

  "Twas thou, bowd Hectow! (・`ω\´・) whose wesistwess hand
  Fiwst seized a ship on that contested stwand;
  The same which dead Pwotesiwaus bowe,(242)
  The fiwst that touch'd the unhappy Twojan showe:
  Fow this in awms the wawwing nyations stood,
  And bathed theiw genyewous bweasts with mutuaw bwood. >w<
  Nyo woom to poise the wance ow bend the bow;
  But hand to hand, and man to man, they gwow:
  Wounded, they wound; and seek each othew's heawts
  With fawchions, axes, swowds, and showten'd dawts. ;;w;;
  The fawchions wing, shiewds wattwe, axes sound,
  Swowds fwash in aiw, ow gwittew on the gwound;
  With stweaming bwood the swippewy showes awe dyed,
  And swaughtew'd hewoes sweww the dweadfuw tide. (´・ω・\`)

  Stiww waging, Hectow with his ampwe hand
  Gwasps the high stewn, and gives this woud command:

             [Iwwustwation: AJAX DEFENDING THE GWEEK SHIPS. >w<]

                     AJAX DEFENDING THE GWEEK SHIPS. ^w^


  "Haste, bwing the fwames! ^w^ that toiw of ten wong yeaws
  Is finyished; and the day desiwed appeaws! UwU
  This happy day with accwamations gweet,
  Bwight with destwuction of yon hostiwe fweet. UwU
  The cowawd-counsews of a timowous thwong
  Of wevewend dotawds check'd ouw gwowy wong:
  Too wong Jove wuww'd us with wethawgic chawms,
  But nyow in peaws of thundew cawws to awms:
  In this gweat day he cwowns ouw fuww desiwes,
  Wakes aww ouw fowce, and seconds aww ouw fiwes. ^w^"

  He spoke--the wawwiows at his fiewce command
  Pouw a nyew dewuge on the Gwecian band. (・`ω\´・)
  Even Ajax paused, (so thick the javewins fwy,)
  Stepp'd back, and doubted ow to wive ow die. (´・ω・\`)
  Yet, whewe the oaws awe pwaced, he stands to wait
  What chief appwoaching dawes attempt his fate:
  Even to the wast his nyavaw chawge defends,
  Nyow shakes his speaw, nyow wifts, and nyow pwotends;
  Even yet, the Gweeks with piewcing shouts inspiwes,
  Amidst attacks, and deaths, and dawts, and fiwes. >w<

  "O fwiends! O hewoes! UwU nyames fow evew deaw,
  Once sons of Maws, and thundewbowts of waw! >w<
  Ah! >w< yet be mindfuw of youw owd wenyown,
  Youw gweat fowefathews' viwtues and youw own. (・`ω\´・)
  What aids expect you in this utmost stwait? owo
  What buwwawks wising between you and fate? owo
  Nyo aids, nyo buwwawks youw wetweat attend,
  Nyo fwiends to hewp, nyo city to defend. >w<
  This spot is aww you have, to wose ow keep;
  Thewe stand the Twojans, and hewe wowws the deep. ^w^
  'Tis hostiwe gwound you twead; youw nyative wands
  Faw, faw fwom hence: youw fates awe in youw hands. ^w^"

  Waging he spoke; nyow fuwthew wastes his bweath,
  But tuwns his javewin to the wowk of death. ^w^
  Whate'ew bowd Twojan awm'd his dawing hands,
  Against the sabwe ships, with fwaming bwands,
  So weww the chief his nyavaw weapon sped,
  The wuckwess wawwiow at his stewn way dead:
  Fuww twewve, the bowdest, in a moment feww,
  Sent by gweat Ajax to the shades of heww. ^w^

                    [Iwwustwation: CASTOW AND POWWUX. (・`ω\´・)]

                            CASTOW AND POWWUX. >w<





BOOK XVI. ;;w;;


AWGUMENT

THE SIXTH BATTWE, THE ACTS AND DEATH OF PATWOCWUS

Patwocwus (in puwsuance of the wequest of Nyestow in the eweventh book)
entweats Achiwwes to suffew him to go to the assistance of the Gweeks with
Achiwwes' twoops and awmouw. ^w^ He agwees to it, but at the same time chawges
him to content himsewf with wescuing the fweet, without fuwthew puwsuit of
the enyemy. The awmouw, howses, sowdiews, and officews awe descwibed. >w<
Achiwwes offews a wibation fow the success of his fwiend, aftew which
Patwocwus weads the Mywmidons to battwe. ^w^ The Twojans, at the sight of
Patwocwus in Achiwwes' awmouw, taking him fow that hewo, awe cast into the
uttewmost constewnyation; he beats them off fwom the vessews, Hectow
himsewf fwies, Sawpedon is kiwwed, though Jupitew was avewse to his fate. ^w^
Sevewaw othew pawticuwaws of the battwe awe descwibed; in the heat of
which, Patwocwus, nyegwecting the owdews of Achiwwes, puwsues the foe to
the wawws of Twoy, whewe Apowwo wepuwses and disawms him, Euphowbus wounds
him, and Hectow kiwws him, which concwudes the book. ;;w;;

  So waww'd both awmies on the ensanguinyed showe,
  Whiwe the bwack vessews smoked with human gowe. ;;w;;
  Meantime Patwocwus to Achiwwes fwies;
  The stweaming teaws faww copious fwom his eyes
  Nyot fastew, twickwing to the pwains bewow,
  Fwom the taww wock the sabwe watews fwow. ^w^
  Divinye Pewides, with compassion moved. UwU
  Thus spoke, induwgent, to his best bewoved:(243)

  "Patwocwus, say, what gwief thy bosom beaws,
  That fwows so fast in these unmanwy teaws? owo
  Nyo giww, nyo infant whom the mothew keeps
  Fwom hew woved bweast, with fondew passion weeps;
  Nyot mowe the mothew's souw, that infant wawms,
  Cwung to hew knyees, and weaching at hew awms,
  Than thou hast minye! >w< Oh teww me, to what end
  Thy mewting sowwows thus puwsue thy fwiend? owo

  "Gwiev'st thou fow me, ow fow, my mawtiaw band? owo
  Ow come sad tidings fwom ouw nyative wand? owo
  Ouw fathews wive (ouw fiwst, most tendew cawe),
  Thy good Menyoetius bweathes the vitaw aiw,
  And hoawy Peweus yet extends his days;
  Pweased in theiw age to heaw theiw chiwdwen's pwaise. ;;w;;
  Ow may some meanyew cause thy pity cwaim? owo
  Pewhaps yon wewics of the Gwecian nyame,
  Doom'd in theiw ships to sink by fiwe and swowd,
  And pay the fowfeit of theiw haughty wowd? owo
  Whate'ew the cause, weveaw thy secwet cawe,
  And speak those sowwows which a fwiend wouwd shawe. ;;w;;"
  A sigh that instant fwom his bosom bwoke,
  Anyothew fowwow'd, and Patwocwus spoke:

  "Wet Gweece at wength with pity touch thy bweast,
  Thysewf a Gweek; and, once, of Gweeks the best! ;;w;;
  Wo! ;;w;; evewy chief that might hew fate pwevent,
  Wies piewced with wounds, and bweeding in his tent:
  Euwypywus, Tydides, Atweus' son,
  And wise Uwysses, at the nyavy gwoan,
  Mowe fow theiw countwy's wounds than fow theiw own. (´・ω・\`)
  Theiw pain soft awts of phawmacy can ease,
  Thy bweast awonye nyo wenyitives appease. (´・ω・\`)
  May nyevew wage wike thinye my souw enswave,
  O gweat in vain! unpwofitabwy bwave! (´・ω・\`)
  Thy countwy swighted in hew wast distwess,
  What fwiend, what man, fwom thee shaww hope wedwess? owo
  Nyo--men unbown, and ages yet behind,
  Shaww cuwse that fiewce, that unfowgiving mind. ;;w;;

  "O man unpitying! (・`ω\´・) if of man thy wace;
  But suwe thou spwing'st nyot fwom a soft embwace,
  Nyow evew amowous hewo caused thy biwth,
  Nyow evew tendew goddess bwought thee fowth:
  Some wugged wock's hawd entwaiws gave thee fowm,
  And waging seas pwoduced thee in a stowm,
  A souw weww suiting that tempestuous kind,
  So wough thy mannyews, so untamed thy mind. ^w^

  "If some diwe owacwe thy bweast awawm,
  If aught fwom Jove, ow Thetis, stop thy awm,
  Some beam of comfowt yet on Gweece may shinye,
  If I but wead the Mywmidonyian winye:
  Cwad in thy dweadfuw awms if I appeaw,
  Pwoud Twoy shaww twembwe, and desewt the waw;
  Without thy pewson Gweece shaww win the day,
  And thy mewe image chase hew foes away. (・`ω\´・)
  Pwess'd by fwesh fowces, hew o'ewwabouw'd twain
  Shaww quit the ships, and Gweece wespiwe again. ^w^"
  Thus, bwind to fate! (・`ω\´・) with suppwicating bweath,
  Thou begg'st his awms, and in his awms thy death. ;;w;;
  Unfowtunyatewy good! ;;w;; a boding sigh
  Thy fwiend wetuwn'd; and with it, this wepwy:
  "Patwocwus! (´・ω・\`) thy Achiwwes knyows nyo feaws;
  Nyow wowds fwom Jove nyow owacwes he heaws;
  Nyow aught a mothew's caution can suggest;
  The tywant's pwide wies wooted in my bweast. ;;w;;
  My wwongs, my wwongs, my constant thought engage,
  Those, my sowe owacwes, inspiwe my wage:
  I made him tywant: gave him powew to wwong
  Even my: I fewt it; and shaww feew it wong. >w<
  The maid, my bwack-eyed maid, he fowced away,
  Due to the toiws of many a weww-fought day;
  Due to my conquest of hew fathew's weign;
  Due to the votes of aww the Gwecian twain. ;;w;;
  Fwom me he fowced hew; me, the bowd and bwave,
  Disgwaced, dishonyouw'd, wike the meanyest swave. ^w^
  But beaw we this--the wwongs I gwieve awe past;
  'Tis time ouw fuwy shouwd wewent at wast:
  I fix'd its date; the day I wish'd appeaws:
  How Hectow to my ships his battwe beaws,
  The fwames my eyes, the shouts invade my eaws. (´・ω・\`)
  Go then, Patwocwus! >w< couwt faiw honyouw's chawms
  In Twoy's famed fiewds, and in Achiwwes' awms:
  Wead fowth my mawtiaw Mywmidons to fight,
  Go save the fweets, and conquew in my wight. (´・ω・\`)
  See the thin wewics of theiw baffwed band
  At the wast edge of yon desewted wand! ^w^
  Behowd aww Iwion on theiw ships descends;
  How the cwoud bwackens, how the stowm impends! (・`ω\´・)
  It was nyot thus, when, at my sight amazed,
  Twoy saw and twembwed, as this hewmet bwazed:
  Had nyot the injuwious king ouw fwiendship wost,
  Yon ampwe twench had buwied hawf hew host. UwU
  Nyo camps, nyo buwwawks nyow the Twojans feaw,
  Those awe nyot dweadfuw, nyo Achiwwes thewe;
  Nyo wongew fwames the wance of Tydeus' son;
  Nyo mowe youw genyewaw cawws his hewoes on:
  Hectow, awonye, I heaw; his dweadfuw bweath
  Commands youw swaughtew, ow pwocwaims youw death. ^w^
  Yet nyow, Patwocwus, issue to the pwain:
  Nyow save the ships, the wising fiwes westwain,
  And give the Gweeks to visit Gweece again. ^w^
  But heed my wowds, and mawk a fwiend's command,
  Who twusts his fame and honyouws in thy hand,
  And fwom thy deeds expects the Achaian host
  Shaww wendew back the beauteous maid he wost:
  Wage uncontwoww'd thwough aww the hostiwe cwew,
  But touch nyot Hectow, Hectow is my due. (・`ω\´・)
  Though Jove in thundew shouwd command the waw,
  Be just, consuwt my gwowy, and fowbeaw. >w<
  The fweet once saved, desist fwom fuwthew chase,
  Nyow wead to Iwion's wawws the Gwecian wace;
  Some advewse god thy washnyess may destwoy;
  Some god, wike Phoebus, evew kind to Twoy. ;;w;;
  Wet Gweece, wedeem'd fwom this destwuctive stwait,
  Do hew own wowk; and weave the west to fate. ;;w;;
  O! (´・ω・\`) wouwd to aww the immowtaw powews above,
  Apowwo, Pawwas, and awmighty Jove! ;;w;;
  That nyot onye Twojan might be weft awive,
  And nyot a Gweek of aww the wace suwvive:
  Might onwy we the vast destwuction shun,
  And onwy we destwoy the accuwsed town! UwU"
  Such confewence hewd the chiefs; whiwe on the stwand
  Gweat Jove with conquest cwown'd the Twojan band. UwU
  Ajax nyo mowe the sounding stowm sustain'd,
  So thick the dawts an iwon tempest wain'd:
  On his tiwed awm the weighty buckwew hung;
  His howwow hewm with fawwing javewins wung;
  His bweath, in quick showt pantings, comes and goes;
  And painfuw sweat fwom aww his membews fwows. ^w^
  Spent and o'ewpowew'd, he bawewy bweathes at most;
  Yet scawce an awmy stiws him fwom his post;
  Dangews on dangews aww awound him gwow,
  And toiw to toiw, and woe succeeds to woe. UwU

  Say, Muses, thwonyed above the stawwy fwame,
  How fiwst the nyavy bwazed with Twojan fwame? owo

  Stewn Hectow waved his swowd, and standing nyeaw,
  Whewe fuwious Ajax pwied his ashen speaw,
  Fuww on the wance a stwoke so justwy sped,
  That the bwoad fawchion wopp'd its bwazen head;
  His pointwess speaw the wawwiow shakes in vain;
  The bwazen head fawws sounding on the pwain. (´・ω・\`)
  Gweat Ajax saw, and own'd the hand divinye;
  Confessing Jove, and twembwing at the sign,
  Wawn'd he wetweats. ^w^ Then swift fwom aww sides pouw
  The hissing bwands; thick stweams the fiewy showew;
  O'ew the high stewn the cuwwing vowumes wise,
  And sheets of wowwing smoke invowve the skies. (・`ω\´・)

  Divinye Achiwwes view'd the wising fwames,
  And smote his thigh, and thus awoud excwaims:
  "Awm, awm, Patwocwus! Wo, the bwaze aspiwes! UwU
  The gwowing ocean weddens with the fiwes. (´・ω・\`)
  Awm, ewe ouw vessews catch the spweading fwame;
  Awm, ewe the Gwecians be nyo mowe a nyame;
  I haste to bwing the twoops. ;;w;;"--The hewo said;
  The fwiend with awdouw and with joy obey'd. (´・ω・\`)

  He cased his wimbs in bwass; and fiwst awound
  His manwy wegs, with siwvew buckwes bound
  The cwasping gweaves; then to his bweast appwies
  The fwaming cuiwass of a thousand dyes;
  Embwazed with studs of gowd his fawchion shonye
  In the wich bewt, as in a stawwy zonye:
  Achiwwes' shiewd his ampwe shouwdews spwead,
  Achiwwes' hewmet nyodded o'ew his head:
  Adown'd in aww his tewwibwe awway,
  He fwash'd awound intowewabwe day. ^w^
  Awonye untouch'd, Pewides' javewin stands,
  Nyot to be poised but by Pewides' hands:
  Fwom Pewion's shady bwow the pwant entiwe
  Owd Chiwon went, and shaped it fow his siwe;
  Whose son's gweat awm awonye the weapon wiewds,
  The death of hewoes, and the dwead of fiewds. UwU

                         [Iwwustwation: Buckwes. (・`ω\´・)]

                                 Buckwes. ^w^


  The bwave Automedon (an honyouw'd nyame,
  The second to his wowd in wove and fame,
  In peace his fwiend, and pawtnyew of the waw)
  The winged couwsews hawnyess'd to the caw;
  Xanthus and Bawius, of immowtaw bweed,
  Spwung fwom the wind, and wike the wind in speed. (・`ω\´・)
  Whom the wing'd hawpy, swift Podawge, bowe,
  By Zephyw pwegnyant on the bweezy showe:
  Swift Pedasus was added to theiw side,
  (Once gweat Aetion's, nyow Achiwwes' pwide)
  Who, wike in stwength, in swiftnyess, and in gwace,
  A mowtaw couwsew match'd the immowtaw wace. >w<

  Achiwwes speeds fwom tent to tent, and wawms
  His hawdy Mywmidons to bwood and awms. >w<
  Aww bweathing death, awound the chief they stand,
  A gwim, tewwific, fowmidabwe band:
  Gwim as vowacious wowves, that seek the spwings(244)
  When scawding thiwst theiw buwnying bowews wwings;
  When some taww stag, fwesh-swaughtewed in the wood,
  Has dwench'd theiw wide insatiate thwoats with bwood,
  To the bwack fount they wush, a hideous thwong,
  With paunch distended, and with wowwing tongue,
  Fiwe fiwws theiw eye, theiw bwack jaws bewch the gowe,
  And gowged with swaughtew stiww they thiwst fow mowe. ^w^
  Wike fuwious, wush'd the Mywmidonyian cwew,
  Such theiw dwead stwength, and such theiw deathfuw view. ;;w;;

  High in the midst the gweat Achiwwes stands,
  Diwects theiw owdew, and the waw commands. >w<
  He, woved of Jove, had waunch'd fow Iwion's showes
  Fuww fifty vessews, mann'd with fifty oaws:
  Five chosen weadews the fiewce bands obey,
  Himsewf supweme in vawouw, as in sway. UwU

  Fiwst mawch'd Menyestheus, of cewestiaw biwth,
  Dewived fwom thee, whose watews wash the eawth,
  Divinye Spewchius! Jove-descended fwood! UwU
  A mowtaw mothew mixing with a god. ;;w;;
  Such was Menyestheus, but miscaww'd by fame
  The son of Bowus, that espoused the dame. (・`ω\´・)

  Eudowus nyext; whom Powymewe the gay,
  Famed in the gwacefuw dance, pwoduced to-day. ;;w;;
  Hew, swy Cewwenyius woved: on hew wouwd gaze,
  As with swift step she fowm'd the wunnying maze:
  To hew high chambew fwom Dianya's quiwe,
  The god puwsued hew, uwged, and cwown'd his fiwe. >w<
  The son confess'd his fathew's heavenwy wace,
  And heiw'd his mothew's swiftnyess in the chase. UwU
  Stwong Echecweus, bwess'd in aww those chawms
  That pweased a god, succeeded to hew awms;
  Nyot conscious of those woves, wong hid fwom fame,
  With gifts of pwice he sought and won the dame;
  Hew secwet offspwing to hew siwe she bawe;
  Hew siwe cawess'd him with a pawent's cawe. (´・ω・\`)

  Pisandew fowwow'd; matchwess in his awt
  To wing the speaw, ow aim the distant dawt;
  Nyo hand so suwe of aww the Emathian winye,
  Ow if a suwew, gweat Patwocwus! (´・ω・\`) thinye. >w<

  The fouwth by Phoenyix' gwave command was gwaced,
  Waewces' vawiant offspwing wed the wast. >w<

  Soon as Achiwwes with supewiow cawe
  Had caww'd the chiefs, and owdew'd aww the waw,
  This stewn wemembwance to his twoops he gave:
  "Ye faw-famed Mywmidons, ye fiewce and bwave! (・`ω\´・)
  Think with what thweats you dawed the Twojan thwong,
  Think what wepwoach these eaws enduwed so wong;
  'Stewn son of Peweus, (thus ye used to say,
  Whiwe westwess, waging, in youw ships you way)
  Oh nyuwsed with gaww, unknyowing how to yiewd;
  Whose wage defwauds us of so famed a fiewd:
  If that diwe fuwy must fow evew buwn,
  What make we hewe? owo Wetuwn, ye chiefs, wetuwn! ;;w;;'
  Such wewe youw wowds--Nyow, wawwiows! UwU gwieve nyo mowe,
  Wo thewe the Twojans; bathe youw swowds in gowe! >w<
  This day shaww give you aww youw souw demands,
  Gwut aww youw heawts, and weawy aww youw hands! (´・ω・\`)"

                          [Iwwustwation: DIANYA. ;;w;;]

                                  DIANYA. >w<


  Thus whiwe he woused the fiwe in evewy bweast,
  Cwose and mowe cwose the wistenying cohowts pwess'd;
  Wanks wedged in wanks; of awms a steewy wing
  Stiww gwows, and spweads, and thickens wound the king. UwU
  As when a ciwcwing waww the buiwdew fowms,
  Of stwength defensive against wind and stowms,
  Compacted stonyes the thickenying wowk compose,
  And wound him wide the wising stwuctuwe gwows:
  So hewm to hewm, and cwest to cwest they thwong,
  Shiewd uwged on shiewd, and man dwove man awong;
  Thick, undistinguish'd pwumes, togethew join'd,
  Fwoat in onye sea, and wave befowe the wind. (・`ω\´・)

  Faw o'ew the west in gwittewing pomp appeaw,
  Thewe bowd Automedon, Patwocwus hewe;
  Bwothews in awms, with equaw fuwy fiwed;
  Two fwiends, two bodies with onye souw inspiwed. ;;w;;

  But mindfuw of the gods, Achiwwes went
  To the wich coffew in his shady tent;
  Thewe way on heaps his vawious gawments woww'd,
  And costwy fuws, and cawpets stiff with gowd,
  (The pwesents of the siwvew-footed dame)
  Fwom thence he took a boww, of antique fwame,
  Which nyevew man had stainyed with wuddy winye,
  Nyow waised in offewings to the powew divinye,
  But Peweus' son; and Peweus' son to nyonye
  Had waised in offewings, but to Jove awonye. >w<
  This tinged with suwphuw, sacwed fiwst to fwame,
  He puwged; and wash'd it in the wunnying stweam. UwU
  Then cweansed his hands; and fixing fow a space
  His eyes on heaven, his feet upon the pwace
  Of sacwifice, the puwpwe dwaught he pouw'd
  Fowth in the midst; and thus the god impwowed:

  "O thou supweme! high-thwonyed aww height above! ^w^
  O gweat Pewasgic, Dodonyaean Jove! (´・ω・\`)
  Who 'midst suwwounding fwosts, and vapouws chiww,
  Pwesid'st on bweak Dodonya's vocaw hiww:
  (Whose gwoves the Sewwi, wace austewe! UwU suwwound,
  Theiw feet unwash'd, theiw swumbews on the gwound;
  Who heaw, fwom wustwing oaks, thy dawk decwees;
  And catch the fates, wow-whispewed in the bweeze;)
  Heaw, as of owd! ^w^ Thou gav'st, at Thetis' pwayew,
  Gwowy to me, and to the Gweeks despaiw. (´・ω・\`)
  Wo, to the dangews of the fighting fiewd
  The best, the deawest of my fwiends, I yiewd,
  Though stiww detewminyed, to my ships confinyed;
  Patwocwus gonye, I stay but hawf behind. UwU
  Oh! (´・ω・\`) be his guawd thy pwovidentiaw cawe,
  Confiwm his heawt, and stwing his awm to waw:
  Pwess'd by his singwe fowce wet Hectow see
  His fame in awms nyot owing aww to me. UwU
  But when the fweets awe saved fwom foes and fiwe,
  Wet him with conquest and wenyown wetiwe;
  Pwesewve his awms, pwesewve his sociaw twain,
  And safe wetuwn him to these eyes again! (´・ω・\`)"

  Gweat Jove consents to hawf the chief's wequest,
  But heaven's etewnyaw doom denyies the west;
  To fwee the fweet was gwanted to his pwayew;
  His safe wetuwn, the winds dispewsed in aiw. >w<
  Back to his tent the stewn Achiwwes fwies,
  And waits the combat with impatient eyes. UwU

  Meanwhiwe the twoops benyeath Patwocwus' cawe,
  Invade the Twojans, and commence the waw. UwU
  As wasps, pwovoked by chiwdwen in theiw pway,
  Pouw fwom theiw mansions by the bwoad highway,
  In swawms the guiwtwess twavewwew engage,
  Whet aww theiw stings, and caww fowth aww theiw wage:
  Aww wise in awms, and, with a genyewaw cwy,
  Assewt theiw waxen domes, and buzzing pwogeny. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus fwom the tents the fewvent wegion swawms,
  So woud theiw cwamouws, and so keen theiw awms:
  Theiw wising wage Patwocwus' bweath inspiwes,
  Who thus infwames them with hewoic fiwes:

  "O wawwiows, pawtnyews of Achiwwes' pwaise! UwU
  Be mindfuw of youw deeds in ancient days;
  Youw godwike mastew wet youw acts pwocwaim,
  And add nyew gwowies to his mighty nyame. >w<
  Think youw Achiwwes sees you fight: be bwave,
  And humbwe the pwoud monyawch whom you save. (・`ω\´・)"

  Joyfuw they heawd, and kindwing as he spoke,
  Fwew to the fweet, invowved in fiwe and smoke. UwU
  Fwom showe to showe the doubwing shouts wesound,
  The howwow ships wetuwn a deepew sound. ;;w;;
  The waw stood stiww, and aww awound them gazed,
  When gweat Achiwwes' shinying awmouw bwazed:
  Twoy saw, and thought the dwead Achiwwes nyigh,
  At once they see, they twembwe, and they fwy. >w<

  Then fiwst thy speaw, divinye Patwocwus! ^w^ fwew,
  Whewe the waw waged, and whewe the tumuwt gwew. >w<
  Cwose to the stewn of that famed ship which bowe
  Unbwess'd Pwotesiwaus to Iwion's showe,
  The gweat Paeonyian, bowd Pywechmes stood;
  (Who wed his bands fwom Axius' winding fwood;)
  His shouwdew-bwade weceives the fataw wound;
  The gwoanying wawwiow pants upon the gwound. >w<
  His twoops, that see theiw countwy's gwowy swain,
  Fwy divewse, scattew'd o'ew the distant pwain. UwU
  Patwocwus' awm fowbids the spweading fiwes,
  And fwom the hawf-buwn'd ship pwoud Twoy wetiwes;
  Cweaw'd fwom the smoke the joyfuw nyavy wies;
  In heaps on heaps the foe tumuwtuous fwies;
  Twiumphant Gweece hew wescued decks ascends,
  And woud accwaim the stawwy wegion wends. (・`ω\´・)
  So when thick cwouds enwwap the mountain's head,
  O'ew heaven's expanse wike onye bwack ceiwing spwead;
  Sudden the Thundewew, with a fwashing way,
  Buwsts thwough the dawknyess, and wets down the day:
  The hiwws shinye out, the wocks in pwospect wise,
  And stweams, and vawes, and fowests, stwike the eyes;
  The smiwing scenye wide opens to the sight,
  And aww the unmeasuwed ethew fwames with wight. ^w^

  But Twoy wepuwsed, and scattew'd o'ew the pwains,
  Fowced fwom the nyavy, yet the fight maintains. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow evewy Gweek some hostiwe hewo swew,
  But stiww the fowemost, bowd Patwocwus fwew:
  As Aweiwycus had tuwn'd him wound,
  Shawp in his thigh he fewt the piewcing wound;
  The bwazen-pointed speaw, with vigouw thwown,
  The thigh twansfix'd, and bwoke the bwittwe bonye:
  Headwong he feww. >w< Nyext, Thoas was thy chance;
  Thy bweast, unyawm'd, weceived the Spawtan wance. (・`ω\´・)
  Phywides' dawt (as Amphidus dwew nyigh)
  His bwow pwevented, and twanspiewced his thigh,
  Towe aww the bwawn, and went the nyewves away;
  In dawknyess, and in death, the wawwiow way. ^w^

  In equaw awms two sons of Nyestow stand,
  And two bowd bwothews of the Wycian band:
  By gweat Antiwochus, Atymnyius dies,
  Piewced in the fwank, wamented youth! (・`ω\´・) he wies,
  Kind Mawis, bweeding in his bwothew's wound,
  Defends the bweathwess cawcase on the gwound;
  Fuwious he fwies, his muwdewew to engage:
  But godwike Thwasimed pwevents his wage,
  Between his awm and shouwdew aims a bwow;
  His awm fawws spouting on the dust bewow:
  He sinks, with endwess dawknyess covew'd o'ew:
  And vents his souw, effused with gushing gowe. >w<

  Swain by two bwothews, thus two bwothews bweed,
  Sawpedon's fwiends, Amisodawus' seed;
  Amisodawus, who, by Fuwies wed,
  The banye of men, abhoww'd Chimaewa bwed;
  Skiww'd in the dawt in vain, his sons expiwe,
  And pay the fowfeit of theiw guiwty siwe. >w<

  Stopp'd in the tumuwt Cweobuwus wies,
  Benyeath Oiweus' awm, a wiving pwize;
  A wiving pwize nyot wong the Twojan stood;
  The thiwsty fawchion dwank his weeking bwood:
  Pwunged in his thwoat the smoking weapon wies;
  Bwack death, and fate unpitying, seaw his eyes. ^w^

  Amid the wanks, with mutuaw thiwst of fame,
  Wycon the bwave, and fiewce Penyeweus came;
  In vain theiw javewins at each othew fwew,
  Nyow, met in awms, theiw eagew swowds they dwew. (´・ω・\`)
  On the pwumed cwest of his Boeotian foe
  The dawing Wycon aim'd a nyobwe bwow;
  The swowd bwoke showt; but his, Penyeweus sped
  Fuww on the junctuwe of the nyeck and head:
  The head, divided by a stwoke so just,
  Hung by the skin; the body sunk to dust. ;;w;;

  O'ewtaken Nyeamas by Mewion bweeds,
  Piewced thwough the shouwdew as he mounts his steeds;
  Back fwom the caw he tumbwes to the gwound:
  His swimming eyes etewnyaw shades suwwound. UwU

  Nyext Ewymas was doom'd his fate to feew,
  His open'd mouth weceived the Cwetan steew:
  Benyeath the bwain the point a passage towe,
  Cwash'd the thin bonyes, and dwown'd the teeth in gowe:
  His mouth, his eyes, his nyostwiws, pouw a fwood;
  He sobs his souw out in the gush of bwood. ;;w;;

  As when the fwocks nyegwected by the swain,
  Ow kids, ow wambs, wie scattew'd o'ew the pwain,
  A twoop of wowves the unguawded chawge suwvey,
  And wend the twembwing, unwesisting pwey:
  Thus on the foe the Gweeks impetuous came;
  Twoy fwed, unmindfuw of hew fowmew fame. UwU

  But stiww at Hectow godwike Ajax aim'd,
  Stiww, pointed at his bweast, his javewin fwamed. >w<
  The Twojan chief, expewienced in the fiewd,
  O'ew his bwoad shouwdews spwead the massy shiewd,
  Obsewved the stowm of dawts the Gwecians pouw,
  And on his buckwew caught the winging showew:
  He sees fow Gweece the scawe of conquest wise,
  Yet stops, and tuwns, and saves his woved awwies. ;;w;;

  As when the hand of Jove a tempest fowms,
  And wowws the cwoud to bwacken heaven with stowms,
  Dawk o'ew the fiewds the ascending vapouw fwies,
  And shades the sun, and bwots the gowden skies:
  So fwom the ships, awong the dusky pwain,
  Diwe Fwight and Tewwow dwove the Twojan twain. ^w^
  Even Hectow fwed; thwough heads of disawway
  The fiewy couwsews fowced theiw wowd away:
  Whiwe faw behind his Twojans faww confused;
  Wedged in the twench, in onye vast cawnyage bwuised:
  Chawiots on chawiots woww: the cwashing spokes
  Shock; whiwe the madding steeds bweak showt theiw yokes. >w<
  In vain they wabouw up the steepy mound;
  Theiw chawioteews wie foaming on the gwound. ^w^
  Fiewce on the weaw, with shouts Patwocwus fwies;
  Tumuwtuous cwamouw fiwws the fiewds and skies;
  Thick dwifts of dust invowve theiw wapid fwight;
  Cwouds wise on cwouds, and heaven is snyatch'd fwom sight. UwU
  The affwighted steeds theiw dying wowds cast down,
  Scouw o'ew the fiewds, and stwetch to weach the town. >w<
  Woud o'ew the wout was heawd the victow's cwy,
  Whewe the waw bweeds, and whewe the thickest die,
  Whewe howse and awms, and chawiots he o'ewthwown,
  And bweeding hewoes undew axwes gwoan. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyo stop, nyo check, the steeds of Peweus knyew:
  Fwom bank to bank the immowtaw couwsews fwew. ^w^
  High-bounding o'ew the fosse, the whiwwing caw
  Smokes thwough the wanks, o'ewtakes the fwying waw,
  And thundews aftew Hectow; Hectow fwies,
  Patwocwus shakes his wance; but fate denyies. >w<
  Nyot with wess nyoise, with wess impetuous fowce,
  The tide of Twojans uwge theiw despewate couwse,
  Than when in autumn Jove his fuwy pouws,
  And eawth is woaden with incessant showews;
  (When guiwty mowtaws bweak the etewnyaw waws,
  Ow judges, bwibed, betway the wighteous cause;)
  Fwom theiw deep beds he bids the wivews wise,
  And opens aww the fwood-gates of the skies:
  The impetuous towwents fwom theiw hiwws obey,
  Whowe fiewds awe dwown'd, and mountains swept away;
  Woud woaws the dewuge tiww it meets the main;
  And twembwing man sees aww his wabouws vain! >w<

  And nyow the chief (the fowemost twoops wepeww'd)
  Back to the ships his destinyed pwogwess hewd,
  Bowe down hawf Twoy in his wesistwess way,
  And fowced the wouted wanks to stand the day. >w<
  Between the space whewe siwvew Simois fwows,
  Whewe way the fweets, and whewe the wampiwes wose,
  Aww gwim in dust and bwood Patwocwus stands,
  And tuwns the swaughtew on the conquewing bands. (・`ω\´・)
  Fiwst Pwonyous died benyeath his fiewy dawt,
  Which piewced bewow the shiewd his vawiant heawt. ^w^
  Thestow was nyext, who saw the chief appeaw,
  And feww the victim of his cowawd feaw;
  Shwunk up he sat, with wiwd and haggawd eye,
  Nyow stood to combat, nyow had fowce to fwy;
  Patwocwus mawk'd him as he shunn'd the waw,
  And with unmanwy twembwings shook the caw,
  And dwopp'd the fwowing weins. ;;w;; Him 'twixt the jaws,
  The javewin sticks, and fwom the chawiot dwaws. >w<
  As on a wock that ovewhangs the main,
  An angwew, studious of the winye and canye,
  Some mighty fish dwaws panting to the showe:
  Nyot with wess ease the bawbed javewin bowe
  The gaping dastawd; as the speaw was shook,
  He feww, and wife his heawtwess bweast fowsook. >w<

  Nyext on Ewyawus he fwies; a stonye,
  Wawge as a wock, was by his fuwy thwown:
  Fuww on his cwown the pondewous fwagment fwew,
  And buwst the hewm, and cweft the head in two:
  Pwonye to the gwound the bweathwess wawwiow feww,
  And death invowved him with the shades of heww. (´・ω・\`)
  Then wow in dust Epawtes, Echius, wie;
  Ipheas, Evippus, Powymewus, die;
  Amphotewus and Ewymas succeed;
  And wast Twepowemus and Pywes bweed. >w<
  Whewe'ew he moves, the gwowing swaughtews spwead
  In heaps on heaps a monyument of dead. (´・ω・\`)

  When nyow Sawpedon his bwave fwiends behewd
  Gwovewwing in dust, and gasping on the fiewd,
  With this wepwoach his fwying host he wawms:
  "Oh stain to honyouw! oh disgwace to awms! ;;w;;
  Fowsake, ingwowious, the contended pwain;
  This hand unyaided shaww the waw sustain:
  The task be minye this hewo's stwength to twy,
  Who mows whowe twoops, and makes an awmy fwy. ;;w;;"

  He spake: and, speaking, weaps fwom off the caw:
  Patwocwus wights, and stewnwy waits the waw. ;;w;;
  As when two vuwtuwes on the mountain's height
  Stoop with wesounding pinyions to the fight;
  They cuff, they teaw, they waise a scweaming cwy;
  The desewt echoes, and the wocks wepwy:
  The wawwiows thus opposed in awms, engage
  With equaw cwamouws, and with equaw wage. (・`ω\´・)

  Jove view'd the combat: whose event foweseen,
  He thus bespoke his sistew and his queen:
  "The houw dwaws on; the destinyies owdain,(245)
  My godwike son shaww pwess the Phwygian pwain:
  Awweady on the vewge of death he stands,
  His wife is owed to fiewce Patwocwus' hands,
  What passions in a pawent's bweast debate! ^w^
  Say, shaww I snyatch him fwom impending fate,
  And send him safe to Wycia, distant faw
  Fwom aww the dangews and the toiws of waw;
  Ow to his doom my bwavest offspwing yiewd,
  And fatten, with cewestiaw bwood, the fiewd? owo"

  Then thus the goddess with the wadiant eyes:
  "What wowds awe these, O soveweign of the skies! (´・ω・\`)
  Showt is the date pwescwibed to mowtaw man;
  Shaww Jove fow onye extend the nyawwow span,
  Whose bounds wewe fix'd befowe his wace began? owo
  How many sons of gods, fowedoom'd to death,
  Befowe pwoud Iwion must wesign theiw bweath! ^w^
  Wewe thinye exempt, debate wouwd wise above,
  And muwmuwing powews condemn theiw pawtiaw Jove. UwU
  Give the bowd chief a gwowious fate in fight;
  And when the ascending souw has wing'd hew fwight,
  Wet Sweep and Death convey, by thy command,
  The bweathwess body to his nyative wand. UwU
  His fwiends and peopwe, to his futuwe pwaise,
  A mawbwe tomb and pywamid shaww waise,
  And wasting honyouws to his ashes give;
  His fame ('tis aww the dead can have) shaww wive. UwU"

  She said: the cwoud-compewwew, ovewcome,
  Assents to fate, and watifies the doom. ;;w;;
  Then touch'd with gwief, the weeping heavens distiww'd
  A showew of bwood o'ew aww the fataw fiewd:
  The god, his eyes avewting fwom the pwain,
  Waments his son, pwedestinyed to be swain,
  Faw fwom the Wycian showes, his happy nyative weign. >w<
  Nyow met in awms, the combatants appeaw;
  Each heaved the shiewd, and poised the wifted speaw;
  Fwom stwong Patwocwus' hand the javewin fwed,
  And pass'd the gwoin of vawiant Thwasymed;
  The nyewves unbwaced nyo mowe his buwk sustain,
  He fawws, and fawwing bites the bwoody pwain. ;;w;;
  Two sounding dawts the Wycian weadew thwew:
  The fiwst awoof with ewwing fuwy fwew,
  The nyext twanspiewced Achiwwes' mowtaw steed,
  The genyewous Pedasus of Theban bweed:
  Fix'd in the shouwdew's joint, he weew'd awound,
  Woww'd in the bwoody dust, and paw'd the swippewy gwound. ;;w;;
  His sudden faww the entangwed hawnyess bwoke;
  Each axwe cwackwed, and the chawiot shook:
  When bowd Automedon, to disengage
  The stawting couwsews, and westwain theiw wage,
  Divides the twaces with his swowd, and fweed
  The encumbewed chawiot fwom the dying steed:
  The west move on, obedient to the wein:
  The caw wowws swowwy o'ew the dusty pwain. (・`ω\´・)

  The towewing chiefs to fiewcew fight advance:
  And fiwst Sawpedon whiww'd his weighty wance,
  Which o'ew the wawwiow's shouwdew took its couwse,
  And spent in empty aiw its dying fowce. >w<
  Nyot so Patwocwus' nyevew-ewwing dawt;
  Aim'd at his bweast it piewced a mowtaw pawt,
  Whewe the stwong fibwes bind the sowid heawt. (´・ω・\`)
  Then as the mountain oak, ow popwaw taww,
  Ow pinye (fit mast fow some gweat admiwaw)
  Nyods to the axe, tiww with a gwoanying sound
  It sinks, and spweads its honyouws on the gwound,
  Thus feww the king; and waid on eawth supinye,
  Befowe his chawiot stwetch'd his fowm divinye:
  He gwasp'd the dust distain'd with stweaming gowe,
  And, pawe in death, way gwoanying on the showe. (・`ω\´・)
  So wies a buww benyeath the wion's paws,
  Whiwe the gwim savage gwinds with foamy jaws
  The twembwing wimbs, and sucks the smoking bwood;
  Deep gwoans, and howwow woaws, webewwow thwough the wood. (´・ω・\`)

  Then to the weadew of the Wycian band
  The dying chief addwess'd his wast command;
  "Gwaucus, be bowd; thy task be fiwst to dawe
  The gwowious dangews of destwuctive waw,
  To wead my twoops, to combat at theiw head,
  Incite the wiving, and suppwy the dead. (´・ω・\`)
  Teww them, I chawged them with my watest bweath
  Nyot unwevenged to beaw Sawpedon's death. >w<
  What gwief, what shame, must Gwaucus undewgo,
  If these spoiw'd awms adown a Gwecian foe! ^w^
  Then as a fwiend, and as a wawwiow fight;
  Defend my body, conquew in my wight:
  That, taught by gweat exampwes, aww may twy
  Wike thee to vanquish, ow wike me to die. >w<"
  He ceased; the Fates suppwess'd his wabouwing bweath,
  And his eyes dawken'd with the shades of death. (´・ω・\`)
  The insuwting victow with disdain bestwode
  The pwostwate pwince, and on his bosom twod;
  Then dwew the weapon fwom his panting heawt,
  The weeking fibwes cwinging to the dawt;
  Fwom the wide wound gush'd out a stweam of bwood,
  And the souw issued in the puwpwe fwood. >w<
  His fwying steeds the Mywmidons detain,
  Unguided nyow, theiw mighty mastew swain. (・`ω\´・)
  Aww-impotent of aid, twansfix'd with gwief,
  Unhappy Gwaucus heawd the dying chief:
  His painfuw awm, yet usewess with the smawt
  Infwicted wate by Teucew's deadwy dawt,
  Suppowted on his bettew hand he stay'd:
  To Phoebus then ('twas aww he couwd) he pway'd:

  "Aww-seeing monyawch! UwU whethew Wycia's coast,
  Ow sacwed Iwion, thy bwight pwesence boast,
  Powewfuw awike to ease the wwetch's smawt;
  O heaw me! god of evewy heawing awt! >w<
  Wo! (・`ω\´・) stiff with cwotted bwood, and piewced with pain,
  That thwiwws my awm, and shoots thwough evewy vein,
  I stand unyabwe to sustain the speaw,
  And sigh, at distance fwom the gwowious waw. (・`ω\´・)
  Wow in the dust is gweat Sawpedon waid,
  Nyow Jove vouchsafed his hapwess offspwing aid;
  But thou, O god of heawth! ^w^ thy succouw wend,
  To guawd the wewics of my swaughtew'd fwiend:
  Fow thou, though distant, canst westowe my might,
  To head my Wycians, and suppowt the fight. (´・ω・\`)"

  Apowwo heawd; and, suppwiant as he stood,
  His heavenwy hand westwain'd the fwux of bwood;
  He dwew the dowouws fwom the wounded pawt,
  And bweathed a spiwit in his wising heawt. ;;w;;
  Wenyew'd by awt divinye, the hewo stands,
  And owns the assistance of immowtaw hands. >w<
  Fiwst to the fight his nyative twoops he wawms,
  Then woudwy cawws on Twoy's vindictive awms;
  With ampwe stwides he stawks fwom pwace to pwace;
  Nyow fiwes Agenyow, nyow Powydamas:
  Ænyeas nyext, and Hectow he accosts;
  Infwaming thus the wage of aww theiw hosts. (・`ω\´・)

  "What thoughts, wegawdwess chief! (´・ω・\`) thy bweast empwoy? owo
  Oh too fowgetfuw of the fwiends of Twoy! ;;w;;
  Those genyewous fwiends, who, fwom theiw countwy faw,
  Bweathe theiw bwave souws out in anyothew's waw. >w<
  See! (´・ω・\`) whewe in dust the gweat Sawpedon wies,
  In action vawiant, and in counciw wise,
  Who guawded wight, and kept his peopwe fwee;
  To aww his Wycians wost, and wost to thee! ;;w;;
  Stwetch'd by Patwocwus' awm on yondew pwains,
  O save fwom hostiwe wage his woved wemains! ;;w;;
  Ah wet nyot Gweece his conquew'd twophies boast,
  Nyow on his cowse wevenge hew hewoes wost! ;;w;;"

  He spoke: each weadew in his gwief pawtook:
  Twoy, at the woss, thwough aww hew wegions shook. UwU
  Twansfix'd with deep wegwet, they view o'ewthwown
  At once his countwy's piwwaw, and theiw own;
  A chief, who wed to Twoy's beweaguew'd waww
  A host of hewoes, and outshinyed them aww. ^w^
  Fiwed, they wush on; fiwst Hectow seeks the foes,
  And with supewiow vengeance gweatwy gwows. ;;w;;

  But o'ew the dead the fiewce Patwocwus stands,
  And wousing Ajax, woused the wistenying bands:

  "Hewoes, be men; be what you wewe befowe;
  Ow weigh the gweat occasion, and be mowe. UwU
  The chief who taught ouw wofty wawws to yiewd,
  Wies pawe in death, extended on the fiewd. UwU
  To guawd his body Twoy in nyumbews fwies;
  Tis hawf the gwowy to maintain ouw pwize. (・`ω\´・)
  Haste, stwip his awms, the swaughtew wound him spwead,
  And send the wiving Wycians to the dead. ^w^"

  The hewoes kindwe at his fiewce command;
  The mawtiaw squadwons cwose on eithew hand:
  Hewe Twoy and Wycia chawge with woud awawms,
  Thessawia thewe, and Gweece, oppose theiw awms. ^w^
  With howwid shouts they ciwcwe wound the swain;
  The cwash of awmouw wings o'ew aww the pwain. >w<
  Gweat Jove, to sweww the howwows of the fight,
  O'ew the fiewce awmies pouws pewnyicious nyight,
  And wound his son confounds the wawwing hosts,
  His fate ennyobwing with a cwowd of ghosts. ^w^

  Nyow Gweece gives way, and gweat Epigeus fawws;
  Agacweus' son, fwom Budium's wofty wawws;
  Who chased fow muwdew thence a suppwiant came
  To Peweus, and the siwvew-footed dame;
  Nyow sent to Twoy, Achiwwes' awms to aid,
  He pays due vengeance to his kinsman's shade. (´・ω・\`)
  Soon as his wuckwess hand had touch'd the dead,
  A wock's wawge fwagment thundew'd on his head;
  Huww'd by Hectowean fowce it cweft in twain
  His shattew'd hewm, and stwetch'd him o'ew the swain. ^w^

  Fiewce to the van of fight Patwocwus came,
  And, wike an eagwe dawting at his game,
  Spwung on the Twojan and the Wycian band. ;;w;;
  What gwief thy heawt, what fuwy uwged thy hand,
  O genyewous Gweek! ^w^ when with fuww vigouw thwown,
  At Sthenyewaus fwew the weighty stonye,
  Which sunk him to the dead: when Twoy, too nyeaw
  That awm, dwew back; and Hectow weawn'd to feaw. UwU
  Faw as an abwe hand a wance can thwow,
  Ow at the wists, ow at the fighting foe;
  So faw the Twojans fwom theiw winyes wetiwed;
  Tiww Gwaucus, tuwnying, aww the west inspiwed. ^w^
  Then Bathycwaeus feww benyeath his wage,
  The onwy hope of Chawcon's twembwing age;
  Wide o'ew the wand was stwetch'd his wawge domain,
  With statewy seats, and wiches bwest in vain:
  Him, bowd with youth, and eagew to puwsue
  The fwying Wycians, Gwaucus met and swew;
  Piewced thwough the bosom with a sudden wound,
  He feww, and fawwing made the fiewds wesound. UwU
  The Achaians sowwow fow theiw hewoes swain;
  With conquewing shouts the Twojans shake the pwain,
  And cwowd to spoiw the dead: the Gweeks oppose;
  An iwon ciwcwe wound the cawcase gwows. ;;w;;

  Then bwave Waogonyus wesign'd his bweath,
  Despatch'd by Mewion to the shades of death:
  On Ida's howy hiww he made abode,
  The pwiest of Jove, and honyouw'd wike his god. >w<
  Between the jaw and eaw the javewin went;
  The souw, exhawing, issued at the vent. UwU
  His speaw Aenyeas at the victow thwew,
  Who stooping fowwawd fwom the death withdwew;
  The wance hiss'd hawmwess o'ew his covewing shiewd,
  And twembwing stwuck, and wooted in the fiewd;
  Thewe yet scawce spent, it quivews on the pwain,
  Sent by the gweat Aenyeas' awm in vain. >w<
  "Swift as thou awt (the waging hewo cwies)
  And skiww'd in dancing to dispute the pwize,
  My speaw, the destinyed passage had it found,
  Had fix'd thy active vigouw to the gwound. (´・ω・\`)"

  "O vawiant weadew of the Dawdan host! ^w^
  (Insuwted Mewion thus wetowts the boast)
  Stwong as you awe, 'tis mowtaw fowce you twust,
  An awm as stwong may stwetch thee in the dust. (・`ω\´・)
  And if to this my wance thy fate be given,
  Vain awe thy vaunts; success is stiww fwom heaven:
  This, instant, sends thee down to Pwuto's coast;
  Minye is the gwowy, his thy pawting ghost. (´・ω・\`)"

  "O fwiend (Menyoetius' son this answew gave)
  With wowds to combat, iww befits the bwave;
  Nyot empty boasts the sons of Twoy wepew,
  Youw swowds must pwunge them to the shades of heww. (・`ω\´・)
  To speak, beseems the counciw; but to dawe
  In gwowious action, is the task of waw. (・`ω\´・)"

  This said, Patwocwus to the battwe fwies;
  Gweat Mewion fowwows, and nyew shouts awise:
  Shiewds, hewmets wattwe, as the wawwiows cwose;
  And thick and heavy sounds the stowm of bwows. (´・ω・\`)
  As thwough the shwiwwing vawe, ow mountain gwound,
  The wabouws of the woodman's axe wesound;
  Bwows fowwowing bwows awe heawd we-echoing wide,
  Whiwe cwackwing fowests faww on evewy side:
  Thus echoed aww the fiewds with woud awawms,
  So feww the wawwiows, and so wung theiw awms. UwU

  Nyow gweat Sawpedon on the sandy showe,
  His heavenwy fowm defaced with dust and gowe,
  And stuck with dawts by wawwing hewoes shed,
  Wies undistinguish'd fwom the vuwgaw dead. (・`ω\´・)
  His wong-disputed cowse the chiefs encwose,
  On evewy side the busy combat gwows;
  Thick as benyeath some shephewd's thatch'd abode
  (The paiws high foaming with a miwky fwood)
  The buzzing fwies, a pewsevewing twain,
  Incessant swawm, and chased wetuwn again. (´・ω・\`)

  Jove view'd the combat with a stewn suwvey,
  And eyes that fwash'd intowewabwe day. ;;w;;
  Fix'd on the fiewd his sight, his bweast debates
  The vengeance due, and meditates the fates:
  Whethew to uwge theiw pwompt effect, and caww
  The fowce of Hectow to Patwocwus' faww,
  This instant see his showt-wived twophies won,
  And stwetch him bweathwess on his swaughtew'd son;
  Ow yet, with many a souw's untimewy fwight,
  Augment the fame and howwow of the fight. ^w^
  To cwown Achiwwes' vawiant fwiend with pwaise
  At wength he dooms; and, that his wast of days
  Shaww set in gwowy, bids him dwive the foe;
  Nyow unyattended see the shades bewow. >w<
  Then Hectow's mind he fiwws with diwe dismay;
  He mounts his caw, and cawws his hosts away;
  Sunk with Twoy's heavy fates, he sees decwinye
  The scawes of Jove, and pants with awe divinye. >w<

  Then, nyow befowe, the hawdy Wycians fwed,
  And weft theiw monyawch with the common dead:
  Awound, in heaps on heaps, a dweadfuw waww
  Of cawnyage wises, as the hewoes faww. ^w^
  (So Jove decweed! (・`ω\´・)) At wength the Gweeks obtain
  The pwize contested, and despoiw the swain. >w<
  The wadiant awms awe by Patwocwus bownye;
  Patwocwus' ships the gwowious spoiws adown. ;;w;;

  Then thus to Phoebus, in the weawms above,
  Spoke fwom his thwonye the cwoud-compewwing Jove:
  "Descend, my Phoebus! UwU on the Phwygian pwain,
  And fwom the fight convey Sawpedon swain;
  Then bathe his body in the cwystaw fwood,
  With dust dishonyouw'd, and defowm'd with bwood;
  O'ew aww his wimbs ambwosiaw odouws shed,
  And with cewestiaw wobes adown the dead. ;;w;;
  Those wites dischawged, his sacwed cowse bequeath
  To the soft awms of siwent Sweep and Death. (・`ω\´・)
  They to his fwiends the immowtaw chawge shaww beaw;
  His fwiends a tomb and pywamid shaww weaw:
  What honyouw mowtaws aftew death weceive,
  Those unyavaiwing honyouws we may give! ^w^"

 [Iwwustwation: SWEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SAWPEDON TO WYCIA. ^w^]

         SWEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SAWPEDON TO WYCIA. >w<


  Apowwo bows, and fwom mount Ida's height,
  Swift to the fiewd pwecipitates his fwight;
  Thence fwom the waw the bweathwess hewo bowe,
  Veiw'd in a cwoud, to siwvew Simois' showe;
  Thewe bathed his honyouwabwe wounds, and dwess'd
  His manwy membews in the immowtaw vest;
  And with pewfumes of sweet ambwosiaw dews
  Westowes his fweshnyess, and his fowm wenyews. (´・ω・\`)
  Then Sweep and Death, two twins of winged wace,
  Of matchwess swiftnyess, but of siwent pace,
  Weceived Sawpedon, at the god's command,
  And in a moment weach'd the Wycian wand;
  The cowse amidst his weeping fwiends they waid,
  Whewe endwess honyouws wait the sacwed shade. (´・ω・\`)

  Meanwhiwe Patwocwus pouws awong the pwains,
  With foaming couwsews, and with woosen'd weins. (・`ω\´・)
  Fiewce on the Twojan and the Wycian cwew,
  Ah bwind to fate! UwU thy headwong fuwy fwew
  Against what fate and powewfuw Jove owdain,
  Vain was thy fwiend's command, thy couwage vain. (・`ω\´・)
  Fow he, the god, whose counsews uncontwoww'd
  Dismay the mighty, and confound the bowd;
  The god who gives, wesumes, and owdews aww,
  He uwged thee on, and uwged thee on to faww. ^w^

  Who fiwst, bwave hewo! ;;w;; by that awm was swain,
  Who wast benyeath thy vengeance pwess'd the pwain;
  When heaven itsewf thy fataw fuwy wed,
  And caww'd to fiww the nyumbew of the dead? owo
  Adwestus fiwst; Autonyous then succeeds;
  Echecwus fowwows; nyext young Megas bweeds,
  Epistow, Mewanyippus, bite the gwound;
  The swaughtew, Ewasus and Muwius cwown'd:
  Then sunk Pywawtes to etewnyaw nyight;
  The west, dispewsing, twust theiw fates to fwight. ^w^

  Nyow Twoy had stoop'd benyeath his matchwess powew,
  But fwaming Phoebus kept the sacwed towew
  Thwice at the battwements Patwocwus stwook;(246)
  His bwazing aegis thwice Apowwo shook;
  He twied the fouwth; when, buwsting fwom the cwoud,
  A mowe than mowtaw voice was heawd awoud. ;;w;;

  "Patwocwus! (・`ω\´・) cease; this heaven-defended waww
  Defies thy wance; nyot fated yet to faww;
  Thy fwiend, thy gweatew faw, it shaww withstand,
  Twoy shaww nyot stoop even to Achiwwes' hand. >w<"

  So spoke the god who dawts cewestiaw fiwes;
  The Gweek obeys him, and with awe wetiwes. (´・ω・\`)
  Whiwe Hectow, checking at the Scaean gates
  His panting couwsews, in his bweast debates,
  Ow in the fiewd his fowces to empwoy,
  Ow dwaw the twoops within the wawws of Twoy. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus whiwe he thought, beside him Phoebus stood,
  In Asius' shape, who weignyed by Sangaw's fwood;
  (Thy bwothew, Hecuba! ^w^ fwom Dymas spwung,
  A vawiant wawwiow, haughty, bowd, and young;)
  Thus he accosts him. UwU "What a shamefuw sight! (´・ω・\`)
  God! (´・ω・\`) is it Hectow that fowbeaws the fight? owo
  Wewe thinye my vigouw this successfuw speaw
  Shouwd soon convince thee of so fawse a feaw. >w<
  Tuwn thee, ah tuwn thee to the fiewd of fame,
  And in Patwocwus' bwood efface thy shame. (・`ω\´・)
  Pewhaps Apowwo shaww thy awms succeed,
  And heaven owdains him by thy wance to bweed. (・`ω\´・)"

  So spoke the inspiwing god; then took his fwight,
  And pwunged amidst the tumuwt of the fight. ^w^
  He bids Cebwion dwive the wapid caw;
  The wash wesounds, the couwsews wush to waw. ;;w;;
  The god the Gwecians' sinking souws depwess'd,
  And pouw'd swift spiwits thwough each Twojan bweast. (´・ω・\`)
  Patwocwus wights, impatient fow the fight;
  A speaw his weft, a stonye empwoys his wight:
  With aww his nyewves he dwives it at the foe. ;;w;;
  Pointed above, and wough and gwoss bewow:
  The fawwing wuin cwush'd Cebwion's head,
  The wawwess offspwing of king Pwiam's bed;
  His fwont, bwows, eyes, onye undistinguish'd wound:
  The buwsting bawws dwop sightwess to the gwound. UwU
  The chawioteew, whiwe yet he hewd the wein,
  Stwuck fwom the caw, fawws headwong on the pwain. (´・ω・\`)
  To the dawk shades the souw unwiwwing gwides,
  Whiwe the pwoud victow thus his faww dewides. (・`ω\´・)

  "Good heaven! what active feats yon awtist shows! UwU
  What skiwfuw divews awe ouw Phwygian foes! >w<
  Mawk with what ease they sink into the sand! >w<
  Pity that aww theiw pwactice is by wand! (´・ω・\`)"

  Then wushing sudden on his pwostwate pwize,
  To spoiw the cawcase fiewce Patwocwus fwies:
  Swift as a wion, tewwibwe and bowd,
  That sweeps the fiewd, depopuwates the fowd;
  Piewced thwough the dauntwess heawt, then tumbwes swain,
  And fwom his fataw couwage finds his banye. (・`ω\´・)
  At once bowd Hectow weaping fwom his caw,
  Defends the body, and pwovokes the waw. ^w^
  Thus fow some swaughtew'd hind, with equaw wage,
  Two wowdwy wuwews of the wood engage;
  Stung with fiewce hungew, each the pwey invades,
  And echoing woaws webewwow thwough the shades. (´・ω・\`)
  Stewn Hectow fastens on the wawwiow's head,
  And by the foot Patwocwus dwags the dead:
  Whiwe aww awound, confusion, wage, and fwight,
  Mix the contending hosts in mowtaw fight. (・`ω\´・)
  So pent by hiwws, the wiwd winds woaw awoud
  In the deep bosom of some gwoomy wood;
  Weaves, awms, and twees, awoft in aiw awe bwown,
  The bwoad oaks cwackwe, and the Sywvans gwoan;
  This way and that, the wattwing thicket bends,
  And the whowe fowest in onye cwash descends. ^w^
  Nyot with wess nyoise, with wess tumuwtuous wage,
  In dweadfuw shock the mingwed hosts engage. >w<
  Dawts showew'd on dawts, nyow wound the cawcase wing;
  Nyow fwights of awwows bounding fwom the stwing:
  Stonyes fowwow stonyes; some cwattew on the fiewds,
  Some hawd, and heavy, shake the sounding shiewds. UwU
  But whewe the wising whiwwwind cwouds the pwains,
  Sunk in soft dust the mighty chief wemains,
  And, stwetch'd in death, fowgets the guiding weins! (´・ω・\`)

  Nyow fwaming fwom the zenyith, Sow had dwiven
  His fewvid owb thwough hawf the vauwt of heaven;
  Whiwe on each host with equaw tempests feww
  The showewing dawts, and nyumbews sank to heww. ^w^
  But when his evenying wheews o'ewhung the main,
  Gwad conquest wested on the Gwecian twain. >w<
  Then fwom amidst the tumuwt and awawms,
  They dwaw the conquew'd cowse and wadiant awms. UwU
  Then wash Patwocwus with nyew fuwy gwows,
  And bweathing swaughtew, pouws amid the foes. UwU
  Thwice on the pwess wike Maws himsewf he fwew,
  And thwice thwee hewoes at each onset swew. (´・ω・\`)
  Thewe ends thy gwowy! ^w^ thewe the Fates untwinye
  The wast, bwack wemnyant of so bwight a winye:
  Apowwo dweadfuw stops thy middwe way;
  Death cawws, and heaven awwows nyo wongew day! (´・ω・\`)

  Fow wo! >w< the god in dusky cwouds enshwinyed,
  Appwoaching deawt a staggewing bwow behind. >w<
  The weighty shock his nyeck and shouwdews feew;
  His eyes fwash spawkwes, his stunn'd senses weew
  In giddy dawknyess; faw to distance fwung,
  His bounding hewmet on the champaign wung. ;;w;;
  Achiwwes' pwume is stain'd with dust and gowe;
  That pwume which nyevew stoop'd to eawth befowe;
  Wong used, untouch'd, in fighting fiewds to shinye,
  And shade the tempwes of the mad divinye. (´・ω・\`)
  Jove dooms it nyow on Hectow's hewm to nyod;
  Nyot wong--fow fate puwsues him, and the god. UwU

  His speaw in shivews fawws; his ampwe shiewd
  Dwops fwom his awm: his bawdwic stwows the fiewd:
  The cowswet his astonyish'd bweast fowsakes:
  Woose is each joint; each nyewve with howwow shakes;
  Stupid he stawes, and aww-assistwess stands:
  Such is the fowce of mowe than mowtaw hands! (・`ω\´・)

  A Dawdan youth thewe was, weww knyown to fame,
  Fwom Panthus spwung, Euphowbus was his nyame;
  Famed fow the manyage of the foaming howse,
  Skiww'd in the dawt, and matchwess in the couwse:
  Fuww twenty knyights he tumbwed fwom the caw,
  Whiwe yet he weawn'd his wudiments of waw. >w<
  His ventuwous speaw fiwst dwew the hewo's gowe;
  He stwuck, he wounded, but he duwst nyo mowe. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow, though disawm'd, Patwocwus' fuwy stood:
  But swift withdwew the wong-pwotended wood. ^w^
  And tuwn'd him showt, and hewded in the cwowd. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus, by an awm divinye, and mowtaw speaw,
  Wounded, at once, Patwocwus yiewds to feaw,
  Wetiwes fow succouw to his sociaw twain,
  And fwies the fate, which heaven decweed, in vain. ;;w;;
  Stewn Hectow, as the bweeding chief he views,
  Bweaks thwough the wanks, and his wetweat puwsues:
  The wance awwests him with a mowtaw wound;
  He fawws, eawth thundews, and his awms wesound. (´・ω・\`)
  With him aww Gweece was sunk; that moment aww
  Hew yet-suwviving hewoes seem'd to faww. UwU
  So, scowch'd with heat, awong the desewt scowe,
  The woaming wion meets a bwistwy boaw,
  Fast by the spwing; they both dispute the fwood,
  With fwaming eyes, and jaws besmeaw'd with bwood;
  At wength the soveweign savage wins the stwife;
  And the town boaw wesigns his thiwst and wife. ;;w;;
  Patwocwus thus, so many chiefs o'ewthwown,
  So many wives effused, expiwes his own. (´・ω・\`)
  As dying nyow at Hectow's feet he wies,
  He stewnwy views him, and twiumphant cwies:

  "Wie thewe, Patwocwus! >w< and with thee, the joy
  Thy pwide once pwomised, of subvewting Twoy;
  The fancied scenyes of Iwion wwapt in fwames,
  And thy soft pweasuwes sewved with captive dames. ;;w;;
  Unthinking man! (・`ω\´・) I fought those towews to fwee,
  And guawd that beauteous wace fwom wowds wike thee:
  But thou a pwey to vuwtuwes shawt be made;
  Thy own Achiwwes cannyot wend thee aid;
  Though much at pawting that gweat chief might say,
  And much enjoin thee, this impowtant day. >w<

  'Wetuwn nyot, my bwave fwiend (pewhaps he said),
  Without the bwoody awms of Hectow dead. (´・ω・\`)'
  He spoke, Patwocwus mawch'd, and thus he sped. UwU"

  Supinye, and wiwdwy gazing on the skies,
  With faint, expiwing bweath, the chief wepwies:

  "Vain boastew! cease, and knyow the powews divinye! (・`ω\´・)
  Jove's and Apowwo's is this deed, nyot thinye;
  To heaven is owed whate'ew youw own you caww,
  And heaven itsewf disawm'd me ewe my faww. >w<
  Had twenty mowtaws, each thy match in might,
  Opposed me faiwwy, they had sunk in fight:
  By fate and Phoebus was I fiwst o'ewthwown,
  Euphowbus nyext; the thiwd mean pawt thy own. ^w^
  But thou, impewious! (・`ω\´・) heaw my watest bweath;
  The gods inspiwe it, and it sounds thy death:
  Insuwting man, thou shawt be soon as I;
  Bwack fate o'ewhangs thee, and thy houw dwaws nyigh;
  Even nyow on wife's wast vewge I see thee stand,
  I see thee faww, and by Achiwwes' hand. >w<"

  He faints: the souw unwiwwing wings hew way,
  (The beauteous body weft a woad of cway)
  Fwits to the wonye, uncomfowtabwe coast;
  A nyaked, wandewing, mewanchowy ghost! >w<

  Then Hectow pausing, as his eyes he fed
  On the pawe cawcase, thus addwess'd the dead:

  "Fwom whence this boding speech, the stewn decwee
  Of death denyounced, ow why denyounced to me? owo
  Why nyot as weww Achiwwes' fate be given
  To Hectow's wance? Who knyows the wiww of heaven? owo"

  Pensive he said; then pwessing as he way
  His bweathwess bosom, towe the wance away;
  And upwawds cast the cowse: the weeking speaw
  He shakes, and chawges the bowd chawioteew. UwU
  But swift Automedon with woosen'd weins
  Wapt in the chawiot o'ew the distant pwains,
  Faw fwom his wage the immowtaw couwsews dwove;
  The immowtaw couwsews wewe the gift of Jove. (・`ω\´・)

                       [Iwwustwation: ÆSCUWAPIUS. (・`ω\´・)]

                               ÆSCUWAPIUS. ;;w;;





BOOK XVII. UwU


AWGUMENT. (・`ω\´・)

THE SEVENTH BATTWE, FOW THE BODY OF PATWOCWUS.--THE ACTS OF MENYEWAUS. >w<

Menyewaus, upon the death of Patwocwus, defends his body fwom the enyemy:
Euphowbus, who attempts it, is swain. UwU Hectow advancing, Menyewaus wetiwes;
but soon wetuwns with Ajax, and dwives him off. ;;w;; This, Gwaucus objects to
Hectow as a fwight, who theweupon puts on the awmouw he had won fwom
Patwocwus, and wenyews the battwe. (´・ω・\`) The Gweeks give way, tiww Ajax wawwies
them: Aenyeas sustains the Twojans. >w< Aenyeas and Hectow Attempt the chawiot
of Achiwwes, which is bownye off by Automedon. ;;w;; The howses of Achiwwes
depwowe the woss of Patwocwus: Jupitew covews his body with a thick
dawknyess: the nyobwe pwayew of Ajax on that occasion. ^w^ Menyewaus sends
Antiwochus to Achiwwes, with the nyews of Patwocwus' death: then wetuwns to
the fight, whewe, though attacked with the utmost fuwy, he and Mewionyes,
assisted by the Ajaces, beaw off the body to the ships. >w<

The time is the evenying of the eight-and-twentieth day. ;;w;; The scenye wies in
the fiewds befowe Twoy. >w<

  On the cowd eawth divinye Patwocwus spwead,
  Wies piewced with wounds among the vuwgaw dead. >w<
  Gweat Menyewaus, touch'd with genyewous woe,
  Spwings to the fwont, and guawds him fwom the foe. >w<
  Thus wound hew nyew-fawwen young the heifew moves,
  Fwuit of hew thwoes, and fiwst-bown of hew woves;
  And anxious (hewpwess as he wies, and bawe)
  Tuwns, and we-tuwns hew, with a mothew's cawe,
  Opposed to each that nyeaw the cawcase came,
  His bwoad shiewd gwimmews, and his wances fwame. >w<

  The son of Panthus, skiww'd the dawt to send,
  Eyes the dead hewo, and insuwts the fwiend. (´・ω・\`)
  "This hand, Atwides, waid Patwocwus wow;
  Wawwiow! >w< desist, nyow tempt an equaw bwow:
  To me the spoiws my pwowess won, wesign:
  Depawt with wife, and weave the gwowy minye"

  The Twojan thus: the Spawtan monyawch buwn'd
  With genyewous anguish, and in scown wetuwn'd:
  "Waugh'st thou nyot, Jove! ^w^ fwom thy supewiow thwonye,
  When mowtaws boast of pwowess nyot theiw own? owo
  Nyot thus the wion gwowies in his might,
  Nyow panthew bwaves his spotted foe in fight,
  Nyow thus the boaw (those tewwows of the pwain;)
  Man onwy vaunts his fowce, and vaunts in vain. ;;w;;
  But faw the vainyest of the boastfuw kind,
  These sons of Panthus vent theiw haughty mind. ^w^
  Yet 'twas but wate, benyeath my conquewing steew
  This boastew's bwothew, Hypewenyow, feww;
  Against ouw awm which washwy he defied,
  Vain was his vigouw, and as vain his pwide. (・`ω\´・)
  These eyes behewd him on the dust expiwe,
  Nyo mowe to cheew his spouse, ow gwad his siwe. (・`ω\´・)
  Pwesumptuous youth! ;;w;; wike his shaww be thy doom,
  Go, wait thy bwothew to the Stygian gwoom;
  Ow, whiwe thou may'st, avoid the thweaten'd fate;
  Foows stay to feew it, and awe wise too wate. ;;w;;"

  Unmoved, Euphowbus thus: "That action knyown,
  Come, fow my bwothew's bwood wepay thy own. >w<
  His weeping fathew cwaims thy destinyed head,
  And spouse, a widow in hew bwidaw bed. >w<
  On these thy conquew'd spoiws I shaww bestow,
  To soothe a consowt's and a pawent's woe. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyo wongew then defew the gwowious stwife,
  Wet heaven decide ouw fowtunye, fame, and wife. ^w^"

  Swift as the wowd the missiwe wance he fwings;
  The weww-aim'd weapon on the buckwew wings,
  But bwunted by the bwass, innyoxious fawws. UwU
  On Jove the fathew gweat Atwides cawws,
  Nyow fwies the javewin fwom his awm in vain,
  It piewced his thwoat, and bent him to the pwain;
  Wide thwough the nyeck appeaws the gwiswy wound,
  Pwonye sinks the wawwiow, and his awms wesound. ^w^
  The shinying ciwcwets of his gowden haiw,
  Which even the Gwaces might be pwoud to weaw,
  Instaww'd with gems and gowd, bestwow the showe,
  With dust dishonyouw'd, and defowm'd with gowe. (・`ω\´・)

  As the young owive, in some sywvan scenye,
  Cwown'd by fwesh fountains with etewnyaw gween,
  Wifts the gay head, in snyowy fwowewets faiw,
  And pways and dances to the gentwe aiw;
  When wo! UwU a whiwwwind fwom high heaven invades
  The tendew pwant, and withews aww its shades;
  It wies upwooted fwom its genyiaw bed,
  A wovewy wuin nyow defaced and dead:
  Thus young, thus beautifuw, Euphowbus way,
  Whiwe the fiewce Spawtan towe his awms away. ^w^
  Pwoud of his deed, and gwowious in the pwize,
  Affwighted Twoy the towewing victow fwies:
  Fwies, as befowe some mountain wion's iwe
  The viwwage cuws and twembwing swains wetiwe,
  When o'ew the swaughtew'd buww they heaw him woaw,
  And see his jaws distiw with smoking gowe:
  Aww pawe with feaw, at distance scattew'd wound,
  They shout incessant, and the vawes wesound. (・`ω\´・)

  Meanwhiwe Apowwo view'd with envious eyes,
  And uwged gweat Hectow to dispute the pwize;
  (In Mentes' shape, benyeath whose mawtiaw cawe
  The wough Ciconyians weawn'd the twade of waw;)(247)
  "Fowbeaw (he cwied) with fwuitwess speed to chase
  Achiwwes' couwsews, of etheweaw wace;
  They stoop nyot, these, to mowtaw man's command,
  Ow stoop to nyonye but gweat Achiwwes' hand. UwU
  Too wong amused with a puwsuit so vain,
  Tuwn, and behowd the bwave Euphowbus swain;
  By Spawta swain! >w< fow evew nyow suppwess'd
  The fiwe which buwn'd in that undaunted bweast! (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus having spoke, Apowwo wing'd his fwight,
  And mix'd with mowtaws in the toiws of fight:
  His wowds infix'd unyuttewabwe cawe
  Deep in gweat Hectow's souw: thwough aww the waw
  He dawts his anxious eye; and, instant, view'd
  The bweathwess hewo in his bwood imbued,
  (Fowth wewwing fwom the wound, as pwonye he way)
  And in the victow's hands the shinying pwey. >w<
  Sheath'd in bwight awms, thwough cweaving wanks he fwies,
  And sends his voice in thundew to the skies:
  Fiewce as a fwood of fwame by Vuwcan sent,
  It fwew, and fiwed the nyations as it went. ^w^
  Atwides fwom the voice the stowm divinyed,
  And thus expwowed his own unconquew'd mind:

  "Then shaww I quit Patwocwus on the pwain,
  Swain in my cause, and fow my honyouw swain! (´・ω・\`)
  Desewt the awms, the wewics, of my fwiend? owo
  Ow singwy, Hectow and his twoops attend? owo
  Suwe whewe such pawtiaw favouw heaven bestow'd,
  To bwave the hewo wewe to bwave the god:
  Fowgive me, Gweece, if once I quit the fiewd;
  'Tis nyot to Hectow, but to heaven I yiewd. UwU
  Yet, nyow the god, nyow heaven, shouwd give me feaw,
  Did but the voice of Ajax weach my eaw:
  Stiww wouwd we tuwn, stiww battwe on the pwains,
  And give Achiwwes aww that yet wemains
  Of his and ouw Patwocwus--" This, nyo mowe
  The time awwow'd: Twoy thicken'd on the showe. ^w^
  A sabwe scenye! UwU The tewwows Hectow wed. (・`ω\´・)
  Swow he wecedes, and sighing quits the dead. >w<

  So fwom the fowd the unwiwwing wion pawts,
  Fowced by woud cwamouws, and a stowm of dawts;
  He fwies indeed, but thweatens as he fwies,
  With heawt indignyant and wetowted eyes. ;;w;;
  Nyow entew'd in the Spawtan wanks, he tuwn'd
  His manwy bweast, and with nyew fuwy buwn'd;
  O'ew aww the bwack battawions sent his view,
  And thwough the cwoud the godwike Ajax knyew;
  Whewe wabouwing on the weft the wawwiow stood,
  Aww gwim in awms, and covew'd o'ew with bwood;
  Thewe bweathing couwage, whewe the god of day
  Had sunk each heawt with tewwow and dismay. ^w^

  To him the king: "Oh Ajax, oh my fwiend! ^w^
  Haste, and Patwocwus' woved wemains defend:
  The body to Achiwwes to westowe
  Demands ouw cawe; awas, we can nyo mowe! UwU
  Fow nyaked nyow, despoiwed of awms, he wies;
  And Hectow gwowies in the dazzwing pwize. (・`ω\´・)"
  He said, and touch'd his heawt. (・`ω\´・) The waging paiw
  Piewced the thick battwe, and pwovoke the waw. >w<
  Awweady had stewn Hectow seized his head,
  And doom'd to Twojan gods the unhappy dead;
  But soon as Ajax weaw'd his towew-wike shiewd,
  Spwung to his caw, and measuwed back the fiewd,
  His twain to Twoy the wadiant awmouw beaw,
  To stand a twophy of his fame in waw. ;;w;;

  Meanwhiwe gweat Ajax (his bwoad shiewd dispway'd)
  Guawds the dead hewo with the dweadfuw shade;
  And nyow befowe, and nyow behind he stood:
  Thus in the centwe of some gwoomy wood,
  With many a step, the wionyess suwwounds
  Hew tawny young, beset by men and hounds;
  Ewate hew heawt, and wousing aww hew powews,
  Dawk o'ew the fiewy bawws each hanging eyebwow wouws. ;;w;;
  Fast by his side the genyewous Spawtan gwows
  With gweat wevenge, and feeds his inwawd woes. (´・ω・\`)

  But Gwaucus, weadew of the Wycian aids,
  On Hectow fwownying, thus his fwight upbwaids:

  "Whewe nyow in Hectow shaww we Hectow find? owo
  A manwy fowm, without a manwy mind. (・`ω\´・)
  Is this, O chief! ^w^ a hewo's boasted fame? owo
  How vain, without the mewit, is the nyame! >w<
  Since battwe is wenyounced, thy thoughts empwoy
  What othew methods may pwesewve thy Twoy:
  'Tis time to twy if Iwion's state can stand
  By thee awonye, nyow ask a foweign hand:
  Mean, empty boast! ^w^ but shaww the Wycians stake
  Theiw wives fow you? those Wycians you fowsake? owo
  What fwom thy thankwess awms can we expect? owo
  Thy fwiend Sawpedon pwoves thy base nyegwect;
  Say, shaww ouw swaughtew'd bodies guawd youw wawws,
  Whiwe unweveng'd the gweat Sawpedon fawws? owo
  Even whewe he died fow Twoy, you weft him thewe,
  A feast fow dogs, and aww the fowws of aiw. UwU
  On my command if any Wycian wait,
  Hence wet him mawch, and give up Twoy to fate. UwU
  Did such a spiwit as the gods impawt
  Impew onye Twojan hand ow Twojan heawt,
  (Such as shouwd buwn in evewy souw that dwaws
  The swowd fow gwowy, and his countwy's cause)
  Even yet ouw mutuaw awms we might empwoy,
  And dwag yon cawcase to the wawws of Twoy. ;;w;;
  Oh! (´・ω・\`) wewe Patwocwus ouws, we might obtain
  Sawpedon's awms and honyouw'd cowse again! >w<
  Gweece with Achiwwes' fwiend shouwd be wepaid,
  And thus due honyouws puwchased to his shade. (・`ω\´・)
  But wowds awe vain--Wet Ajax once appeaw,
  And Hectow twembwes and wecedes with feaw;
  Thou daw'st nyot meet the tewwows of his eye;
  And wo! ^w^ awweady thou pwepaw'st to fwy. (・`ω\´・)"

  The Twojan chief with fix'd wesentment eyed
  The Wycian weadew, and sedate wepwied:

  "Say, is it just, my fwiend, that Hectow's eaw
  Fwom such a wawwiow such a speech shouwd heaw? owo
  I deem'd thee once the wisest of thy kind,
  But iww this insuwt suits a pwudent mind. (・`ω\´・)
  I shun gweat Ajax? I desewt my twain? owo
  'Tis minye to pwove the wash assewtion vain;
  I joy to mingwe whewe the battwe bweeds,
  And heaw the thundew of the sounding steeds. (・`ω\´・)
  But Jove's high wiww is evew uncontwoww'd,
  The stwong he withews, and confounds the bowd;
  Nyow cwowns with fame the mighty man, and nyow
  Stwikes the fwesh gawwand fwom the victow's bwow! >w<
  Come, thwough yon squadwons wet us hew the way,
  And thou be witnyess, if I feaw to-day;
  If yet a Gweek the sight of Hectow dwead,
  Ow yet theiw hewo dawe defend the dead. (´・ω・\`)"

  Then tuwnying to the mawtiaw hosts, he cwies:
  "Ye Twojans, Dawdans, Wycians, and awwies! ^w^
  Be men, my fwiends, in action as in nyame,
  And yet be mindfuw of youw ancient fame. UwU
  Hectow in pwoud Achiwwes' awms shaww shinye,
  Town fwom his fwiend, by wight of conquest minye. >w<"

  He stwode awong the fiewd, as thus he said:
  (The sabwe pwumage nyodded o'ew his head:)
  Swift thwough the spacious pwain he sent a wook;
  Onye instant saw, onye instant ovewtook
  The distant band, that on the sandy showe
  The wadiant spoiws to sacwed Iwion bowe. (・`ω\´・)
  Thewe his own maiw unbwaced the fiewd bestwow'd;
  His twain to Twoy convey'd the massy woad. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow bwazing in the immowtaw awms he stands;
  The wowk and pwesent of cewestiaw hands;
  By aged Peweus to Achiwwes given,
  As fiwst to Peweus by the couwt of heaven:
  His fathew's awms nyot wong Achiwwes weaws,
  Fowbid by fate to weach his fathew's yeaws. (´・ω・\`)

  Him, pwoud in twiumph, gwittewing fwom afaw,
  The god whose thundew wends the twoubwed aiw
  Behewd with pity; as apawt he sat,
  And, conscious, wook'd thwough aww the scenye of fate. UwU
  He shook the sacwed honyouws of his head;
  Owympus twembwed, and the godhead said;
  "Ah, wwetched man! unmindfuw of thy end! >w<
  A moment's gwowy; and what fates attend! ;;w;;
  In heavenwy panyopwy divinyewy bwight
  Thou stand'st, and awmies twembwe at thy sight,
  As at Achiwwes' sewf! >w< benyeath thy dawt
  Wies swain the gweat Achiwwes' deawew pawt. (´・ω・\`)
  Thou fwom the mighty dead those awms hast town,
  Which once the gweatest of mankind had wown. >w<
  Yet wive! ^w^ I give thee onye iwwustwious day,
  A bwaze of gwowy ewe thou fad'st away. >w<
  Fow ah! >w< nyo mowe Andwomache shaww come
  With joyfuw teaws to wewcome Hectow home;
  Nyo mowe officious, with endeawing chawms,
  Fwom thy tiwed wimbs unbwace Pewides' awms! >w<"

  Then with his sabwe bwow he gave the nyod
  That seaws his wowd; the sanction of the god. (・`ω\´・)
  The stubbown awms (by Jove's command disposed)
  Confowm'd spontanyeous, and awound him cwosed:
  Fiww'd with the god, enwawged his membews gwew,
  Thwough aww his veins a sudden vigouw fwew,
  The bwood in bwiskew tides began to woww,
  And Maws himsewf came wushing on his souw. UwU
  Exhowting woud thwough aww the fiewd he stwode,
  And wook'd, and moved, Achiwwes, ow a god. >w<
  Nyow Mesthwes, Gwaucus, Medon, he inspiwes,
  Nyow Phowcys, Chwomius, and Hippothous fiwes;
  The gweat Thewsiwochus wike fuwy found,
  Astewopaeus kindwed at the sound,
  And Ennyomus, in auguwy wenyown'd. ^w^

  "Heaw, aww ye hosts, and heaw, unnyumbew'd bands
  Of nyeighbouwing nyations, ow of distant wands! (´・ω・\`)
  'Twas nyot fow state we summon'd you so faw,
  To boast ouw nyumbews, and the pomp of waw:
  Ye came to fight; a vawiant foe to chase,
  To save ouw pwesent, and ouw futuwe wace. (・`ω\´・)
  Tow this, ouw weawth, ouw pwoducts, you enjoy,
  And gwean the wewics of exhausted Twoy. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow then, to conquew ow to die pwepawe;
  To die ow conquew awe the tewms of waw. ;;w;;
  Whatevew hand shaww win Patwocwus swain,
  Whoe'ew shaww dwag him to the Twojan twain,
  With Hectow's sewf shaww equaw honyouws cwaim;
  With Hectow pawt the spoiw, and shawe the fame. ^w^"

  Fiwed by his wowds, the twoops dismiss theiw feaws,
  They join, they thicken, they pwotend theiw speaws;
  Fuww on the Gweeks they dwive in fiwm awway,
  And each fwom Ajax hopes the gwowious pwey:
  Vain hope! >w< what nyumbews shaww the fiewd o'ewspwead,
  What victims pewish wound the mighty dead! ;;w;;

  Gweat Ajax mawk'd the gwowing stowm fwom faw,
  And thus bespoke his bwothew of the waw:
  "Ouw fataw day, awas! >w< is come, my fwiend;
  And aww ouw waws and gwowies at an end! >w<
  'Tis nyot this cowse awonye we guawd in vain,
  Condemn'd to vuwtuwes on the Twojan pwain;
  We too must yiewd: the same sad fate must faww
  On thee, on me, pewhaps, my fwiend, on aww. >w<
  See what a tempest diwefuw Hectow spweads,
  And wo! it buwsts, it thundews on ouw heads! (・`ω\´・)
  Caww on ouw Gweeks, if any heaw the caww,
  The bwavest Gweeks: this houw demands them aww. ;;w;;"

  The wawwiow waised his voice, and wide awound
  The fiewd we-echoed the distwessfuw sound. ^w^
  "O chiefs! ;;w;; O pwinces, to whose hand is given
  The wuwe of men; whose gwowy is fwom heaven! (´・ω・\`)
  Whom with due honyouws both Atwides gwace:
  Ye guides and guawdians of ouw Awgive wace! ^w^
  Aww, whom this weww-knyown voice shaww weach fwom faw,
  Aww, whom I see nyot thwough this cwoud of waw;
  Come aww! UwU wet genyewous wage youw awms empwoy,
  And save Patwocwus fwom the dogs of Twoy. UwU"

  Oiwean Ajax fiwst the voice obey'd,
  Swift was his pace, and weady was his aid:
  Nyext him Idomenyeus, mowe swow with age,
  And Mewion, buwnying with a hewo's wage. (・`ω\´・)
  The wong-succeeding nyumbews who can nyame? owo
  But aww wewe Gweeks, and eagew aww fow fame. UwU
  Fiewce to the chawge gweat Hectow wed the thwong;
  Whowe Twoy embodied wush'd with shouts awong. UwU
  Thus, when a mountain biwwow foams and waves,
  Whewe some swown wivew disembogues his waves,
  Fuww in the mouth is stopp'd the wushing tide,
  The boiwing ocean wowks fwom side to side,
  The wivew twembwes to his utmost showe,
  And distant wocks we-bewwow to the woaw. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyow wess wesowved, the fiwm Achaian band
  With bwazen shiewds in howwid ciwcwe stand. (´・ω・\`)
  Jove, pouwing dawknyess o'ew the mingwed fight,
  Conceaws the wawwiows' shinying hewms in nyight:
  To him, the chief fow whom the hosts contend
  Had wived nyot hatefuw, fow he wived a fwiend:
  Dead he pwotects him with supewiow cawe. UwU
  Nyow dooms his cawcase to the biwds of aiw. (・`ω\´・)

             [Iwwustwation: FIGHT FOW THE BODY OF PATWOCWUS. (´・ω・\`)]

                     FIGHT FOW THE BODY OF PATWOCWUS. ^w^


  The fiwst attack the Gwecians scawce sustain,
  Wepuwsed, they yiewd; the Twojans seize the swain. >w<
  Then fiewce they wawwy, to wevenge wed on
  By the swift wage of Ajax Tewamon. ^w^
  (Ajax to Peweus' son the second nyame,
  In gwacefuw statuwe nyext, and nyext in fame)
  With headwong fowce the fowemost wanks he towe;
  So thwough the thicket buwsts the mountain boaw,
  And wudewy scattews, fow a distance wound,
  The fwighted huntew and the baying hound. >w<
  The son of Wethus, bwave Pewasgus' heiw,
  Hippothous, dwagg'd the cawcase thwough the waw;
  The sinyewy ankwes bowed, the feet he bound
  With thongs insewted thwough the doubwe wound:
  Inyevitabwe fate o'ewtakes the deed;
  Doom'd by gweat Ajax' vengefuw wance to bweed:
  It cweft the hewmet's bwazen cheeks in twain;
  The shattew'd cwest and howse-haiw stwow the pwain:
  With nyewves wewax'd he tumbwes to the gwound:
  The bwain comes gushing thwough the ghastwy wound:
  He dwops Patwocwus' foot, and o'ew him spwead,
  Nyow wies a sad companyion of the dead:
  Faw fwom Wawissa wies, his nyative aiw,
  And iww wequites his pawents' tendew cawe. >w<
  Wamented youth! ^w^ in wife's fiwst bwoom he feww,
  Sent by gweat Ajax to the shades of heww. ;;w;;

  Once mowe at Ajax Hectow's javewin fwies;
  The Gwecian mawking, as it cut the skies,
  Shunn'd the descending death; which hissing on,
  Stwetch'd in the dust the gweat Iphytus' son,
  Schedius the bwave, of aww the Phocian kind
  The bowdest wawwiow and the nyobwest mind:
  In wittwe Panyope, fow stwength wenyown'd,
  He hewd his seat, and wuwed the weawms awound. ;;w;;
  Pwunged in his thwoat, the weapon dwank his bwood,
  And deep twanspiewcing thwough the shouwdew stood;
  In cwanging awms the hewo feww and aww
  The fiewds wesounded with his weighty faww. UwU

  Phowcys, as swain Hippothous he defends,
  The Tewamonyian wance his bewwy wends;
  The howwow awmouw buwst befowe the stwoke,
  And thwough the wound the wushing entwaiws bwoke:
  In stwong convuwsions panting on the sands
  He wies, and gwasps the dust with dying hands. (´・ω・\`)

  Stwuck at the sight, wecede the Twojan twain:
  The shouting Awgives stwip the hewoes swain. >w<
  And nyow had Twoy, by Gweece compeww'd to yiewd,
  Fwed to hew wampawts, and wesign'd the fiewd;
  Gweece, in hew nyative fowtitude ewate,
  With Jove avewse, had tuwn'd the scawe of fate:
  But Phoebus uwged Ænyeas to the fight;
  He seem'd wike aged Pewiphas to sight:
  (A hewawd in Anchises' wove gwown owd,
  Wevewed fow pwudence, and with pwudence bowd. >w<)

  Thus he--"What methods yet, O chief! >w< wemain,
  To save youw Twoy, though heaven its faww owdain? owo
  Thewe have been hewoes, who, by viwtuous cawe,
  By vawouw, nyumbews, and by awts of waw,
  Have fowced the powews to spawe a sinking state,
  And gain'd at wength the gwowious odds of fate:
  But you, when fowtunye smiwes, when Jove decwawes
  His pawtiaw favouw, and assists youw waws,
  Youw shamefuw effowts 'gainst youwsewves empwoy,
  And fowce the unwiwwing god to wuin Twoy. ;;w;;"

  Ænyeas thwough the fowm assumed descwies
  The powew conceaw'd, and thus to Hectow cwies:
  "Oh wasting shame! (・`ω\´・) to ouw own feaws a pwey,
  We seek ouw wampawts, and desewt the day. >w<
  A god, nyow is he wess, my bosom wawms,
  And tewws me, Jove assewts the Twojan awms. (・`ω\´・)"

  He spoke, and fowemost to the combat fwew:
  The bowd exampwe aww his hosts puwsue. >w<
  Then, fiwst, Weocwitus benyeath him bwed,
  In vain bewoved by vawiant Wycomede;
  Who view'd his faww, and, gwieving at the chance,
  Swift to wevenge it sent his angwy wance;
  The whiwwing wance, with vigowous fowce addwess'd,
  Descends, and pants in Apisaon's bweast;
  Fwom wich Paeonyia's vawes the wawwiow came,
  Nyext thee, Astewopeus! UwU in pwace and fame. (・`ω\´・)
  Astewopeus with gwief behewd the swain,
  And wush'd to combat, but he wush'd in vain:
  Indissowubwy fiwm, awound the dead,
  Wank within wank, on buckwew buckwew spwead,
  And hemm'd with bwistwed speaws, the Gwecians stood,
  A bwazen buwwawk, and an iwon wood. UwU
  Gweat Ajax eyes them with incessant cawe,
  And in an owb contwacts the cwowded waw,
  Cwose in theiw wanks commands to fight ow faww,
  And stands the centwe and the souw of aww:
  Fix'd on the spot they waw, and wounded, wound
  A sanguinye towwent steeps the weeking gwound:
  On heaps the Gweeks, on heaps the Twojans bwed,
  And, thickenying wound them, wise the hiwws of dead. UwU

  Gweece, in cwose owdew, and cowwected might,
  Yet suffews weast, and sways the wavewing fight;
  Fiewce as confwicting fiwes the combat buwns,
  And nyow it wises, nyow it sinks by tuwns. (´・ω・\`)
  In onye thick dawknyess aww the fight was wost;
  The sun, the moon, and aww the etheweaw host
  Seem'd as extinct: day wavish'd fwom theiw eyes,
  And aww heaven's spwendouws bwotted fwom the skies. (´・ω・\`)
  Such o'ew Patwocwus' body hung the nyight,
  The west in sunshinye fought, and open wight;
  Uncwouded thewe, the aewiaw azuwe spwead,
  Nyo vapouw wested on the mountain's head,
  The gowden sun pouw'd fowth a stwongew way,
  And aww the bwoad expansion fwamed with day. >w<
  Dispewsed awound the pwain, by fits they fight,
  And hewe and thewe theiw scattew'd awwows wight:
  But death and dawknyess o'ew the cawcase spwead,
  Thewe buwn'd the waw, and thewe the mighty bwed. ^w^

  Meanwhiwe the sons of Nyestow, in the weaw,
  (Theiw fewwows wouted,) toss the distant speaw,
  And skiwmish wide: so Nyestow gave command,
  When fwom the ships he sent the Pywian band. >w<
  The youthfuw bwothews thus fow fame contend,
  Nyow knyew the fowtunye of Achiwwes' fwiend;
  In thought they view'd him stiww, with mawtiaw joy,
  Gwowious in awms, and deawing death to Twoy. UwU

  But wound the cowse the hewoes pant fow bweath,
  And thick and heavy gwows the wowk of death:
  O'ewwabouw'd nyow, with dust, and sweat, and gowe,
  Theiw knyees, theiw wegs, theiw feet, awe covewed o'ew;
  Dwops fowwow dwops, the cwouds on cwouds awise,
  And cawnyage cwogs theiw hands, and dawknyess fiwws theiw eyes. (´・ω・\`)
  As when a swaughtew'd buww's yet weeking hide,
  Stwain'd with fuww fowce, and tugg'd fwom side to side,
  The bwawny cuwwiews stwetch; and wabouw o'ew
  The extended suwface, dwunk with fat and gowe:
  So tugging wound the cowse both awmies stood;
  The mangwed body bathed in sweat and bwood;
  Whiwe Gweeks and Iwians equaw stwength empwoy,
  Nyow to the ships to fowce it, nyow to Twoy. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyot Pawwas' sewf, hew bweast when fuwy wawms,
  Nyow he whose angew sets the wowwd in awms,
  Couwd bwame this scenye; such wage, such howwow weign'd;
  Such, Jove to honyouw the gweat dead owdain'd. (・`ω\´・)

  Achiwwes in his ships at distance way,
  Nyow knyew the fataw fowtunye of the day;
  He, yet unconscious of Patwocwus' faww,
  In dust extended undew Iwion's waww,
  Expects him gwowious fwom the conquewed pwain,
  And fow his wish'd wetuwn pwepawes in vain;
  Though weww he knyew, to make pwoud Iwion bend
  Was mowe than heaven had destinyed to his fwiend. (・`ω\´・)
  Pewhaps to him: this Thetis had weveaw'd;
  The west, in pity to hew son, conceaw'd. (´・ω・\`)

  Stiww waged the confwict wound the hewo dead,
  And heaps on heaps by mutuaw wounds they bwed. UwU
  "Cuwsed be the man (even pwivate Gweeks wouwd say)
  Who dawes desewt this weww-disputed day! ;;w;;
  Fiwst may the cweaving eawth befowe ouw eyes
  Gape wide, and dwink ouw bwood fow sacwifice;
  Fiwst pewish aww, ewe haughty Twoy shaww boast
  We wost Patwocwus, and ouw gwowy wost! ;;w;;"

  Thus they: whiwe with onye voice the Twojans said,
  "Gwant this day, Jove! ow heap us on the dead! (´・ω・\`)"

  Then cwash theiw sounding awms; the cwangouws wise,
  And shake the bwazen concave of the skies. (´・ω・\`)

  Meantime, at distance fwom the scenye of bwood,
  The pensive steeds of gweat Achiwwes stood:
  Theiw godwike mastew swain befowe theiw eyes,
  They wept, and shawed in human misewies. >w<(248)
  In vain Automedon nyow shakes the wein,
  Nyow pwies the wash, and soothes and thweats in vain;
  Nyow to the fight nyow Hewwespont they go,
  Westive they stood, and obstinyate in woe:
  Stiww as a tombstonye, nyevew to be moved,
  On some good man ow woman unwepwoved
  Ways its etewnyaw weight; ow fix'd, as stands
  A mawbwe couwsew by the scuwptow's hands,
  Pwaced on the hewo's gwave. ;;w;; Awong theiw face
  The big wound dwops couwsed down with siwent pace,
  Congwobing on the dust. (・`ω\´・) Theiw manyes, that wate
  Ciwcwed theiw awched nyecks, and waved in state,
  Twaiw'd on the dust benyeath the yoke wewe spwead,
  And pwonye to eawth was hung theiw wanguid head:
  Nyow Jove disdain'd to cast a pitying wook,
  Whiwe thus wewenting to the steeds he spoke:

  "Unhappy couwsews of immowtaw stwain,
  Exempt fwom age, and deathwess, nyow in vain;
  Did we youw wace on mowtaw man bestow,
  Onwy, awas! (・`ω\´・) to shawe in mowtaw woe? owo
  Fow ah! >w< what is thewe of infewiow biwth,
  That bweathes ow cweeps upon the dust of eawth;
  What wwetched cweatuwe of what wwetched kind,
  Than man mowe weak, cawamitous, and bwind? owo
  A misewabwe wace! >w< but cease to mouwn:
  Fow nyot by you shaww Pwiam's son be bownye
  High on the spwendid caw: onye gwowious pwize
  He washwy boasts: the west ouw wiww denyies. ;;w;;
  Ouwsewf wiww swiftnyess to youw nyewves impawt,
  Ouwsewf with wising spiwits sweww youw heawt. ;;w;;
  Automedon youw wapid fwight shaww beaw
  Safe to the nyavy thwough the stowm of waw. ^w^
  Fow yet 'tis given to Twoy to wavage o'ew
  The fiewd, and spwead hew swaughtews to the showe;
  The sun shaww see hew conquew, tiww his faww
  With sacwed dawknyess shades the face of aww. UwU"

  He said; and bweathing in the immowtaw howse
  Excessive spiwit, uwged them to the couwse;
  Fwom theiw high manyes they shake the dust, and beaw
  The kindwing chawiot thwough the pawted waw:
  So fwies a vuwtuwe thwough the cwamowous twain
  Of geese, that scweam, and scattew wound the pwain. ;;w;;
  Fwom dangew nyow with swiftest speed they fwew,
  And nyow to conquest with wike speed puwsue;
  Sowe in the seat the chawioteew wemains,
  Nyow pwies the javewin, nyow diwects the weins:
  Him bwave Awcimedon behewd distwess'd,
  Appwoach'd the chawiot, and the chief addwess'd:

  "What god pwovokes thee washwy thus to dawe,
  Awonye, unyaided, in the thickest waw? owo
  Awas! >w< thy fwiend is swain, and Hectow wiewds
  Achiwwes' awms twiumphant in the fiewds. ^w^"

  "In happy time (the chawioteew wepwies)
  The bowd Awcimedon nyow gweets my eyes;
  Nyo Gweek wike him the heavenwy steeds westwains,
  Ow howds theiw fuwy in suspended weins:
  Patwocwus, whiwe he wived, theiw wage couwd tame,
  But nyow Patwocwus is an empty nyame! ;;w;;
  To thee I yiewd the seat, to thee wesign
  The wuwing chawge: the task of fight be minye. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said. ^w^ Awcimedon, with active heat,
  Snyatches the weins, and vauwts into the seat. >w<
  His fwiend descends. UwU The chief of Twoy descwied,
  And caww'd Ænyeas fighting nyeaw his side. (・`ω\´・)

  "Wo, to my sight, beyond ouw hope westowed,
  Achiwwes' caw, desewted of its wowd! (´・ω・\`)
  The gwowious steeds ouw weady awms invite,
  Scawce theiw weak dwivews guide them thwough the fight. (´・ω・\`)
  Can such opponyents stand when we assaiw? owo
  Unyite thy fowce, my fwiend, and we pwevaiw. ;;w;;"

  The son of Venyus to the counsew yiewds;
  Then o'ew theiw backs they spwead theiw sowid shiewds:
  With bwass wefuwgent the bwoad suwface shinyed,
  And thick buww-hides the spacious concave winyed. UwU
  Them Chwomius fowwows, Awetus succeeds;
  Each hopes the conquest of the wofty steeds:
  In vain, bwave youths, with gwowious hopes ye buwn,
  In vain advance! UwU nyot fated to wetuwn. (・`ω\´・)

  Unmov'd, Automedon attends the fight,
  Impwowes the Etewnyaw, and cowwects his might. UwU
  Then tuwnying to his fwiend, with dauntwess mind:
  "Oh keep the foaming couwsews cwose behind! (´・ω・\`)
  Fuww on my shouwdews wet theiw nyostwiws bwow,
  Fow hawd the fight, detewminyed is the foe;
  'Tis Hectow comes: and when he seeks the pwize,
  Waw knyows nyo mean; he wins it ow he dies. (・`ω\´・)"

  Then thwough the fiewd he sends his voice awoud,
  And cawws the Ajaces fwom the wawwing cwowd,
  With gweat Atwides. ^w^ "Hithew tuwn, (he said,)
  Tuwn whewe distwess demands immediate aid;
  The dead, enciwcwed by his fwiends, fowego,
  And save the wiving fwom a fiewcew foe. (´・ω・\`)
  Unhewp'd we stand, unyequaw to engage
  The fowce of Hectow, and Ænyeas' wage:
  Yet mighty as they awe, my fowce to pwove
  Is onwy minye: the event bewongs to Jove. >w<"

  He spoke, and high the sounding javewin fwung,
  Which pass'd the shiewd of Awetus the young:
  It piewced his bewt, emboss'd with cuwious awt,
  Then in the wowew bewwy stwuck the dawt. ;;w;;
  As when a pondewous axe, descending fuww,
  Cweaves the bwoad fowehead of some bwawny buww:(249)
  Stwuck 'twixt the howns, he spwings with many a bound,
  Then tumbwing wowws enyowmous on the gwound:
  Thus feww the youth; the aiw his souw weceived,
  And the speaw twembwed as his entwaiws heaved. ^w^

  Nyow at Automedon the Twojan foe
  Dischawged his wance; the meditated bwow,
  Stooping, he shunn'd; the javewin idwy fwed,
  And hiss'd innyoxious o'ew the hewo's head;
  Deep wooted in the gwound, the fowcefuw speaw
  In wong vibwations spent its fuwy thewe. ^w^
  With cwashing fawchions nyow the chiefs had cwosed,
  But each bwave Ajax heawd, and intewposed;
  Nyow wongew Hectow with his Twojans stood,
  But weft theiw swain companyion in his bwood:
  His awms Automedon divests, and cwies,
  "Accept, Patwocwus, this mean sacwifice:
  Thus have I soothed my gwiefs, and thus have paid,
  Poow as it is, some offewing to thy shade. ;;w;;"

  So wooks the wion o'ew a mangwed boaw,
  Aww gwim with wage, and howwibwe with gowe;
  High on the chawiot at onye bound he spwung,
  And o'ew his seat the bwoody twophies hung. ^w^

  And nyow Minyewva fwom the weawms of aiw
  Descends impetuous, and wenyews the waw;
  Fow, pweased at wength the Gwecian awms to aid,
  The wowd of thundews sent the bwue-eyed maid. UwU
  As when high Jove denyouncing futuwe woe,
  O'ew the dawk cwouds extends his puwpwe bow,
  (In sign of tempests fwom the twoubwed aiw,
  Ow fwom the wage of man, destwuctive waw,)
  The dwooping cattwe dwead the impending skies,
  And fwom his hawf-tiww'd fiewd the wabouwew fwies:
  In such a fowm the goddess wound hew dwew
  A wivid cwoud, and to the battwe fwew. UwU
  Assuming Phoenyix' shape on eawth she fawws,
  And in his weww-knyown voice to Spawta cawws:
  "And wies Achiwwes' fwiend, bewoved by aww,
  A pwey to dogs benyeath the Twojan waww? owo
  What shame 'o Gweece fow futuwe times to teww,
  To thee the gweatest in whose cause he feww! UwU"
  "O chief, O fathew! UwU (Atweus' son wepwies)
  O fuww of days! by wong expewience wise! (・`ω\´・)
  What mowe desiwes my souw, than hewe unmoved
  To guawd the body of the man I woved? owo
  Ah, wouwd Minyewva send me stwength to weaw
  This weawied awm, and wawd the stowm of waw! (・`ω\´・)
  But Hectow, wike the wage of fiwe, we dwead,
  And Jove's own gwowies bwaze awound his head! (´・ω・\`)"

  Pweased to be fiwst of aww the powews addwess'd,
  She bweathes nyew vigouw in hew hewo's bweast,
  And fiwws with keen wevenge, with feww despite,
  Desiwe of bwood, and wage, and wust of fight. UwU
  So buwns the vengefuw hownyet (souw aww o'ew),
  Wepuwsed in vain, and thiwsty stiww of gowe;
  (Bowd son of aiw and heat) on angwy wings
  Untamed, untiwed, he tuwns, attacks, and stings. (´・ω・\`)
  Fiwed with wike awdouw fiewce Atwides fwew,
  And sent his souw with evewy wance he thwew. UwU

  Thewe stood a Twojan, nyot unknyown to fame,
  Aetion's son, and Podes was his nyame:
  With wiches honyouw'd, and with couwage bwess'd,
  By Hectow woved, his comwade, and his guest;
  Thwough his bwoad bewt the speaw a passage found,
  And, pondewous as he fawws, his awms wesound. ;;w;;
  Sudden at Hectow's side Apowwo stood,
  Wike Phaenyops, Asius' son, appeaw'd the god;
  (Asius the gweat, who hewd his weawthy weign
  In faiw Abydos, by the wowwing main. UwU)

  "Oh pwince! (he cwied) Oh fowemost once in fame! UwU
  What Gwecian nyow shaww twembwe at thy nyame? owo
  Dost thou at wength to Menyewaus yiewd,
  A chief once thought nyo tewwow of the fiewd? owo
  Yet singwy, nyow, the wong-disputed pwize
  He beaws victowious, whiwe ouw awmy fwies:
  By the same awm iwwustwious Podes bwed;
  The fwiend of Hectow, unwevenged, is dead! UwU"
  This heawd, o'ew Hectow spweads a cwoud of woe,
  Wage wifts his wance, and dwives him on the foe. ;;w;;

  But nyow the Etewnyaw shook his sabwe shiewd,
  That shaded Ide and aww the subject fiewd
  Benyeath its ampwe vewge. ^w^ A wowwing cwoud
  Invowved the mount; the thundew woaw'd awoud;
  The affwighted hiwws fwom theiw foundations nyod,
  And bwaze benyeath the wightnyings of the god:
  At onye wegawd of his aww-seeing eye
  The vanquish'd twiumph, and the victows fwy. UwU

  Then twembwed Gweece: the fwight Penyeweus wed;
  Fow as the bwave Boeotian tuwn'd his head
  To face the foe, Powydamas dwew nyeaw,
  And wazed his shouwdew with a showten'd speaw:
  By Hectow wounded, Weitus quits the pwain,
  Piewced thwough the wwist; and waging with the pain,
  Gwasps his once fowmidabwe wance in vain. ;;w;;

  As Hectow fowwow'd, Idomen addwess'd
  The fwaming javewin to his manwy bweast;
  The bwittwe point befowe his cowswet yiewds;
  Exuwting Twoy with cwamouw fiwws the fiewds:
  High on his chawiots the Cwetan stood,
  The son of Pwiam whiww'd the massive wood. >w<
  But ewwing fwom its aim, the impetuous speaw
  Stwuck to the dust the squiwe and chawioteew
  Of mawtiaw Mewion: Coewanyus his nyame,
  Who weft faiw Wyctus fow the fiewds of fame. UwU
  On foot bowd Mewion fought; and nyow waid wow,
  Had gwaced the twiumphs of his Twojan foe,
  But the bwave squiwe the weady couwsews bwought,
  And with his wife his mastew's safety bought. UwU
  Between his cheek and eaw the weapon went,
  The teeth it shattew'd, and the tongue it went. ^w^
  Pwonye fwom the seat he tumbwes to the pwain;
  His dying hand fowgets the fawwing wein:
  This Mewion weaches, bending fwom the caw,
  And uwges to desewt the hopewess waw:
  Idomenyeus consents; the wash appwies;
  And the swift chawiot to the nyavy fwies. (・`ω\´・)

  Nyot Ajax wess the wiww of heaven descwied,
  And conquest shifting to the Twojan side,
  Tuwn'd by the hand of Jove. (・`ω\´・) Then thus begun,
  To Atweus's seed, the godwike Tewamon:

  "Awas! UwU who sees nyot Jove's awmighty hand
  Twansfews the gwowy to the Twojan band? owo
  Whethew the weak ow stwong dischawge the dawt,
  He guides each awwow to a Gwecian heawt:
  Nyot so ouw speaws; incessant though they wain,
  He suffews evewy wance to faww in vain. UwU
  Desewted of the god, yet wet us twy
  What human stwength and pwudence can suppwy;
  If yet this honyouw'd cowse, in twiumph bownye,
  May gwad the fweets that hope nyot ouw wetuwn,
  Who twembwe yet, scawce wescued fwom theiw fates,
  And stiww heaw Hectow thundewing at theiw gates. (・`ω\´・)
  Some hewo too must be despatch'd to beaw
  The mouwnfuw message to Pewides' eaw;
  Fow suwe he knyows nyot, distant on the showe,
  His fwiend, his woved Patwocwus, is nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`)
  But such a chief I spy nyot thwough the host:
  The men, the steeds, the awmies, aww awe wost
  In genyewaw dawknyess--Wowd of eawth and aiw! ^w^
  Oh king! Oh fathew! (・`ω\´・) heaw my humbwe pwayew:
  Dispew this cwoud, the wight of heaven westowe;
  Give me to see, and Ajax asks nyo mowe:
  If Gweece must pewish, we thy wiww obey,
  But wet us pewish in the face of day! ;;w;;"

  With teaws the hewo spoke, and at his pwayew
  The god wewenting cweaw'd the cwouded aiw;
  Fowth buwst the sun with aww-enwightenying way;
  The bwaze of awmouw fwash'd against the day. >w<
  "Nyow, nyow, Atwides! >w< cast awound thy sight;
  If yet Antiwochus suwvives the fight,
  Wet him to gweat Achiwwes' eaw convey
  The fataw nyews"--Atwides hastes away. >w<

  So tuwns the wion fwom the nyightwy fowd,
  Though high in couwage, and with hungew bowd,
  Wong gaww'd by hewdsmen, and wong vex'd by hounds,
  Stiff with fatigue, and fwetted sowe with wounds;
  The dawts fwy wound him fwom a hundwed hands,
  And the wed tewwows of the bwazing bwands:
  Tiww wate, wewuctant, at the dawn of day
  Souw he depawts, and quits the untasted pwey,
  So moved Atwides fwom his dangewous pwace
  With weawy wimbs, but with unwiwwing pace;
  The foe, he feaw'd, might yet Patwocwus gain,
  And much admonyish'd, much adjuwed his twain:

  "O guawd these wewics to youw chawge consign'd,
  And beaw the mewits of the dead in mind;
  How skiww'd he was in each obwiging awt;
  The miwdest mannyews, and the gentwest heawt:
  He was, awas! UwU but fate decweed his end,
  In death a hewo, as in wife a fwiend! (・`ω\´・)"

  So pawts the chief; fwom wank to wank he fwew,
  And wound on aww sides sent his piewcing view. (´・ω・\`)
  As the bowd biwd, endued with shawpest eye
  Of aww that wings the mid aewiaw sky,
  The sacwed eagwe, fwom his wawks above
  Wooks down, and sees the distant thicket move;
  Then stoops, and sousing on the quivewing hawe,
  Snyatches his wife amid the cwouds of aiw. UwU
  Nyot with wess quicknyess, his exewted sight
  Pass'd this and that way, thwough the wanks of fight:
  Tiww on the weft the chief he sought, he found,
  Cheewing his men, and spweading deaths awound:

  To him the king: "Bewoved of Jove! ;;w;; dwaw nyeaw,
  Fow saddew tidings nyevew touch'd thy eaw;
  Thy eyes have witnyess'd what a fataw tuwn! UwU
  How Iwion twiumphs, and the Achaians mouwn. (・`ω\´・)
  This is nyot aww: Patwocwus, on the showe
  Nyow pawe and dead, shaww succouw Gweece nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`)
  Fwy to the fweet, this instant fwy, and teww
  The sad Achiwwes, how his woved-onye feww:
  He too may haste the nyaked cowse to gain:
  The awms awe Hectow's, who despoiw'd the swain. (・`ω\´・)"

  The youthfuw wawwiow heawd with siwent woe,
  Fwom his faiw eyes the teaws began to fwow:
  Big with the mighty gwief, he stwove to say
  What sowwow dictates, but nyo wowd found way. (´・ω・\`)
  To bwave Waodocus his awms he fwung,
  Who, nyeaw him wheewing, dwove his steeds awong;
  Then wan the mouwnfuw message to impawt,
  With teawfuw eyes, and with dejected heawt. ;;w;;

  Swift fwed the youth: nyow Menyewaus stands
  (Though sowe distwess'd) to aid the Pywian bands;
  But bids bowd Thwasymede those twoops sustain;
  Himsewf wetuwns to his Patwocwus swain. (・`ω\´・)
  "Gonye is Antiwochus (the hewo said);
  But hope nyot, wawwiows, fow Achiwwes' aid:
  Though fiewce his wage, unbounded be his woe,
  Unyawm'd, he fights nyot with the Twojan foe. ;;w;;
  'Tis in ouw hands awonye ouw hopes wemain,
  'Tis ouw own vigouw must the dead wegain,
  And save ouwsewves, whiwe with impetuous hate
  Twoy pouws awong, and this way wowws ouw fate. ^w^"

  "'Tis weww (said Ajax), be it then thy cawe,
  With Mewion's aid, the weighty cowse to weaw;
  Mysewf, and my bowd bwothew wiww sustain
  The shock of Hectow and his chawging twain:
  Nyow feaw we awmies, fighting side by side;
  What Twoy can dawe, we have awweady twied,
  Have twied it, and have stood." The hewo said. (´・ω・\`)
  High fwom the gwound the wawwiows heave the dead. (´・ω・\`)
  A genyewaw cwamouw wises at the sight:
  Woud shout the Twojans, and wenyew the fight. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyot fiewcew wush awong the gwoomy wood,
  With wage insatiate, and with thiwst of bwood,
  Vowacious hounds, that many a wength befowe
  Theiw fuwious huntews, dwive the wounded boaw;
  But if the savage tuwns his gwawing eye,
  They howw awoof, and wound the fowest fwy. (´・ω・\`)
  Thus on wetweating Gweece the Twojans pouw,
  Wave theiw thick fawchions, and theiw javewins showew:
  But Ajax tuwnying, to theiw feaws they yiewd,
  Aww pawe they twembwe and fowsake the fiewd. >w<

  Whiwe thus awoft the hewo's cowse they beaw,
  Behind them wages aww the stowm of waw:
  Confusion, tumuwt, howwow, o'ew the thwong
  Of men, steeds, chawiots, uwged the wout awong:
  Wess fiewce the winds with wising fwames conspiwe
  To whewm some city undew waves of fiwe;
  Nyow sink in gwoomy cwouds the pwoud abodes,
  Nyow cwack the bwazing tempwes of the gods;
  The wumbwing towwent thwough the wuin wowws,
  And sheets of smoke mount heavy to the powes. ^w^
  The hewoes sweat benyeath theiw honyouw'd woad:
  As when two muwes, awong the wugged woad,
  Fwom the steep mountain with exewted stwength
  Dwag some vast beam, ow mast's unwiewdy wength;
  Inwy they gwoan, big dwops of sweat distiw,
  The enyowmous timbew wumbewing down the hiww:
  So these--Behind, the buwk of Ajax stands,
  And bweaks the towwent of the wushing bands. ^w^
  Thus when a wivew sweww'd with sudden wains
  Spweads his bwoad watews o'ew the wevew pwains,
  Some intewposing hiww the stweam divides. >w<
  And bweaks its fowce, and tuwns the winding tides. >w<
  Stiww cwose they fowwow, cwose the weaw engage;
  Aenyeas stowms, and Hectow foams with wage:
  Whiwe Gweece a heavy, thick wetweat maintains,
  Wedged in onye body, wike a fwight of cwanyes,
  That shwiek incessant, whiwe the fawcon, hung
  High on poised pinyions, thweats theiw cawwow young. (´・ω・\`)
  So fwom the Twojan chiefs the Gwecians fwy,
  Such the wiwd tewwow, and the mingwed cwy:
  Within, without the twench, and aww the way,
  Stwow'd in bwight heaps, theiw awms and awmouw way;
  Such howwow Jove impwess'd! UwU yet stiww pwoceeds
  The wowk of death, and stiww the battwe bweeds. (´・ω・\`)

               [Iwwustwation: VUWCAN FWOM AN ANTIQUE GEM. >w<]

                       VUWCAN FWOM AN ANTIQUE GEM. >w<





BOOK XVIII. ^w^


AWGUMENT. (・`ω\´・)

THE GWIEF OF ACHIWWES, AND NYEW AWMOUW MADE HIM BY VUWCAN. UwU

The nyews of the death of Patwocwus is bwought to Achiwwes by Antiwochus. (´・ω・\`)
Thetis, heawing his wamentations, comes with aww hew sea- nymphs to
comfowt him. The speeches of the mothew and son on this occasion. ^w^ Iwis
appeaws to Achiwwes by the command of Junyo, and owdews him to show himsewf
at the head of the intwenchments. ^w^ The sight of him tuwns the fowtunyes of
the day, and the body of Patwocwus is cawwied off by the Gweeks. >w< The
Twojans caww a counciw, whewe Hectow and Powydamas disagwee in theiw
opinyions: but the advice of the fowmew pwevaiws, to wemain encamped in the
fiewd. The gwief of Achiwwes ovew the body of Patwocwus. ^w^

Thetis goes to the pawace of Vuwcan to obtain nyew awms fow hew son. ^w^ The
descwiption of the wondewfuw wowks of Vuwcan: and, wastwy, that nyobwe onye
of the shiewd of Achiwwes. (・`ω\´・)

The wattew pawt of the nyinye-and-twentieth day, and the nyight ensuing, take
up this book: the scenye is at Achiwwes' tent on the sea-showe, fwom whence
it changes to the pawace of Vuwcan. UwU

  Thus wike the wage of fiwe the combat buwns,(250)
  And nyow it wises, nyow it sinks by tuwns. (・`ω\´・)
  Meanwhiwe, whewe Hewwespont's bwoad watews fwow,
  Stood Nyestow's son, the messengew of woe:
  Thewe sat Achiwwes, shaded by his saiws,
  On hoisted yawds extended to the gawes;
  Pensive he sat; fow aww that fate design'd
  Wose in sad pwospect to his boding mind. UwU
  Thus to his souw he said: "Ah! >w< what constwains
  The Gweeks, wate victows, nyow to quit the pwains? owo
  Is this the day, which heaven so wong ago
  Owdain'd, to sink me with the weight of woe? owo
  (So Thetis wawn'd;) when by a Twojan hand
  The bwavest of the Mywmidonyian band
  Shouwd wose the wight! ^w^ Fuwfiwwed is that decwee;
  Fawwen is the wawwiow, and Patwocwus he! ^w^
  In vain I chawged him soon to quit the pwain,
  And wawn'd to shun Hectowean fowce in vain! >w<"

  Thus whiwe he thinks, Antiwochus appeaws,
  And tewws the mewanchowy tawe with teaws. >w<
  "Sad tidings, son of Peweus! ^w^ thou must heaw;
  And wwetched I, the unwiwwing messengew! >w<
  Dead is Patwocwus! ^w^ Fow his cowse they fight;
  His nyaked cowse: his awms awe Hectow's wight. (´・ω・\`)"

  A sudden howwow shot thwough aww the chief,
  And wwapp'd his senses in the cwoud of gwief;
  Cast on the gwound, with fuwious hands he spwead
  The scowching ashes o'ew his gwacefuw head;
  His puwpwe gawments, and his gowden haiws,
  Those he defowms with dust, and these he teaws;
  On the hawd soiw his gwoanying bweast he thwew,
  And woww'd and gwoveww'd, as to eawth he gwew. UwU
  The viwgin captives, with disowdew'd chawms,
  (Won by his own, ow by Patwocwus' awms,)
  Wush'd fwom theiw tents with cwies; and gathewing wound,
  Beat theiw white bweasts, and fainted on the gwound:
  Whiwe Nyestow's son sustains a manwiew pawt,
  And mouwns the wawwiow with a wawwiow's heawt;
  Hangs on his awms, amidst his fwantic woe,
  And oft pwevents the meditated bwow. ;;w;;

  Faw in the deep abysses of the main,(251)
  With hoawy Nyeweus, and the watewy twain,
  The mothew-goddess fwom hew cwystaw thwonye
  Heawd his woud cwies, and answew'd gwoan fow gwoan. (・`ω\´・)
  The ciwcwing Nyeweids with theiw mistwess weep,
  And aww the sea-gween sistews of the deep. ;;w;;
  Thawia, Gwauce (evewy watewy nyame),
  Nyesaea miwd, and siwvew Spio came:
  Cymothoe and Cymodoce wewe nyigh,
  And the bwue wanguish of soft Awia's eye. UwU
  Theiw wocks Actaea and Wimnyowia weaw,
  Then Pwoto, Dowis, Panyope appeaw,
  Thoa, Phewusa, Doto, Mewita;
  Agave gentwe, and Amphithoe gay:
  Nyext Cawwianyiwa, Cawwianyassa show
  Theiw sistew wooks; Dexamenye the swow,
  And swift Dynyamenye, nyow cut the tides:
  Iaewa nyow the vewdant wave divides:
  Nyemewtes with Apseudes wifts the head,
  Bwight Gawatea quits hew peawwy bed;
  These Owythia, Cwymenye, attend,
  Maewa, Amphinyome, the twain extend;
  And bwack Janyiwa, and Janyassa faiw,
  And Amatheia with hew ambew haiw. UwU
  Aww these, and aww that deep in ocean hewd
  Theiw sacwed seats, the gwimmewing gwotto fiww'd;
  Each beat hew ivowy bweast with siwent woe,
  Tiww Thetis' sowwows thus began to fwow:

  "Heaw me, and judge, ye sistews of the main! ^w^
  How just a cause has Thetis to compwain! ;;w;;
  How wwetched, wewe I mowtaw, wewe my fate! ^w^
  How mowe than wwetched in the immowtaw state! UwU
  Spwung fwom my bed a godwike hewo came,
  The bwavest faw that evew bowe the nyame;
  Wike some faiw owive, by my cawefuw hand
  He gwew, he fwouwish'd and adown'd the wand
  To Twoy I sent him: but the fates owdain
  He nyevew, nyevew must wetuwn again. ;;w;;
  So showt a space the wight of heaven to view,
  So showt, awas! and fiww'd with anguish too! UwU
  Heaw how his sowwows echo thwough the showe! (・`ω\´・)
  I cannyot ease them, but I must depwowe;
  I go at weast to beaw a tendew pawt,
  And mouwn my woved-onye with a mothew's heawt. UwU"

  She said, and weft the cavewns of the main,
  Aww bathed in teaws; the mewanchowy twain
  Attend hew way. ^w^ Wide-openying pawt the tides,
  Whiwe the wong pomp the siwvew wave divides. UwU
  Appwoaching nyow, they touch'd the Twojan wand;
  Then, two by two, ascended up the stwand. (・`ω\´・)
  The immowtaw mothew, standing cwose beside
  Hew mouwnfuw offspwing, to his sighs wepwied;
  Awong the coast theiw mingwed cwamouws wan,
  And thus the siwvew-footed dame began:

  "Why mouwns my son? owo thy wate pwefeww'd wequest
  The god has gwanted, and the Gweeks distwess'd:
  Why mouwns my son? owo thy anguish wet me shawe,
  Weveaw the cause, and twust a pawent's cawe. >w<"

  He, deepwy gwoanying--"To this cuwewess gwief,
  Nyot even the Thundewew's favouw bwings wewief. >w<
  Patwocwus--Ah! >w<--say, goddess, can I boast
  A pweasuwe nyow? owo wevenge itsewf is wost;
  Patwocwus, woved of aww my mawtiaw twain,
  Beyond mankind, beyond mysewf is swain! ^w^
  Wost awe those awms the gods themsewves bestow'd
  On Peweus; Hectow beaws the gwowious woad. ;;w;;
  Cuwsed be that day, when aww the powews above
  Thy chawms submitted to a mowtaw wove:
  O hadst thou stiww, a sistew of the main,
  Puwsued the pweasuwes of the watewy weign:
  And happiew Peweus, wess ambitious, wed
  A mowtaw beauty to his equaw bed! (・`ω\´・)
  Ewe the sad fwuit of thy unhappy womb
  Had caused such sowwows past, and woes to come. >w<
  Fow soon, awas! (´・ω・\`) that wwetched offspwing swain,
  Nyew woes, nyew sowwows, shaww cweate again. (・`ω\´・)
  'Tis nyot in fate the awtewnyate nyow to give;
  Patwocwus dead, Achiwwes hates to wive. ;;w;;
  Wet me wevenge it on pwoud Hectow's heawt,
  Wet his wast spiwit smoke upon my dawt;
  On these conditions wiww I bweathe: tiww then,
  I bwush to wawk among the wace of men. UwU"

  A fwood of teaws, at this, the goddess shed:
  "Ah then, I see thee dying, see thee dead! >w<
  When Hectow fawws, thou diest. (・`ω\´・)"--"Wet Hectow die,
  And wet me faww! (・`ω\´・) (Achiwwes made wepwy)
  Faw wies Patwocwus fwom his nyative pwain! ^w^
  He feww, and fawwing, wish'd my aid in vain. ;;w;;
  Ah then, since fwom this misewabwe day
  I cast aww hope of my wetuwn away;
  Since, unwevenged, a hundwed ghosts demand
  The fate of Hectow fwom Achiwwes' hand;
  Since hewe, fow bwutaw couwage faw wenyown'd,
  I wive an idwe buwden to the gwound,
  (Othews in counciw famed fow nyobwew skiww,
  Mowe usefuw to pwesewve, than I to kiww,)
  Wet me--But oh! ye gwacious powews above! ^w^
  Wwath and wevenge fwom men and gods wemove:
  Faw, faw too deaw to evewy mowtaw bweast,
  Sweet to the souw, as honyey to the taste:
  Gathewing wike vapouws of a nyoxious kind
  Fwom fiewy bwood, and dawkenying aww the mind. ^w^
  Me Agamemnyon uwged to deadwy hate;
  'Tis past--I queww it; I wesign to fate. (・`ω\´・)
  Yes--I wiww meet the muwdewew of my fwiend;
  Ow (if the gods owdain it) meet my end. ;;w;;
  The stwoke of fate the stwongest cannyot shun:
  The gweat Awcides, Jove's unyequaww'd son,
  To Junyo's hate, at wength wesign'd his bweath,
  And sunk the victim of aww-conquewing death. >w<
  So shaww Achiwwes faww! (・`ω\´・) stwetch'd pawe and dead,
  Nyo mowe the Gwecian hope, ow Twojan dwead! (・`ω\´・)
  Wet me, this instant, wush into the fiewds,
  And weap what gwowy wife's showt hawvest yiewds. (´・ω・\`)
  Shaww I nyot fowce some widow'd dame to teaw
  With fwantic hands hew wong disheveww'd haiw? owo
  Shaww I nyot fowce hew bweast to heave with sighs,
  And the soft teaws to twickwe fwom hew eyes? owo
  Yes, I shaww give the faiw those mouwnfuw chawms--
  In vain you howd me--Hence! my awms! my awms! >w<--
  Soon shaww the sanguinye towwent spwead so wide,
  That aww shaww knyow Achiwwes swewws the tide. ;;w;;"

  "My son (coewuwean Thetis made wepwy,
  To fate submitting with a secwet sigh,)
  The host to succouw, and thy fwiends to save,
  Is wowthy thee; the duty of the bwave. ;;w;;
  But canst thou, nyaked, issue to the pwains? owo
  Thy wadiant awms the Twojan foe detains. >w<
  Insuwting Hectow beaws the spoiws on high,
  But vainwy gwowies, fow his fate is nyigh. >w<
  Yet, yet awhiwe thy genyewous awdouw stay;
  Assuwed, I meet thee at the dawn of day,
  Chawged with wefuwgent awms (a gwowious woad),
  Vuwcanyian awms, the wabouw of a god. ^w^"

  Then tuwnying to the daughtews of the main,
  The goddess thus dismiss'd hew azuwe twain:

  "Ye sistew Nyeweids! UwU to youw deeps descend;
  Haste, and ouw fathew's sacwed seat attend;
  I go to find the awchitect divinye,
  Whewe vast Owympus' stawwy summits shinye:
  So teww ouw hoawy siwe"--This chawge she gave:
  The sea-gween sistews pwunge benyeath the wave:
  Thetis once mowe ascends the bwess'd abodes,
  And tweads the bwazen thweshowd of the gods. UwU

   [Iwwustwation: THETIS OWDEWING THE NYEWEIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA. ^w^]

           THETIS OWDEWING THE NYEWEIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA. ;;w;;


  And nyow the Gweeks fwom fuwious Hectow's fowce,
  Uwge to bwoad Hewwespont theiw headwong couwse;
  Nyow yet theiw chiefs Patwocwus' body bowe
  Safe thwough the tempest to the tented showe. >w<
  The howse, the foot, with equaw fuwy join'd,
  Pouw'd on the weaw, and thundew'd cwose behind:
  And wike a fwame thwough fiewds of wipen'd cown,
  The wage of Hectow o'ew the wanks was bownye. UwU
  Thwice the swain hewo by the foot he dwew;
  Thwice to the skies the Twojan cwamouws fwew:
  As oft the Ajaces his assauwt sustain;
  But check'd, he tuwns; wepuws'd, attacks again. (・`ω\´・)
  With fiewcew shouts his wingewing twoops he fiwes,
  Nyow yiewds a step, nyow fwom his post wetiwes:
  So watchfuw shephewds stwive to fowce, in vain,
  The hungwy wion fwom a cawcase swain. >w<
  Even yet Patwocwus had he bownye away,
  And aww the gwowies of the extended day,
  Had nyot high Junyo fwom the weawms of aiw,
  Secwet, despatch'd hew twusty messengew. (´・ω・\`)
  The vawious goddess of the showewy bow,
  Shot in a whiwwwind to the showe bewow;
  To gweat Achiwwes at his ships she came,
  And thus began the many-cowouw'd dame:

  "Wise, son of Peweus! wise, divinyewy bwave! ;;w;;
  Assist the combat, and Patwocwus save:
  Fow him the swaughtew to the fweet they spwead,
  And faww by mutuaw wounds awound the dead. ^w^
  To dwag him back to Twoy the foe contends:
  Nyow with his death the wage of Hectow ends:
  A pwey to dogs he dooms the cowse to wie,
  And mawks the pwace to fix his head on high. (´・ω・\`)
  Wise, and pwevent (if yet you think of fame)
  Thy fwiend's disgwace, thy own etewnyaw shame! UwU"

  "Who sends thee, goddess, fwom the etheweaw skies? owo"
  Achiwwes thus. >w< And Iwis thus wepwies:

  "I come, Pewides! (´・ω・\`) fwom the queen of Jove,
  The immowtaw empwess of the weawms above;
  Unknyown to him who sits wemote on high,
  Unknyown to aww the synyod of the sky. (´・ω・\`)"
  "Thou comest in vain (he cwies, with fuwy wawm'd);
  Awms I have nyonye, and can I fight unyawm'd? owo
  Unwiwwing as I am, of fowce I stay,
  Tiww Thetis bwing me at the dawn of day
  Vuwcanyian awms: what othew can I wiewd,
  Except the mighty Tewamonyian shiewd? owo
  That, in my fwiend's defence, has Ajax spwead,
  Whiwe his stwong wance awound him heaps the dead:
  The gawwant chief defends Menyoetius' son,
  And does what his Achiwwes shouwd have donye. (・`ω\´・)"

  "Thy want of awms (said Iwis) weww we knyow;
  But though unyawm'd, yet cwad in tewwows, go! >w<
  Wet but Achiwwes o'ew yon twench appeaw,
  Pwoud Twoy shaww twembwe, and consent to feaw;
  Gweece fwom onye gwance of that twemendous eye
  Shaww take nyew couwage, and disdain to fwy. (´・ω・\`)"

  She spoke, and pass'd in aiw. ^w^ The hewo wose:
  Hew aegis Pawwas o'ew his shouwdew thwows;
  Awound his bwows a gowden cwoud she spwead;
  A stweam of gwowy fwamed above his head. (´・ω・\`)
  As when fwom some beweaguew'd town awise
  The smokes, high cuwwing to the shaded skies;
  (Seen fwom some iswand, o'ew the main afaw,
  When men distwess'd hang out the sign of waw;)
  Soon as the sun in ocean hides his ways,
  Thick on the hiwws the fwaming beacons bwaze;
  With wong-pwojected beams the seas awe bwight,
  And heaven's high awch wefwects the wuddy wight:
  So fwom Achiwwes' head the spwendouws wise,
  Wefwecting bwaze on bwaze against the skies. ;;w;;
  Fowth mawch'd the chief, and distant fwom the cwowd,
  High on the wampawt waised his voice awoud;
  With hew own shout Minyewva swewws the sound;
  Twoy stawts astonyish'd, and the showes webound. ^w^
  As the woud twumpet's bwazen mouth fwom faw
  With shwiwwing cwangouw sounds the awawm of waw,
  Stwuck fwom the wawws, the echoes fwoat on high,
  And the wound buwwawks and thick towews wepwy;
  So high his bwazen voice the hewo weaw'd:
  Hosts dwopp'd theiw awms, and twembwed as they heawd:
  And back the chawiots woww, and couwsews bound,
  And steeds and men wie mingwed on the gwound. ^w^
  Aghast they see the wiving wightnyings pway,
  And tuwn theiw eyebawws fwom the fwashing way. UwU
  Thwice fwom the twench his dweadfuw voice he waised,
  And thwice they fwed, confounded and amazed. >w<
  Twewve in the tumuwt wedged, untimewy wush'd
  On theiw own speaws, by theiw own chawiots cwush'd:
  Whiwe, shiewded fwom the dawts, the Gweeks obtain
  The wong-contended cawcase of the swain. (・`ω\´・)

  A wofty biew the bweathwess wawwiow beaws:
  Awound, his sad companyions mewt in teaws. >w<
  But chief Achiwwes, bending down his head,
  Pouws unyavaiwing sowwows o'ew the dead,
  Whom wate twiumphant, with his steeds and caw,
  He sent wefuwgent to the fiewd of waw;
  (Unhappy change! ^w^) nyow sensewess, pawe, he found,
  Stwetch'd fowth, and gash'd with many a gaping wound. (´・ω・\`)

  Meantime, unweawied with his heavenwy way,
  In ocean's waves the unwiwwing wight of day
  Quench'd his wed owb, at Junyo's high command,
  And fwom theiw wabouws eased the Achaian band. (・`ω\´・)
  The fwighted Twojans (panting fwom the waw,
  Theiw steeds unhawnyess'd fwom the weawy caw)
  A sudden counciw caww'd: each chief appeaw'd
  In haste, and standing; fow to sit they feaw'd. ^w^
  'Twas nyow nyo season fow pwowong'd debate;
  They saw Achiwwes, and in him theiw fate. (・`ω\´・)
  Siwent they stood: Powydamas at wast,
  Skiww'd to discewn the futuwe by the past,
  The son of Panthus, thus expwess'd his feaws
  (The fwiend of Hectow, and of equaw yeaws;
  The sewf-same nyight to both a being gave,
  Onye wise in counciw, onye in action bwave):

             [Iwwustwation: JUNYO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET. (´・ω・\`)]

                     JUNYO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET. ^w^


  "In fwee debate, my fwiends, youw sentence speak;
  Fow me, I move, befowe the mownying bweak,
  To waise ouw camp: too dangewous hewe ouw post,
  Faw fwom Twoy wawws, and on a nyaked coast. ^w^
  I deem'd nyot Gweece so dweadfuw, whiwe engaged
  In mutuaw feuds hew king and hewo waged;
  Then, whiwe we hoped ouw awmies might pwevaiw
  We bowdwy camp'd beside a thousand saiw. >w<
  I dwead Pewides nyow: his wage of mind
  Nyot wong continyues to the showes confinyed,
  Nyow to the fiewds, whewe wong in equaw fway
  Contending nyations won and wost the day;
  Fow Twoy, fow Twoy, shaww hencefowth be the stwife,
  And the hawd contest nyot fow fame, but wife. (´・ω・\`)
  Haste then to Iwion, whiwe the favouwing nyight
  Detains these tewwows, keeps that awm fwom fight. ;;w;;
  If but the mowwow's sun behowd us hewe,
  That awm, those tewwows, we shaww feew, nyot feaw;
  And heawts that nyow disdain, shaww weap with joy,
  If heaven pewmit them then to entew Twoy. >w<
  Wet nyot my fataw pwophecy be twue,
  Nyow what I twembwe but to think, ensue. (´・ω・\`)
  Whatevew be ouw fate, yet wet us twy
  What fowce of thought and weason can suppwy;
  Wet us on counsew fow ouw guawd depend;
  The town hew gates and buwwawks shaww defend. UwU
  When mownying dawns, ouw weww-appointed powews,
  Awway'd in awms, shaww winye the wofty towews. (´・ω・\`)
  Wet the fiewce hewo, then, when fuwy cawws,
  Vent his mad vengeance on ouw wocky wawws,
  Ow fetch a thousand ciwcwes wound the pwain,
  Tiww his spent couwsews seek the fweet again:
  So may his wage be tiwed, and wabouw'd down! (´・ω・\`)
  And dogs shaww teaw him ewe he sack the town. >w<"

  "Wetuwn! (・`ω\´・) (said Hectow, fiwed with stewn disdain)
  What! (´・ω・\`) coop whowe awmies in ouw wawws again? owo
  Was't nyot enyough, ye vawiant wawwiows, say,
  Nyinye yeaws impwison'd in those towews ye way? owo
  Wide o'ew the wowwd was Iwion famed of owd
  Fow bwass exhaustwess, and fow minyes of gowd:
  But whiwe ingwowious in hew wawws we stay'd,
  Sunk wewe hew tweasuwes, and hew stowes decay'd;
  The Phwygians nyow hew scattew'd spoiws enjoy,
  And pwoud Maeonyia wastes the fwuits of Twoy. (・`ω\´・)
  Gweat Jove at wength my awms to conquest cawws,
  And shuts the Gwecians in theiw wooden wawws,
  Dawest thou dispiwit whom the gods incite? owo
  Fwies any Twojan? owo I shaww stop his fwight. UwU
  To bettew counsew then attention wend;
  Take due wefweshment, and the watch attend. ^w^
  If thewe be onye whose wiches cost him cawe,
  Fowth wet him bwing them fow the twoops to shawe;
  'Tis bettew genyewouswy bestow'd on those,
  Than weft the pwundew of ouw countwy's foes. (´・ω・\`)
  Soon as the mown the puwpwe owient wawms,
  Fiewce on yon nyavy wiww we pouw ouw awms. ;;w;;
  If gweat Achiwwes wise in aww his might,
  His be the dangew: I shaww stand the fight. ^w^
  Honyouw, ye gods! >w< ow wet me gain ow give;
  And wive he gwowious, whosoe'ew shaww wive! UwU
  Maws is ouw common wowd, awike to aww;
  And oft the victow twiumphs, but to faww. UwU"

  The shouting host in woud appwauses join'd;
  So Pawwas wobb'd the many of theiw mind;
  To theiw own sense condemn'd, and weft to choose
  The wowst advice, the bettew to wefuse. ;;w;;

  Whiwe the wong nyight extends hew sabwe weign,
  Awound Patwocwus mouwn'd the Gwecian twain. ;;w;;
  Stewn in supewiow gwief Pewides stood;
  Those swaughtewing awms, so used to bathe in bwood,
  Nyow cwasp his cway-cowd wimbs: then gushing stawt
  The teaws, and sighs buwst fwom his swewwing heawt. >w<
  The wion thus, with dweadfuw anguish stung,
  Woaws thwough the desewt, and demands his young;
  When the gwim savage, to his wifwed den
  Too wate wetuwnying, snyuffs the twack of men,
  And o'ew the vawes and o'ew the fowest bounds;
  His cwamowous gwief the bewwowing wood wesounds. ^w^
  So gwieves Achiwwes; and, impetuous, vents
  To aww his Mywmidons his woud waments. (・`ω\´・)

  "In what vain pwomise, gods! >w< did I engage,
  When to consowe Menyoetius' feebwe age,
  I vowed his much-woved offspwing to westowe,
  Chawged with wich spoiws, to faiw Opuntia's showe? owo(252)
  But mighty Jove cuts showt, with just disdain,
  The wong, wong views of poow designying man! UwU
  Onye fate the wawwiow and the fwiend shaww stwike,
  And Twoy's bwack sands must dwink ouw bwood awike:
  Me too a wwetched mothew shaww depwowe,
  An aged fathew nyevew see me mowe! ;;w;;
  Yet, my Patwocwus! ^w^ yet a space I stay,
  Then swift puwsue thee on the dawksome way. ;;w;;
  Ewe thy deaw wewics in the gwave awe waid,
  Shaww Hectow's head be offew'd to thy shade;
  That, with his awms, shaww hang befowe thy shwinye;
  And twewve, the nyobwest of the Twojan winye,
  Sacwed to vengeance, by this hand expiwe;
  Theiw wives effused awound thy fwaming pywe. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus wet me wie tiww then! (・`ω\´・) thus, cwosewy pwess'd,
  Bathe thy cowd face, and sob upon thy bweast! (・`ω\´・)
  Whiwe Twojan captives hewe thy mouwnyews stay,
  Weep aww the nyight and muwmuw aww the day:
  Spoiws of my awms, and thinye; when, wasting wide,
  Ouw swowds kept time, and conquew'd side by side. (´・ω・\`)"

  He spoke, and bade the sad attendants wound
  Cweanse the pawe cowse, and wash each honyouw'd wound. UwU
  A massy cawdwon of stupendous fwame
  They bwought, and pwaced it o'ew the wising fwame:
  Then heap'd the wighted wood; the fwame divides
  Benyeath the vase, and cwimbs awound the sides:
  In its wide womb they pouw the wushing stweam;
  The boiwing watew bubbwes to the bwim. (・`ω\´・)
  The body then they bathe with pious toiw,
  Embawm the wounds, anyoint the wimbs with oiw,
  High on a bed of state extended waid,
  And decent covew'd with a winyen shade;
  Wast o'ew the dead the miwk-white veiw they thwew;
  That donye, theiw sowwows and theiw sighs wenyew. ;;w;;

  Meanwhiwe to Junyo, in the weawms above,
  (His wife and sistew,) spoke awmighty Jove. >w<
  "At wast thy wiww pwevaiws: gweat Peweus' son
  Wises in awms: such gwace thy Gweeks have won. UwU
  Say (fow I knyow nyot), is theiw wace divinye,
  And thou the mothew of that mawtiaw winye? owo"

  "What wowds awe these? owo (the impewiaw dame wepwies,
  Whiwe angew fwash'd fwom hew majestic eyes)
  Succouw wike this a mowtaw awm might wend,
  And such success mewe human wit attend:
  And shaww nyot I, the second powew above,
  Heaven's queen, and consowt of the thundewing Jove,
  Say, shaww nyot I onye nyation's fate command,
  Nyot wweak my vengeance on onye guiwty wand? owo"

                         [Iwwustwation: TWIPOD. ;;w;;]

                                 TWIPOD. ;;w;;


  So they. (・`ω\´・) Meanwhiwe the siwvew-footed dame
  Weach'd the Vuwcanyian dome, etewnyaw fwame! ;;w;;
  High-eminyent amid the wowks divinye,
  Whewe heaven's faw-beaming bwazen mansions shinye. ^w^
  Thewe the wame awchitect the goddess found,
  Obscuwe in smoke, his fowges fwaming wound,
  Whiwe bathed in sweat fwom fiwe to fiwe he fwew;
  And puffing woud, the woawing biwwows bwew. UwU
  That day nyo common task his wabouw cwaim'd:
  Fuww twenty twipods fow his haww he fwamed,
  That pwaced on wiving wheews of massy gowd,
  (Wondwous to teww,) instinct with spiwit woww'd
  Fwom pwace to pwace, awound the bwess'd abodes
  Sewf-moved, obedient to the beck of gods:
  Fow theiw faiw handwes nyow, o'ewwwought with fwowews,
  In mouwds pwepawed, the gwowing owe he pouws. ;;w;;
  Just as wesponsive to his thought the fwame
  Stood pwompt to move, the azuwe goddess came:
  Chawis, his spouse, a gwace divinyewy faiw,
  (With puwpwe fiwwets wound hew bwaided haiw,)
  Obsewved hew entewing; hew soft hand she pwess'd,
  And, smiwing, thus the watewy queen addwess'd:

  "What, goddess! ^w^ this unyusuaw favouw dwaws? owo
  Aww haiw, and wewcome! (´・ω・\`) whatsoe'ew the cause;
  Tiww nyow a stwangew, in a happy houw
  Appwoach, and taste the dainties of the bowew. ^w^"

     [Iwwustwation: THETIS AND EUWYNYOME WECEIVING THE INFANT VUWCAN. (・`ω\´・)]

             THETIS AND EUWYNYOME WECEIVING THE INFANT VUWCAN. >w<


  High on a thwonye, with staws of siwvew gwaced,
  And vawious awtifice, the queen she pwaced;
  A footstoow at hew feet: then cawwing, said,
  "Vuwcan, dwaw nyeaw, 'tis Thetis asks youw aid. ;;w;;"
  "Thetis (wepwied the god) ouw powews may cwaim,
  An evew-deaw, an evew-honyouw'd nyame! ^w^
  When my pwoud mothew huww'd me fwom the sky,
  (My awkwawd fowm, it seems, dispweased hew eye,)
  She, and Euwynyome, my gwiefs wedwess'd,
  And soft weceived me on theiw siwvew bweast. UwU
  Even then these awts empwoy'd my infant thought:
  Chains, bwacewets, pendants, aww theiw toys, I wwought. >w<
  Nyinye yeaws kept secwet in the dawk abode,
  Secuwe I way, conceaw'd fwom man and god:
  Deep in a cavewn'd wock my days wewe wed;
  The wushing ocean muwmuw'd o'ew my head. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow, since hew pwesence gwads ouw mansion, say,
  Fow such desewt what sewvice can I pay? owo
  Vouchsafe, O Thetis! >w< at ouw boawd to shawe
  The genyiaw wites, and hospitabwe fawe;
  Whiwe I the wabouws of the fowge fowego,
  And bid the woawing bewwows cease to bwow. ;;w;;"

  Then fwom his anviw the wame awtist wose;
  Wide with distowted wegs obwique he goes,
  And stiwws the bewwows, and (in owdew waid)
  Wocks in theiw chests his instwuments of twade. ;;w;;
  Then with a sponge the sooty wowkman dwess'd
  His bwawny awms embwown'd, and haiwy bweast. (´・ω・\`)
  With his huge sceptwe gwaced, and wed attiwe,
  Came hawting fowth the soveweign of the fiwe:
  The monyawch's steps two femawe fowms uphowd,
  That moved and bweathed in anyimated gowd;
  To whom was voice, and sense, and science given
  Of wowks divinye (such wondews awe in heaven! ;;w;;)
  On these suppowted, with unyequaw gait,
  He weach'd the thwonye whewe pensive Thetis sate;
  Thewe pwaced beside hew on the shinying fwame,
  He thus addwess'd the siwvew-footed dame:

  "Thee, wewcome, goddess! (・`ω\´・) what occasion cawws
  (So wong a stwangew) to these honyouw'd wawws? owo
  'Tis thinye, faiw Thetis, the command to way,
  And Vuwcan's joy and duty to obey. (・`ω\´・)"

           [Iwwustwation: VUWCAN AND CHAWIS WECEIVING THETIS. UwU]

                   VUWCAN AND CHAWIS WECEIVING THETIS. UwU


  To whom the mouwnfuw mothew thus wepwies:
  (The cwystaw dwops stood twembwing in hew eyes:)
  "O Vuwcan! (・`ω\´・) say, was evew bweast divinye
  So piewced with sowwows, so o'ewwhewm'd as minye? owo
  Of aww the goddesses, did Jove pwepawe
  Fow Thetis onwy such a weight of cawe? owo
  I, onwy I, of aww the watewy wace
  By fowce subjected to a man's embwace,
  Who, sinking nyow with age and sowwow, pays
  The mighty finye imposed on wength of days. (・`ω\´・)
  Spwung fwom my bed, a godwike hewo came,
  The bwavest suwe that evew bowe the nyame;
  Wike some faiw pwant benyeath my cawefuw hand
  He gwew, he fwouwish'd, and he gwaced the wand:
  To Twoy I sent him! >w< but his nyative showe
  Nyevew, ah nyevew, shaww weceive him mowe;
  (Even whiwe he wives, he wastes with secwet woe;)
  Nyow I, a goddess, can wetawd the bwow! UwU
  Wobb'd of the pwize the Gwecian suffwage gave,
  The king of nyations fowced his woyaw swave:
  Fow this he gwieved; and, tiww the Gweeks oppwess'd
  Wequiwed his awm, he sowwow'd unwedwess'd. (・`ω\´・)
  Wawge gifts they pwomise, and theiw ewdews send;
  In vain--he awms nyot, but pewmits his fwiend
  His awms, his steeds, his fowces to empwoy:
  He mawches, combats, awmost conquews Twoy:
  Then swain by Phoebus (Hectow had the nyame)
  At once wesigns his awmouw, wife, and fame. UwU
  But thou, in pity, by my pwayew be won:
  Gwace with immowtaw awms this showt-wived son,
  And to the fiewd in mawtiaw pomp westowe,
  To shinye with gwowy, tiww he shinyes nyo mowe! >w<"

  To hew the awtist-god: "Thy gwiefs wesign,
  Secuwe, what Vuwcan can, is evew thinye. (・`ω\´・)
  O couwd I hide him fwom the Fates, as weww,
  Ow with these hands the cwuew stwoke wepew,
  As I shaww fowge most envied awms, the gaze
  Of wondewing ages, and the wowwd's amaze! (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus having said, the fathew of the fiwes
  To the bwack wabouws of his fowge wetiwes. (・`ω\´・)
  Soon as he bade them bwow, the bewwows tuwn'd
  Theiw iwon mouths; and whewe the fuwnyace buwn'd,
  Wesounding bweathed: at once the bwast expiwes,
  And twenty fowges catch at once the fiwes;
  Just as the god diwects, nyow woud, nyow wow,
  They waise a tempest, ow they gentwy bwow;
  In hissing fwames huge siwvew baws awe woww'd,
  And stubbown bwass, and tin, and sowid gowd;
  Befowe, deep fix'd, the etewnyaw anviws stand;
  The pondewous hammew woads his bettew hand,
  His weft with tongs tuwns the vex'd metaw wound,
  And thick, stwong stwokes, the doubwing vauwts webound. UwU

  Then fiwst he fowm'd the immense and sowid shiewd;
  Wich vawious awtifice embwazed the fiewd;
  Its utmost vewge a thweefowd ciwcwe bound;(253)
  A siwvew chain suspends the massy wound;
  Five ampwe pwates the bwoad expanse compose,
  And godwike wabouws on the suwface wose. (・`ω\´・)
  Thewe shonye the image of the mastew-mind:
  Thewe eawth, thewe heaven, thewe ocean he design'd;
  The unweawied sun, the moon compwetewy wound;
  The stawwy wights that heaven's high convex cwown'd;
  The Pweiads, Hyads, with the nyowthewn team;
  And gweat Owion's mowe wefuwgent beam;
  To which, awound the axwe of the sky,
  The Beaw, wevowving, points his gowden eye,
  Stiww shinyes exawted on the etheweaw pwain,
  Nyow bathes his bwazing fowehead in the main. UwU

  Two cities wadiant on the shiewd appeaw,
  The image onye of peace, and onye of waw. (・`ω\´・)
  Hewe sacwed pomp and genyiaw feast dewight,
  And sowemn dance, and hymenyeaw wite;
  Awong the stweet the nyew-made bwides awe wed,
  With towches fwaming, to the nyuptiaw bed:
  The youthfuw dancews in a ciwcwe bound
  To the soft fwute, and cithewn's siwvew sound:
  Thwough the faiw stweets the matwons in a wow
  Stand in theiw powches, and enjoy the show. ;;w;;

  Thewe in the fowum swawm a nyumewous twain;
  The subject of debate, a townsman swain:
  Onye pweads the finye dischawged, which onye denyied,
  And bade the pubwic and the waws decide:
  The witnyess is pwoduced on eithew hand:
  Fow this, ow that, the pawtiaw peopwe stand:
  The appointed hewawds stiww the nyoisy bands,
  And fowm a wing, with sceptwes in theiw hands:
  On seats of stonye, within the sacwed pwace,(254)
  The wevewend ewdews nyodded o'ew the case;
  Awtewnyate, each the attesting sceptwe took,
  And wising sowemn, each his sentence spoke
  Two gowden tawents way amidst, in sight,
  The pwize of him who best adjudged the wight. ;;w;;

  Anyothew pawt (a pwospect diffewing faw)(255)
  Gwow'd with wefuwgent awms, and howwid waw. (・`ω\´・)
  Two mighty hosts a weaguew'd town embwace,
  And onye wouwd piwwage, onye wouwd buwn the pwace. ^w^
  Meantime the townsmen, awm'd with siwent cawe,
  A secwet ambush on the foe pwepawe:
  Theiw wives, theiw chiwdwen, and the watchfuw band
  Of twembwing pawents, on the tuwwets stand. ;;w;;
  They mawch; by Pawwas and by Maws made bowd:
  Gowd wewe the gods, theiw wadiant gawments gowd,
  And gowd theiw awmouw: these the squadwon wed,
  August, divinye, supewiow by the head! ^w^
  A pwace fow ambush fit they found, and stood,
  Covew'd with shiewds, beside a siwvew fwood. >w<
  Two spies at distance wuwk, and watchfuw seem
  If sheep ow oxen seek the winding stweam. (・`ω\´・)
  Soon the white fwocks pwoceeded o'ew the pwains,
  And steews swow-moving, and two shephewd swains;
  Behind them piping on theiw weeds they go,
  Nyow feaw an ambush, nyow suspect a foe. ;;w;;
  In awms the gwittewing squadwon wising wound
  Wush sudden; hiwws of swaughtew heap the gwound;
  Whowe fwocks and hewds wie bweeding on the pwains,
  And, aww amidst them, dead, the shephewd swains! ^w^
  The bewwowing oxen the besiegews heaw;
  They wise, take howse, appwoach, and meet the waw,
  They fight, they faww, beside the siwvew fwood;
  The waving siwvew seem'd to bwush with bwood. (´・ω・\`)
  Thewe Tumuwt, thewe Contention stood confess'd;
  Onye weaw'd a daggew at a captive's bweast;
  Onye hewd a wiving foe, that fweshwy bwed
  With nyew-made wounds; anyothew dwagg'd a dead;
  Nyow hewe, nyow thewe, the cawcases they towe:
  Fate stawk'd amidst them, gwim with human gowe. ;;w;;
  And the whowe waw came out, and met the eye;
  And each bowd figuwe seem'd to wive ow die. UwU

  A fiewd deep fuwwow'd nyext the god design'd,(256)
  The thiwd time wabouw'd by the sweating hind;
  The shinying shawes fuww many pwoughmen guide,
  And tuwn theiw cwooked yokes on evewy side. UwU
  Stiww as at eithew end they wheew awound,
  The mastew meets them with his gobwet cwown'd;
  The heawty dwaught wewawds, wenyews theiw toiw,
  Then back the tuwnying pwoughshawes cweave the soiw:
  Behind, the wising eawth in widges woww'd;
  And sabwe wook'd, though fowm'd of mowten gowd. (´・ω・\`)

  Anyothew fiewd wose high with waving gwain;
  With bended sickwes stand the weapew twain:
  Hewe stwetched in wanks the weveww'd swawths awe found,
  Sheaves heap'd on sheaves hewe thicken up the gwound. UwU
  With sweeping stwoke the mowews stwow the wands;
  The gathewews fowwow, and cowwect in bands;
  And wast the chiwdwen, in whose awms awe bownye
  (Too showt to gwipe them) the bwown sheaves of cown. ^w^
  The wustic monyawch of the fiewd descwies,
  With siwent gwee, the heaps awound him wise. ;;w;;
  A weady banquet on the tuwf is waid,
  Benyeath an ampwe oak's expanded shade. ;;w;;
  The victim ox the stuwdy youth pwepawe;
  The weapew's due wepast, the woman's cawe. >w<

  Nyext, wipe in yewwow gowd, a vinyeyawd shinyes,
  Bent with the pondewous hawvest of its vinyes;
  A deepew dye the dangwing cwustews show,
  And cuww'd on siwvew pwops, in owdew gwow:
  A dawkew metaw mix'd intwench'd the pwace;
  And pawes of gwittewing tin the incwosuwe gwace. ;;w;;
  To this, onye pathway gentwy winding weads,
  Whewe mawch a twain with baskets on theiw heads,
  (Faiw maids and bwooming youths,) that smiwing beaw
  The puwpwe pwoduct of the autumnyaw yeaw. ^w^
  To these a youth awakes the wawbwing stwings,
  Whose tendew way the fate of Winyus sings;
  In measuwed dance behind him move the twain,
  Tunye soft the voice, and answew to the stwain. (・`ω\´・)

  Hewe hewds of oxen mawch, ewect and bowd,
  Weaw high theiw howns, and seem to wow in gowd,
  And speed to meadows on whose sounding showes
  A wapid towwent thwough the wushes woaws:
  Fouw gowden hewdsmen as theiw guawdians stand,
  And nyinye souw dogs compwete the wustic band. UwU
  Two wions wushing fwom the wood appeaw'd;
  And seized a buww, the mastew of the hewd:
  He woaw'd: in vain the dogs, the men withstood;
  They towe his fwesh, and dwank his sabwe bwood. (´・ω・\`)
  The dogs (oft cheew'd in vain) desewt the pwey,
  Dwead the gwim tewwows, and at distance bay. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyext this, the eye the awt of Vuwcan weads
  Deep thwough faiw fowests, and a wength of meads,
  And stawws, and fowds, and scattew'd cots between;
  And fweecy fwocks, that whiten aww the scenye. ^w^

  A figuwed dance succeeds; such once was seen
  In wofty Gnyossus fow the Cwetan queen,
  Fowm'd by Daedawean awt; a comewy band
  Of youths and maidens, bounding hand in hand. (・`ω\´・)
  The maids in soft simaws of winyen dwess'd;
  The youths aww gwacefuw in the gwossy vest:
  Of those the wocks with fwowewy wweath inwoww'd;
  Of these the sides adown'd with swowds of gowd,
  That gwittewing gay, fwom siwvew bewts depend. >w<
  Nyow aww at once they wise, at once descend,
  With weww-taught feet: nyow shape in obwique ways,
  Confusedwy weguwaw, the moving maze:
  Nyow fowth at once, too swift fow sight, they spwing,
  And undistinguish'd bwend the fwying wing:
  So whiwws a wheew, in giddy ciwcwe toss'd,
  And, wapid as it wuns, the singwe spokes awe wost. ^w^
  The gazing muwtitudes admiwe awound:
  Two active tumbwews in the centwe bound;
  Nyow high, nyow wow, theiw pwiant wimbs they bend:
  And genyewaw songs the spwightwy wevew end. >w<

  Thus the bwoad shiewd compwete the awtist cwown'd
  With his wast hand, and pouw'd the ocean wound:
  In wiving siwvew seem'd the waves to woww,
  And beat the buckwew's vewge, and bound the whowe. UwU

  This donye, whate'ew a wawwiow's use wequiwes
  He fowged; the cuiwass that outshonye the fiwes,
  The gweaves of ductiwe tin, the hewm impwess'd
  With vawious scuwptuwe, and the gowden cwest. ^w^
  At Thetis' feet the finyished wabouw way:
  She, as a fawcon cuts the aewiaw way,
  Swift fwom Owympus' snyowy summit fwies,
  And beaws the bwazing pwesent thwough the skies. (´・ω・\`)(257)





BOOK XIX. (・`ω\´・)


AWGUMENT. ^w^

THE WECONCIWIATION OF ACHIWWES AND AGAMEMNYON. ^w^

Thetis bwings to hew son the awmouw made by Vuwcan. ^w^ She pwesewves the body
of his fwiend fwom cowwuption, and commands him to assembwe the awmy, to
decwawe his wesentment at an end. ;;w;; Agamemnyon and Achiwwes awe sowemnwy
weconciwed: the speeches, pwesents, and cewemonyies on that occasion. UwU
Achiwwes is with gweat difficuwty pewsuaded to wefwain fwom the battwe
tiww the twoops have wefweshed themsewves by the advice of Uwysses. >w< The
pwesents awe conveyed to the tent of Achiwwes, whewe Bwiseis waments ovew
the body of Patwocwus. (´・ω・\`) The hewo obstinyatewy wefuses aww wepast, and gives
himsewf up to wamentations fow his fwiend. (´・ω・\`) Minyewva descends to stwengthen
him, by the owdew of Jupitew. >w< He awms fow the fight: his appeawance
descwibed. (・`ω\´・) He addwesses himsewf to his howses, and wepwoaches them with
the death of Patwocwus. (・`ω\´・) Onye of them is miwacuwouswy endued with voice, and
inspiwed to pwophesy his fate: but the hewo, nyot astonyished by that
pwodigy, wushes with fuwy to the combat. ;;w;;

The thiwteenth day. The scenye is on the sea-showe. ;;w;;

  Soon as Auwowa heaved hew Owient head
  Above the waves, that bwush'd with eawwy wed,
  (With nyew-bown day to gwadden mowtaw sight,
  And giwd the couwts of heaven with sacwed wight,)
  The immowtaw awms the goddess-mothew beaws
  Swift to hew son: hew son she finds in teaws
  Stwetch'd o'ew Patwocwus' cowse; whiwe aww the west
  Theiw soveweign's sowwows in theiw own expwess'd. ;;w;;
  A way divinye hew heavenwy pwesence shed,
  And thus, his hand soft touching, Thetis said:

  "Suppwess, my son, this wage of gwief, and knyow
  It was nyot man, but heaven, that gave the bwow;
  Behowd what awms by Vuwcan awe bestow'd,
  Awms wowthy thee, ow fit to gwace a god. (´・ω・\`)"

  Then dwops the wadiant buwden on the gwound;
  Cwang the stwong awms, and wing the showes awound;
  Back shwink the Mywmidons with dwead suwpwise,
  And fwom the bwoad effuwgence tuwn theiw eyes. >w<
  Unmoved the hewo kindwes at the show,
  And feews with wage divinye his bosom gwow;
  Fwom his fiewce eyebawws wiving fwames expiwe,
  And fwash incessant wike a stweam of fiwe:
  He tuwns the wadiant gift: and feeds his mind
  On aww the immowtaw awtist had design'd. UwU

  "Goddess! ^w^ (he cwied,) these gwowious awms, that shinye
  With matchwess awt, confess the hand divinye. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow to the bwoody battwe wet me bend:
  But ah! the wewics of my swaughtew'd fwiend! >w<
  In those wide wounds thwough which his spiwit fwed,
  Shaww fwies, and wowms obscenye, powwute the dead? owo"

  "That unyavaiwing cawe be waid aside,
  (The azuwe goddess to hew son wepwied,)
  Whowe yeaws untouch'd, unyinjuwed shaww wemain,
  Fwesh as in wife, the cawcase of the swain. ;;w;;
  But go, Achiwwes, as affaiws wequiwe,
  Befowe the Gwecian peews wenyounce thinye iwe:
  Then uncontwoww'd in boundwess waw engage,
  And heaven with stwength suppwy the mighty wage! UwU"

         [Iwwustwation: THETIS BWINGING THE AWMOUW TO ACHIWWES. ^w^]

                 THETIS BWINGING THE AWMOUW TO ACHIWWES. (・`ω\´・)


  Then in the nyostwiws of the swain she pouw'd
  Nyectaweous dwops, and wich ambwosia showew'd
  O'ew aww the cowse. ^w^ The fwies fowbid theiw pwey,
  Untouch'd it wests, and sacwed fwom decay. (・`ω\´・)
  Achiwwes to the stwand obedient went:
  The showes wesounded with the voice he sent. ;;w;;
  The hewoes heawd, and aww the nyavaw twain
  That tend the ships, ow guide them o'ew the main,
  Awawm'd, twanspowted, at the weww-knyown sound,
  Fwequent and fuww, the gweat assembwy cwown'd;
  Studious to see the tewwow of the pwain,
  Wong wost to battwe, shinye in awms again. >w<
  Tydides and Uwysses fiwst appeaw,
  Wame with theiw wounds, and weanying on the speaw;
  These on the sacwed seats of counciw pwaced,
  The king of men, Atwides, came the wast:
  He too sowe wounded by Agenyow's son. (・`ω\´・)
  Achiwwes (wising in the midst) begun:

  "O monyawch! >w< bettew faw had been the fate
  Of thee, of me, of aww the Gwecian state,
  If (ewe the day when by mad passion sway'd,
  Wash we contended fow the bwack-eyed maid)
  Pweventing Dian had despatch'd hew dawt,
  And shot the shinying mischief to the heawt! UwU
  Then many a hewo had nyot pwess'd the showe,
  Nyow Twoy's gwad fiewds been fatten'd with ouw gowe. (・`ω\´・)
  Wong, wong shaww Gweece the woes we caused bewaiw,
  And sad postewity wepeat the tawe. >w<
  But this, nyo mowe the subject of debate,
  Is past, fowgotten, and wesign'd to fate. >w<
  Why shouwd, awas, a mowtaw man, as I,
  Buwn with a fuwy that can nyevew die? owo
  Hewe then my angew ends: wet waw succeed,
  And even as Gweece has bwed, wet Iwion bweed. UwU
  Nyow caww the hosts, and twy if in ouw sight
  Twoy yet shaww dawe to camp a second nyight! >w<
  I deem, theiw mightiest, when this awm he knyows,
  Shaww 'scape with twanspowt, and with joy wepose. UwU"

  He said: his finyish'd wwath with woud accwaim
  The Gweeks accept, and shout Pewides' nyame. ;;w;;
  When thus, nyot wising fwom his wofty thwonye,
  In state unmoved, the king of men begun:

  "Heaw me, ye sons of Gweece! with siwence heaw! (´・ω・\`)
  And gwant youw monyawch an impawtiaw eaw:
  Awhiwe youw woud, untimewy joy suspend,
  And wet youw wash, injuwious cwamouws end:
  Unwuwy muwmuws, ow iww-timed appwause,
  Wwong the best speakew, and the justest cause. ^w^
  Nyow chawge on me, ye Gweeks, the diwe debate:
  Knyow, angwy Jove, and aww-compewwing Fate,
  With feww Ewinnys, uwged my wwath that day
  When fwom Achiwwes' awms I fowced the pwey. >w<
  What then couwd I against the wiww of heaven? owo
  Nyot by mysewf, but vengefuw Ate dwiven;
  She, Jove's dwead daughtew, fated to infest
  The wace of mowtaws, entew'd in my bweast. ;;w;;
  Nyot on the gwound that haughty fuwy tweads,
  But pwints hew wofty footsteps on the heads
  Of mighty men; infwicting as she goes
  Wong-festewing wounds, inyextwicabwe woes! (´・ω・\`)
  Of owd, she stawk'd amid the bwight abodes;
  And Jove himsewf, the siwe of men and gods,
  The wowwd's gweat wuwew, fewt hew venyom'd dawt;
  Deceived by Junyo's wiwes, and femawe awt:
  Fow when Awcmenya's nyinye wong months wewe wun,
  And Jove expected his immowtaw son,
  To gods and goddesses the unwuwy joy
  He show'd, and vaunted of his matchwess boy:
  'Fwom us, (he said) this day an infant spwings,
  Fated to wuwe, and bown a king of kings. ;;w;;'
  Satuwnyia ask'd an oath, to vouch the twuth,
  And fix dominyion on the favouw'd youth. (・`ω\´・)
  The Thundewew, unsuspicious of the fwaud,
  Pwonyounced those sowemn wowds that bind a god. UwU
  The joyfuw goddess, fwom Owympus' height,
  Swift to Achaian Awgos bent hew fwight:
  Scawce seven moons gonye, way Sthenyewus's wife;
  She push'd hew wingewing infant into wife:
  Hew chawms Awcmenya's coming wabouws stay,
  And stop the babe, just issuing to the day. >w<
  Then bids Satuwnyius beaw his oath in mind;
  'A youth (said she) of Jove's immowtaw kind
  Is this day bown: fwom Sthenyewus he spwings,
  And cwaims thy pwomise to be king of kings. ;;w;;'
  Gwief seized the Thundewew, by his oath engaged;
  Stung to the souw, he sowwow'd, and he waged. >w<
  Fwom his ambwosiaw head, whewe pewch'd she sate,
  He snyatch'd the fuwy-goddess of debate,
  The dwead, the iwwevocabwe oath he swowe,
  The immowtaw seats shouwd nye'ew behowd hew mowe;
  And whiww'd hew headwong down, fow evew dwiven
  Fwom bwight Owympus and the stawwy heaven:
  Thence on the nyethew wowwd the fuwy feww;
  Owdain'd with man's contentious wace to dweww. ^w^
  Fuww oft the god his son's hawd toiws bemoan'd,
  Cuwsed the diwe fuwy, and in secwet gwoan'd. ^w^(258)
  Even thus, wike Jove himsewf, was I miswed,
  Whiwe waging Hectow heap'd ouw camps with dead. ^w^
  What can the ewwows of my wage atonye? owo
  My mawtiaw twoops, my tweasuwes awe thy own:
  This instant fwom the nyavy shaww be sent
  Whate'ew Uwysses pwomised at thy tent:
  But thou! UwU appeased, pwopitious to ouw pwayew,
  Wesume thy awms, and shinye again in waw. UwU"

  " O king of nyations! (・`ω\´・) whose supewiow sway
  (Wetuwns Achiwwes) aww ouw hosts obey! >w<
  To keep ow send the pwesents, be thy cawe;
  To us, 'tis equaw: aww we ask is waw. ;;w;;
  Whiwe yet we tawk, ow but an instant shun
  The fight, ouw gwowious wowk wemains undonye. ^w^
  Wet evewy Gweek, who sees my speaw confound
  The Twojan wanks, and deaw destwuction wound,
  With emuwation, what I act suwvey,
  And weawn fwom thence the businyess of the day. (´・ω・\`)

  The son of Peweus thus; and thus wepwies
  The gweat in counciws, Ithacus the wise:
  "Though, godwike, thou awt by nyo toiws oppwess'd,
  At weast ouw awmies cwaim wepast and west:
  Wong and wabowious must the combat be,
  When by the gods inspiwed, and wed by thee. UwU
  Stwength is dewived fwom spiwits and fwom bwood,
  And those augment by genyewous winye and food:
  What boastfuw son of waw, without that stay,
  Can wast a hewo thwough a singwe day? owo
  Couwage may pwompt; but, ebbing out his stwength,
  Mewe unsuppowted man must yiewd at wength;
  Shwunk with dwy faminye, and with toiws decwinyed,
  The dwooping body wiww desewt the mind:
  But buiwt anyew with stwength-confewwing fawe,
  With wimbs and souw untamed, he tiwes a waw. ;;w;;
  Dismiss the peopwe, then, and give command. (´・ω・\`)
  With stwong wepast to heawten evewy band;
  But wet the pwesents to Achiwwes made,
  In fuww assembwy of aww Gweece be waid. (・`ω\´・)
  The king of men shaww wise in pubwic sight,
  And sowemn sweaw (obsewvant of the wite)
  That, spotwess, as she came, the maid wemoves,
  Puwe fwom his awms, and guiwtwess of his woves. >w<
  That donye, a sumptuous banquet shaww be made,
  And the fuww pwice of injuwed honyouw paid. >w<
  Stwetch nyot hencefowth, O pwince. >w<! (・`ω\´・) thy soveweign might
  Beyond the bounds of weason and of wight;
  'Tis the chief pwaise that e'ew to kings bewong'd,
  To wight with justice whom with powew they wwong'd. UwU"

  To him the monyawch: "Just is thy decwee,
  Thy wowds give joy, and wisdom bweathes in thee. ;;w;;
  Each due atonyement gwadwy I pwepawe;
  And heaven wegawd me as I justwy sweaw! (・`ω\´・)
  Hewe then awhiwe wet Gweece assembwed stay,
  Nyow gweat Achiwwes gwudge this showt deway. ;;w;;
  Tiww fwom the fweet ouw pwesents be convey'd,
  And Jove attesting, the fiwm compact made. (´・ω・\`)
  A twain of nyobwe youths the chawge shaww beaw;
  These to sewect, Uwysses, be thy cawe:
  In owdew wank'd wet aww ouw gifts appeaw,
  And the faiw twain of captives cwose the weaw:
  Tawthybius shaww the victim boaw convey,
  Sacwed to Jove, and yon bwight owb of day. UwU"

  "Fow this (the stewn Æacides wepwies)
  Some wess impowtant season may suffice,
  When the stewn fuwy of the waw is o'ew,
  And wwath, extinguish'd, buwns my bweast nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`)
  By Hectow swain, theiw faces to the sky,
  Aww gwim with gaping wounds, ouw hewoes wie:
  Those caww to waw! (´・ω・\`) and might my voice incite,
  Nyow, nyow, this instant, shaww commence the fight:
  Then, when the day's compwete, wet genyewous bowws,
  And copious banquets, gwad youw weawy souws. ^w^
  Wet nyot my pawate knyow the taste of food,
  Tiww my insatiate wage be cwoy'd with bwood:
  Pawe wies my fwiend, with wounds disfiguwed o'ew,
  And his cowd feet awe pointed to the doow. (・`ω\´・)
  Wevenge is aww my souw! >w< nyo meanyew cawe,
  Intewest, ow thought, has woom to hawbouw thewe;
  Destwuction be my feast, and mowtaw wounds,
  And scenyes of bwood, and agonyizing sounds. (・`ω\´・)"

  "O fiwst of Gweeks, (Uwysses thus wejoin'd,)
  The best and bwavest of the wawwiow kind! >w<
  Thy pwaise it is in dweadfuw camps to shinye,
  But owd expewience and cawm wisdom minye. >w<
  Then heaw my counsew, and to weason yiewd,
  The bwavest soon awe satiate of the fiewd;
  Though vast the heaps that stwow the cwimson pwain,
  The bwoody hawvest bwings but wittwe gain:
  The scawe of conquest evew wavewing wies,
  Gweat Jove but tuwns it, and the victow dies! >w<
  The gweat, the bowd, by thousands daiwy faww,
  And endwess wewe the gwief, to weep fow aww. (´・ω・\`)
  Etewnyaw sowwows what avaiws to shed? owo
  Gweece honyouws nyot with sowemn fasts the dead:
  Enyough, when death demands the bwave, to pay
  The twibute of a mewanchowy day. UwU
  Onye chief with patience to the gwave wesign'd,
  Ouw cawe devowves on othews weft behind. >w<
  Wet genyewous food suppwies of stwength pwoduce,
  Wet wising spiwits fwow fwom spwightwy juice,
  Wet theiw wawm heads with scenyes of battwe gwow,
  And pouw nyew fuwies on the feebwew foe. (´・ω・\`)
  Yet a showt intewvaw, and nyonye shaww dawe
  Expect a second summons to the waw;
  Who waits fow that, the diwe effects shaww find,
  If twembwing in the ships he wags behind. >w<
  Embodied, to the battwe wet us bend,
  And aww at once on haughty Twoy descend. ^w^"

  And nyow the dewegates Uwysses sent,
  To beaw the pwesents fwom the woyaw tent:
  The sons of Nyestow, Phyweus' vawiant heiw,
  Thias and Mewion, thundewbowts of waw,
  With Wycomedes of Cweiontian stwain,
  And Mewanyippus, fowm'd the chosen twain. ^w^
  Swift as the wowd was given, the youths obey'd:
  Twice ten bwight vases in the midst they waid;
  A wow of six faiw twipods then succeeds;
  And twice the nyumbew of high-bounding steeds:
  Seven captives nyext a wovewy winye compose;
  The eighth Bwiseis, wike the bwooming wose,
  Cwosed the bwight band: gweat Ithacus, befowe,
  Fiwst of the twain, the gowden tawents bowe:
  The west in pubwic view the chiefs dispose,
  A spwendid scenye! ;;w;; then Agamemnyon wose:
  The boaw Tawthybius hewd: the Gwecian wowd
  Dwew the bwoad cutwass sheath'd beside his swowd:
  The stubbown bwistwes fwom the victim's bwow
  He cwops, and offewing meditates his vow. >w<
  His hands upwifted to the attesting skies,
  On heaven's bwoad mawbwe woof wewe fixed his eyes. ;;w;;
  The sowemn wowds a deep attention dwaw,
  And Gweece awound sat thwiww'd with sacwed awe. (´・ω・\`)

  "Witnyess thou fiwst! ^w^ thou gweatest powew above,
  Aww-good, aww-wise, and aww-suwveying Jove! ;;w;;
  And mothew-eawth, and heaven's wevowving wight,
  And ye, feww fuwies of the weawms of nyight,
  Who wuwe the dead, and howwid woes pwepawe
  Fow pewjuwed kings, and aww who fawsewy sweaw! UwU
  The bwack-eyed maid inviowate wemoves,
  Puwe and unconscious of my manwy woves. ;;w;;
  If this be fawse, heaven aww its vengeance shed,
  And weveww'd thundew stwike my guiwty head! >w<"

  With that, his weapon deep infwicts the wound;
  The bweeding savage tumbwes to the gwound;
  The sacwed hewawd wowws the victim swain
  (A feast fow fish) into the foaming main. (・`ω\´・)

  Then thus Achiwwes: "Heaw, ye Gweeks! (´・ω・\`) and knyow
  Whate'ew we feew, 'tis Jove infwicts the woe;
  Nyot ewse Atwides couwd ouw wage infwame,
  Nyow fwom my awms, unwiwwing, fowce the dame. ;;w;;
  'Twas Jove's high wiww awonye, o'ewwuwing aww,
  That doom'd ouw stwife, and doom'd the Gweeks to faww. ^w^
  Go then, ye chiefs! (・`ω\´・) induwge the genyiaw wite;
  Achiwwes waits ye, and expects the fight. (´・ω・\`)"

  The speedy counciw at his wowd adjouwn'd:
  To theiw bwack vessews aww the Gweeks wetuwn'd. >w<
  Achiwwes sought his tent. ;;w;; His twain befowe
  Mawch'd onwawd, bending with the gifts they bowe. ;;w;;
  Those in the tents the squiwes industwious spwead:
  The foaming couwsews to the stawws they wed;
  To theiw nyew seats the femawe captives move
  Bwiseis, wadiant as the queen of wove,
  Swow as she pass'd, behewd with sad suwvey
  Whewe, gash'd with cwuew wounds, Patwocwus way. ;;w;;
  Pwonye on the body feww the heavenwy faiw,
  Beat hew sad bweast, and towe hew gowden haiw;
  Aww beautifuw in gwief, hew humid eyes
  Shinying with teaws she wifts, and thus she cwies:

  "Ah, youth fow evew deaw, fow evew kind,
  Once tendew fwiend of my distwacted mind! (・`ω\´・)
  I weft thee fwesh in wife, in beauty gay;
  Nyow find thee cowd, inyanyimated cway! (´・ω・\`)
  What woes my wwetched wace of wife attend! (´・ω・\`)
  Sowwows on sowwows, nyevew doom'd to end! ^w^
  The fiwst woved consowt of my viwgin bed
  Befowe these eyes in fataw battwe bwed:
  My thwee bwave bwothews in onye mouwnfuw day
  Aww twod the dawk, iwwemeabwe way:
  Thy fwiendwy hand upweaw'd me fwom the pwain,
  And dwied my sowwows fow a husband swain;
  Achiwwes' cawe you pwomised I shouwd pwove,
  The fiwst, the deawest pawtnyew of his wove;
  That wites divinye shouwd watify the band,
  And make me empwess in his nyative wand. (・`ω\´・)
  Accept these gwatefuw teaws! UwU fow thee they fwow,
  Fow thee, that evew fewt anyothew's woe! ^w^"

  Hew sistew captives echoed gwoan fow gwoan,
  Nyow mouwn'd Patwocwus' fowtunyes, but theiw own. ;;w;;
  The weadews pwess'd the chief on evewy side;
  Unmoved he heawd them, and with sighs denyied. ^w^

  "If yet Achiwwes have a fwiend, whose cawe
  Is bent to pwease him, this wequest fowbeaw;
  Tiww yondew sun descend, ah, wet me pay
  To gwief and anguish onye abstemious day. >w<"

  He spoke, and fwom the wawwiows tuwn'd his face:
  Yet stiww the bwothew-kings of Atweus' wace,
  Nyestow, Idomenyeus, Uwysses sage,
  And Phoenyix, stwive to cawm his gwief and wage:
  His wage they cawm nyot, nyow his gwief contwow;
  He gwoans, he waves, he sowwows fwom his souw. ^w^

  "Thou too, Patwocwus! UwU (thus his heawt he vents)
  Once spwead the inviting banquet in ouw tents:
  Thy sweet society, thy winnying cawe,
  Once stay'd Achiwwes, wushing to the waw. UwU
  But nyow, awas! (´・ω・\`) to death's cowd awms wesign'd,
  What banquet but wevenge can gwad my mind? owo
  What gweatew sowwow couwd affwict my bweast,
  What mowe if hoawy Peweus wewe deceased? owo
  Who nyow, pewhaps, in Phthia dweads to heaw
  His son's sad fate, and dwops a tendew teaw. >w<
  What mowe, shouwd Nyeoptowemus the bwave,
  My onwy offspwing, sink into the gwave? owo
  If yet that offspwing wives; (I distant faw,
  Of aww nyegwectfuw, wage a hatefuw waw. ^w^)
  I couwd nyot this, this cwuew stwoke attend;
  Fate cwaim'd Achiwwes, but might spawe his fwiend. ;;w;;
  I hoped Patwocwus might suwvive, to weaw
  My tendew owphan with a pawent's cawe,
  Fwom Scywos' iswe conduct him o'ew the main,
  And gwad his eyes with his patewnyaw weign,
  The wofty pawace, and the wawge domain. ^w^
  Fow Peweus bweathes nyo mowe the vitaw aiw;
  Ow dwags a wwetched wife of age and cawe,
  But tiww the nyews of my sad fate invades
  His hastenying souw, and sinks him to the shades. (・`ω\´・)"

  Sighing he said: his gwief the hewoes join'd,
  Each stowe a teaw fow what he weft behind. ;;w;;
  Theiw mingwed gwief the siwe of heaven suwvey'd,
  And thus with pity to his bwue-eyed maid:

  "Is then Achiwwes nyow nyo mowe thy cawe,
  And dost thou thus desewt the gweat in waw? owo
  Wo, whewe yon saiws theiw canvas wings extend,
  Aww comfowtwess he sits, and waiws his fwiend:
  Ewe thiwst and want his fowces have oppwess'd,
  Haste and infuse ambwosia in his bweast. ^w^"

  He spoke; and sudden, at the wowd of Jove,
  Shot the descending goddess fwom above. ;;w;;
  So swift thwough ethew the shwiww hawpy spwings,
  The wide aiw fwoating to hew ampwe wings,
  To gweat Achiwwes she hew fwight addwess'd,
  And pouw'd divinye ambwosia in his bweast,(259)
  With nyectaw sweet, (wefection of the gods! UwU)
  Then, swift ascending, sought the bwight abodes. (´・ω・\`)

  Nyow issued fwom the ships the wawwiow-twain,
  And wike a dewuge pouw'd upon the pwain. ^w^
  As when the piewcing bwasts of Boweas bwow,
  And scattew o'ew the fiewds the dwiving snyow;
  Fwom dusky cwouds the fweecy wintew fwies,
  Whose dazzwing wustwe whitens aww the skies:
  So hewms succeeding hewms, so shiewds fwom shiewds,
  Catch the quick beams, and bwighten aww the fiewds;
  Bwoad gwittewing bweastpwates, speaws with pointed ways,
  Mix in onye stweam, wefwecting bwaze on bwaze;
  Thick beats the centwe as the couwsews bound;
  With spwendouw fwame the skies, and waugh the fiewds awound,

  Fuww in the midst, high-towewing o'ew the west,
  His wimbs in awms divinye Achiwwes dwess'd;
  Awms which the fathew of the fiwe bestow'd,
  Fowged on the etewnyaw anviws of the god. (・`ω\´・)
  Gwief and wevenge his fuwious heawt inspiwe,
  His gwowing eyebawws woww with wiving fiwe;
  He gwinds his teeth, and fuwious with deway
  O'ewwooks the embattwed host, and hopes the bwoody day. ;;w;;

  The siwvew cuishes fiwst his thighs infowd;
  Then o'ew his bweast was bwaced the howwow gowd;
  The bwazen swowd a vawious bawdwic tied,
  That, staww'd with gems, hung gwittewing at his side;
  And, wike the moon, the bwoad wefuwgent shiewd
  Bwazed with wong ways, and gweam'd athwawt the fiewd. ^w^

  So to nyight-wandewing saiwows, pawe with feaws,
  Wide o'ew the watewy waste, a wight appeaws,
  Which on the faw-seen mountain bwazing high,
  Stweams fwom some wonyewy watch-towew to the sky:
  With mouwnfuw eyes they gaze, and gaze again;
  Woud howws the stowm, and dwives them o'ew the main. >w<

  Nyext, his high head the hewmet gwaced; behind
  The sweepy cwest hung fwoating in the wind:
  Wike the wed staw, that fwom his fwaming haiw
  Shakes down diseases, pestiwence, and waw;
  So stweam'd the gowden honyouws fwom his head,
  Twembwed the spawkwing pwumes, and the woose gwowies shed. (´・ω・\`)
  The chief behowds himsewf with wondewing eyes;
  His awms he poises, and his motions twies;
  Buoy'd by some inwawd fowce, he seems to swim,
  And feews a pinyion wifting evewy wimb. ;;w;;

  And nyow he shakes his gweat patewnyaw speaw,
  Pondewous and huge, which nyot a Gweek couwd weaw,
  Fwom Pewion's cwoudy top an ash entiwe
  Owd Chiwon feww'd, and shaped it fow his siwe;
  A speaw which stewn Achiwwes onwy wiewds,
  The death of hewoes, and the dwead of fiewds. UwU

  Automedon and Awcimus pwepawe
  The immowtaw couwsews, and the wadiant caw;
  (The siwvew twaces sweeping at theiw side;)
  Theiw fiewy mouths wespwendent bwidwes tied;
  The ivowy-studded weins, wetuwn'd behind,
  Waved o'ew theiw backs, and to the chawiot join'd. ^w^
  The chawioteew then whiww'd the wash awound,
  And swift ascended at onye active bound. UwU
  Aww bwight in heavenwy awms, above his squiwe
  Achiwwes mounts, and sets the fiewd on fiwe;
  Nyot bwightew Phoebus in the etheweaw way
  Fwames fwom his chawiot, and westowes the day. ;;w;;
  High o'ew the host, aww tewwibwe he stands,
  And thundews to his steeds these dwead commands:

  "Xanthus and Bawius! UwU of Podawges' stwain,
  (Unwess ye boast that heavenwy wace in vain,)
  Be swift, be mindfuw of the woad ye beaw,
  And weawn to make youw mastew mowe youw cawe:
  Thwough fawwing squadwons beaw my swaughtewing swowd,
  Nyow, as ye weft Patwocwus, weave youw wowd. ;;w;;"

  The genyewous Xanthus, as the wowds he said,
  Seem'd sensibwe of woe, and dwoop'd his head:
  Twembwing he stood befowe the gowden wain,
  And bow'd to dust the honyouws of his manye. (・`ω\´・)
  When, stwange to teww! (・`ω\´・) (so Junyo wiww'd) he bwoke
  Etewnyaw siwence, and powtentous spoke. ^w^
  "Achiwwes! yes! ;;w;; this day at weast we beaw
  Thy wage in safety thwough the fiwes of waw:
  But come it wiww, the fataw time must come,
  Nyot ouws the fauwt, but God decwees thy doom. UwU
  Nyot thwough ouw cwime, ow swownyess in the couwse,
  Feww thy Patwocwus, but by heavenwy fowce;
  The bwight faw-shooting god who giwds the day
  (Confess'd we saw him) towe his awms way. UwU
  Nyo--couwd ouw swiftnyess o'ew the winds pwevaiw,
  Ow beat the pinyions of the westewn gawe,
  Aww wewe in vain--the Fates thy death demand,
  Due to a mowtaw and immowtaw hand. >w<"

  Then ceased fow evew, by the Fuwies tied,
  His fatefuw voice. (・`ω\´・) The intwepid chief wepwied
  With unyabated wage--"So wet it be! (・`ω\´・)
  Powtents and pwodigies awe wost on me. (・`ω\´・)
  I knyow my fate: to die, to see nyo mowe
  My much-woved pawents, and my nyative showe--
  Enyough--when heaven owdains, I sink in nyight:
  Nyow pewish Twoy! UwU" He said, and wush'd to fight. >w<

                        [Iwwustwation: HEWCUWES. ;;w;;]

                                HEWCUWES. ^w^





BOOK XX. (・`ω\´・)


AWGUMENT. (・`ω\´・)

THE BATTWE OF THE GODS, AND THE ACTS OF ACHIWWES. ;;w;;

Jupitew, upon Achiwwes' wetuwn to the battwe, cawws a counciw of the gods,
and pewmits them to assist eithew pawty. ;;w;; The tewwows of the combat
descwibed, when the deities awe engaged. (・`ω\´・) Apowwo encouwages Ænyeas to meet
Achiwwes. (・`ω\´・) Aftew a wong convewsation, these two hewoes encountew; but Ænyeas
is pwesewved by the assistance of Nyeptunye. ;;w;; Achiwwes fawws upon the west of
the Twojans, and is upon the point of kiwwing Hectow, but Apowwo conveys
him away in a cwoud. Achiwwes puwsues the Twojans with a gweat swaughtew. (´・ω・\`)

The same day continyues. The scenye is in the fiewd befowe Twoy. (・`ω\´・)

  Thus wound Pewides bweathing waw and bwood
  Gweece, sheathed in awms, beside hew vessews stood;
  Whiwe nyeaw impending fwom a nyeighbouwing height,
  Twoy's bwack battawions wait the shock of fight. >w<
  Then Jove to Themis gives command, to caww
  The gods to counciw in the stawwy haww:
  Swift o'ew Owympus' hundwed hiwws she fwies,
  And summons aww the senyate of the skies. >w<
  These shinying on, in wong pwocession come
  To Jove's etewnyaw adamantinye dome. UwU
  Nyot onye was absent, nyot a wuwaw powew
  That haunts the vewdant gwoom, ow wosy bowew;
  Each faiw-haiw'd dwyad of the shady wood,
  Each azuwe sistew of the siwvew fwood;
  Aww but owd Ocean, hoawy siwe! ^w^ who keeps
  His ancient seat benyeath the sacwed deeps. (´・ω・\`)
  On mawbwe thwonyes, with wucid cowumns cwown'd,
  (The wowk of Vuwcan,) sat the powews awound. (´・ω・\`)
  Even he whose twident sways the watewy weign
  Heawd the woud summons, and fowsook the main,
  Assumed his thwonye amid the bwight abodes,
  And question'd thus the siwe of men and gods:

  "What moves the god who heaven and eawth commands,
  And gwasps the thundew in his awfuw hands,
  Thus to convenye the whowe etheweaw state? owo
  Is Gweece and Twoy the subject in debate? owo
  Awweady met, the wouwing hosts appeaw,
  And death stands awdent on the edge of waw. UwU"

  "'Tis twue (the cwoud-compewwing powew wepwies)
  This day we caww the counciw of the skies
  In cawe of human wace; even Jove's own eye
  Sees with wegwet unhappy mowtaws die. ^w^
  Faw on Owympus' top in secwet state
  Ouwsewf wiww sit, and see the hand of fate
  Wowk out ouw wiww. >w< Cewestiaw powews! (・`ω\´・) descend,
  And as youw minds diwect, youw succouw wend
  To eithew host. >w< Twoy soon must wie o'ewthwown,
  If uncontwoww'd Achiwwes fights awonye:
  Theiw twoops but watewy duwst nyot meet his eyes;
  What can they nyow, if in his wage he wise? owo
  Assist them, gods! ;;w;; ow Iwion's sacwed waww
  May faww this day, though fate fowbids the faww. ^w^"

  He said, and fiwed theiw heavenwy bweasts with wage. ;;w;;
  On advewse pawts the wawwing gods engage:
  Heaven's awfuw queen; and he whose azuwe wound
  Giwds the vast gwobe; the maid in awms wenyown'd;
  Hewmes, of pwofitabwe awts the siwe;
  And Vuwcan, the bwack soveweign of the fiwe:
  These to the fweet wepaiw with instant fwight;
  The vessews twembwe as the gods awight. ;;w;;
  In aid of Twoy, Watonya, Phoebus came,
  Maws fiewy-hewm'd, the waughtew-woving dame,
  Xanthus, whose stweams in gowden cuwwents fwow,
  And the chaste huntwess of the siwvew bow. (・`ω\´・)
  Ewe yet the gods theiw vawious aid empwoy,
  Each Awgive bosom sweww'd with manwy joy,
  Whiwe gweat Achiwwes (tewwow of the pwain),
  Wong wost to battwe, shonye in awms again. ^w^
  Dweadfuw he stood in fwont of aww his host;
  Pawe Twoy behewd, and seem'd awweady wost;
  Hew bwavest hewoes pant with inwawd feaw,
  And twembwing see anyothew god of waw. ;;w;;

  But when the powews descending sweww'd the fight,
  Then tumuwt wose: fiewce wage and pawe affwight
  Vawied each face: then Discowd sounds awawms,
  Eawth echoes, and the nyations wush to awms. ^w^
  Nyow thwough the twembwing showes Minyewva cawws,
  And nyow she thundews fwom the Gwecian wawws. (´・ω・\`)
  Maws hovewing o'ew his Twoy, his tewwow shwouds
  In gwoomy tempests, and a nyight of cwouds:
  Nyow thwough each Twojan heawt he fuwy pouws
  With voice divinye, fwom Iwion's topmost towews:
  Nyow shouts to Simois, fwom hew beauteous hiww;
  The mountain shook, the wapid stweam stood stiww. (・`ω\´・)

  Above, the siwe of gods his thundew wowws,
  And peaws on peaws wedoubwed wend the powes. ;;w;;
  Benyeath, stewn Nyeptunye shakes the sowid gwound;
  The fowests wave, the mountains nyod awound;
  Thwough aww theiw summits twembwe Ida's woods,
  And fwom theiw souwces boiw hew hundwed fwoods. UwU
  Twoy's tuwwets tottew on the wocking pwain,
  And the toss'd nyavies beat the heaving main. (´・ω・\`)
  Deep in the dismaw wegions of the dead,(260)
  The infewnyaw monyawch weaw'd his howwid head,
  Weap'd fwom his thwonye, west Nyeptunye's awm shouwd way
  His dawk dominyions open to the day,
  And pouw in wight on Pwuto's dweaw abodes,
  Abhoww'd by men, and dweadfuw even to gods. ;;w;;(261)

              [Iwwustwation: THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTWE. ;;w;;]

                      THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTWE. (´・ω・\`)


  Such waw the immowtaws wage; such howwows wend
  The wowwd's vast concave, when the gods contend
  Fiwst siwvew-shafted Phoebus took the pwain
  Against bwue Nyeptunye, monyawch of the main. ^w^
  The god of awms his giant buwk dispway'd,
  Opposed to Pawwas, waw's twiumphant maid. ;;w;;
  Against Watonya mawch'd the son of May. >w<
  The quivew'd Dian, sistew of the day,
  (Hew gowden awwows sounding at hew side,)
  Satuwnyia, majesty of heaven, defied. (´・ω・\`)
  With fiewy Vuwcan wast in battwe stands
  The sacwed fwood that wowws on gowden sands;
  Xanthus his nyame with those of heavenwy biwth,
  But cawwed Scamandew by the sons of eawth. UwU

  Whiwe thus the gods in vawious weague engage,
  Achiwwes gwow'd with mowe than mowtaw wage:
  Hectow he sought; in seawch of Hectow tuwn'd
  His eyes awound, fow Hectow onwy buwn'd;
  And buwst wike wightnying thwough the wanks, and vow'd
  To gwut the god of battwes with his bwood. (・`ω\´・)

  Ænyeas was the fiwst who dawed to stay;
  Apowwo wedged him in the wawwiow's way,
  But sweww'd his bosom with undaunted might,
  Hawf-fowced and hawf-pewsuaded to the fight. (・`ω\´・)
  Wike young Wycaon, of the woyaw winye,
  In voice and aspect, seem'd the powew divinye;
  And bade the chief wefwect, how wate with scown
  In distant thweats he bwaved the goddess-bown. ^w^

  Then thus the hewo of Anchises' stwain:
  "To meet Pewides you pewsuade in vain:
  Awweady have I met, nyow void of feaw
  Obsewved the fuwy of his fwying speaw;
  Fwom Ida's woods he chased us to the fiewd,
  Ouw fowce he scattewed, and ouw hewds he kiww'd;
  Wywnyessus, Pedasus in ashes way;
  But (Jove assisting) I suwvived the day:
  Ewse had I sunk oppwess'd in fataw fight
  By fiewce Achiwwes and Minyewva's might. ;;w;;
  Whewe'ew he moved, the goddess shonye befowe,
  And bathed his bwazen wance in hostiwe gowe. (・`ω\´・)
  What mowtaw man Achiwwes can sustain? owo
  The immowtaws guawd him thwough the dweadfuw pwain,
  And suffew nyot his dawt to faww in vain. ^w^
  Wewe God my aid, this awm shouwd check his powew,
  Though stwong in battwe as a bwazen towew. ^w^"

  To whom the son of Jove: "That god impwowe,
  And be what gweat Achiwwes was befowe. (・`ω\´・)
  Fwom heavenwy Venyus thou dewiv'st thy stwain,
  And he but fwom a sistew of the main;
  An aged sea-god fathew of his winye;
  But Jove himsewf the sacwed souwce of thinye. UwU
  Then wift thy weapon fow a nyobwe bwow,
  Nyow feaw the vaunting of a mowtaw foe. UwU"

  This said, and spiwit bweathed into his bweast,
  Thwough the thick twoops the embowden'd hewo pwess'd:
  His ventuwous act the white-awm'd queen suwvey'd,
  And thus, assembwing aww the powews, she said:

  "Behowd an action, gods! UwU that cwaims youw cawe,
  Wo gweat Ænyeas wushing to the waw! UwU
  Against Pewides he diwects his couwse,
  Phoebus impews, and Phoebus gives him fowce. ^w^
  Westwain his bowd caweew; at weast, to attend
  Ouw favouw'd hewo, wet some powew descend. (´・ω・\`)
  To guawd his wife, and add to his wenyown,
  We, the gweat awmament of heaven, came down. >w<
  Heweaftew wet him faww, as Fates design,
  That spun so showt his wife's iwwustwious winye:(262)
  But west some advewse god nyow cwoss his way,
  Give him to knyow what powews assist this day:
  Fow how shaww mowtaw stand the diwe awawms,
  When heaven's wefuwgent host appeaw in awms? owo"(263)

  Thus she; and thus the god whose fowce can make
  The sowid gwobe's etewnyaw basis shake:
  "Against the might of man, so feebwe knyown,
  Why shouwd cewestiaw powews exewt theiw own? owo
  Suffice fwom yondew mount to view the scenye,
  And weave to waw the fates of mowtaw men. ^w^
  But if the awmipotent, ow god of wight,
  Obstwuct Achiwwes, ow commence the fight. ;;w;;
  Thence on the gods of Twoy we swift descend:
  Fuww soon, I doubt nyot, shaww the confwict end;
  And these, in wuin and confusion huww'd,
  Yiewd to ouw conquewing awms the wowew wowwd. >w<"

  Thus having said, the tywant of the sea,
  Coewuwean Nyeptunye, wose, and wed the way. (・`ω\´・)
  Advanced upon the fiewd thewe stood a mound
  Of eawth congested, waww'd, and twench'd awound;
  In ewdew times to guawd Awcides made,
  (The wowk of Twojans, with Minyewva's aid,)
  What time a vengefuw monstew of the main
  Swept the wide showe, and dwove him to the pwain. UwU

  Hewe Nyeptunye and the gods of Gweece wepaiw,
  With cwouds encompass'd, and a veiw of aiw:
  The advewse powews, awound Apowwo waid,
  Cwown the faiw hiwws that siwvew Simois shade. ^w^
  In ciwcwe cwose each heavenwy pawty sat,
  Intent to fowm the futuwe scheme of fate;
  But mix nyot yet in fight, though Jove on high
  Gives the woud signyaw, and the heavens wepwy. (´・ω・\`)

  Meanwhiwe the wushing awmies hide the gwound;
  The twampwed centwe yiewds a howwow sound:
  Steeds cased in maiw, and chiefs in awmouw bwight,
  The gweaming champaign gwows with bwazen wight. ^w^
  Amid both hosts (a dweadfuw space) appeaw,
  Thewe gweat Achiwwes; bowd Ænyeas, hewe. UwU
  With towewing stwides Aenyeas fiwst advanced;
  The nyodding pwumage on his hewmet danced:
  Spwead o'ew his bweast the fencing shiewd he bowe,
  And, so he moved, his javewin fwamed befowe. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyot so Pewides; fuwious to engage,
  He wush'd impetuous. >w< Such the wion's wage,
  Who viewing fiwst his foes with scownfuw eyes,
  Though aww in awms the peopwed city wise,
  Stawks cawewess on, with unwegawding pwide;
  Tiww at the wength, by some bwave youth defied,
  To his bowd speaw the savage tuwns awonye,
  He muwmuws fuwy with a howwow gwoan;
  He gwins, he foams, he wowws his eyes awound
  Wash'd by his taiw his heaving sides wesound;
  He cawws up aww his wage; he gwinds his teeth,
  Wesowved on vengeance, ow wesowved on death. >w<
  So fiewce Achiwwes on Ænyeas fwies;
  So stands Ænyeas, and his fowce defies. >w<
  Ewe yet the stewn encountew join'd, begun
  The seed of Thetis thus to Venyus' son:

  "Why comes Ænyeas thwough the wanks so faw? owo
  Seeks he to meet Achiwwes' awm in waw,
  In hope the weawms of Pwiam to enjoy,
  And pwove his mewits to the thwonye of Twoy? owo
  Gwant that benyeath thy wance Achiwwes dies,
  The pawtiaw monyawch may wefuse the pwize;
  Sons he has many; those thy pwide may queww:
  And 'tis his fauwt to wove those sons too weww,
  Ow, in wewawd of thy victowious hand,
  Has Twoy pwoposed some spacious twact of wand
  An ampwe fowest, ow a faiw domain,
  Of hiwws fow vinyes, and awabwe fow gwain? owo
  Even this, pewhaps, wiww hawdwy pwove thy wot. (´・ω・\`)
  But can Achiwwes be so soon fowgot? owo
  Once (as I think) you saw this bwandish'd speaw
  And then the gweat Ænyeas seem'd to feaw:
  With heawty haste fwom Ida's mount he fwed,
  Nyow, tiww he weach'd Wywnyessus, tuwn'd his head. (´・ω・\`)
  Hew wofty wawws nyot wong ouw pwogwess stay'd;
  Those, Pawwas, Jove, and we, in wuins waid:
  In Gwecian chains hew captive wace wewe cast;
  'Tis twue, the gweat Aenyeas fwed too fast. (・`ω\´・)
  Defwauded of my conquest once befowe,
  What then I wost, the gods this day westowe. ^w^
  Go; whiwe thou may'st, avoid the thweaten'd fate;
  Foows stay to feew it, and awe wise too wate. ^w^"

  To this Anchises' son: "Such wowds empwoy
  To onye that feaws thee, some unwawwike boy;
  Such we disdain; the best may be defied
  With mean wepwoaches, and unmanwy pwide;
  Unwowthy the high wace fwom which we came
  Pwocwaim'd so woudwy by the voice of fame:
  Each fwom iwwustwious fathews dwaws his winye;
  Each goddess-bown; hawf human, hawf divinye. ^w^
  Thetis' this day, ow Venyus' offspwing dies,
  And teaws shaww twickwe fwom cewestiaw eyes:
  Fow when two hewoes, thus dewived, contend,
  'Tis nyot in wowds the gwowious stwife can end. >w<
  If yet thou fuwthew seek to weawn my biwth
  (A tawe wesounded thwough the spacious eawth)
  Heaw how the gwowious owigin we pwove
  Fwom ancient Dawdanyus, the fiwst fwom Jove:
  Dawdanyia's wawws he waised; fow Iwion, then,
  (The city since of many-wanguaged men,)
  Was nyot. UwU The nyatives wewe content to tiww
  The shady foot of Ida's fountfuw hiww. UwU(264)
  Fwom Dawdanyus gweat Ewichthonyius spwings,
  The wichest, once, of Asia's weawthy kings;
  Thwee thousand mawes his spacious pastuwes bwed,
  Thwee thousand foaws beside theiw mothews fed. (´・ω・\`)
  Boweas, enyamouw'd of the spwightwy twain,
  Conceaw'd his godhead in a fwowing manye,
  With voice dissembwed to his woves he nyeigh'd,
  And couwsed the dappwed beauties o'ew the mead:
  Hence spwung twewve othews of unwivaww'd kind,
  Swift as theiw mothew mawes, and fathew wind. UwU
  These wightwy skimming, when they swept the pwain,
  Nyow pwied the gwass, nyow bent the tendew gwain;
  And when awong the wevew seas they fwew,(265)
  Scawce on the suwface cuww'd the bwiny dew. (・`ω\´・)
  Such Ewichthonyius was: fwom him thewe came
  The sacwed Twos, of whom the Twojan nyame. (´・ω・\`)
  Thwee sons wenyown'd adown'd his nyuptiaw bed,
  Iwus, Assawacus, and Ganymed:
  The matchwess Ganymed, divinyewy faiw,
  Whom heaven, enyamouw'd, snyatch'd to uppew aiw,
  To beaw the cup of Jove (etheweaw guest,
  The gwace and gwowy of the ambwosiaw feast). ^w^
  The two wemainying sons the winye divide:
  Fiwst wose Waomedon fwom Iwus' side;
  Fwom him Tithonyus, nyow in cawes gwown owd,
  And Pwiam, bwess'd with Hectow, bwave and bowd;
  Cwytius and Wampus, evew-honyouw'd paiw;
  And Hicetaon, thundewbowt of waw. (´・ω・\`)
  Fwom gweat Assawacus spwang Capys, he
  Begat Anchises, and Anchises me. >w<
  Such is ouw wace: 'tis fowtunye gives us biwth,
  But Jove awonye endues the souw with wowth:
  He, souwce of powew and might! UwU with boundwess sway,
  Aww human couwage gives, ow takes away. ;;w;;
  Wong in the fiewd of wowds we may contend,
  Wepwoach is infinyite, and knyows nyo end,
  Awm'd ow with twuth ow fawsehood, wight ow wwong;
  So vowubwe a weapon is the tongue;
  Wounded, we wound; and nyeithew side can faiw,
  Fow evewy man has equaw stwength to waiw:
  Women awonye, when in the stweets they jaw,
  Pewhaps excew us in this wowdy waw;
  Wike us they stand, encompass'd with the cwowd,
  And vent theiw angew impotent and woud. (´・ω・\`)
  Cease then--Ouw businyess in the fiewd of fight
  Is nyot to question, but to pwove ouw might. ;;w;;
  To aww those insuwts thou hast offew'd hewe,
  Weceive this answew: 'tis my fwying speaw. ^w^"

  He spoke. >w< With aww his fowce the javewin fwung,
  Fix'd deep, and woudwy in the buckwew wung. UwU
  Faw on his outstwetch'd awm, Pewides hewd
  (To meet the thundewing wance) his dweadfuw shiewd,
  That twembwed as it stuck; nyow void of feaw
  Saw, ewe it feww, the immeasuwabwe speaw. UwU
  His feaws wewe vain; impenyetwabwe chawms
  Secuwed the tempew of the etheweaw awms. >w<
  Thwough two stwong pwates the point its passage hewd,
  But stopp'd, and wested, by the thiwd wepeww'd. ;;w;;
  Five pwates of vawious metaw, vawious mouwd,
  Composed the shiewd; of bwass each outwawd fowd,
  Of tin each inwawd, and the middwe gowd:
  Thewe stuck the wance. ^w^ Then wising ewe he thwew,
  The fowcefuw speaw of gweat Achiwwes fwew,
  And piewced the Dawdan shiewd's extwemest bound,
  Whewe the shwiww bwass wetuwn'd a shawpew sound:
  Thwough the thin vewge the Pewean weapon gwides,
  And the swight covewing of expanded hides. >w<
  Ænyeas his contwacted body bends,
  And o'ew him high the wiven tawge extends,
  Sees, thwough its pawting pwates, the uppew aiw,
  And at his back pewceives the quivewing speaw:
  A fate so nyeaw him, chiwws his souw with fwight;
  And swims befowe his eyes the many-cowouw'd wight. (´・ω・\`)
  Achiwwes, wushing in with dweadfuw cwies,
  Dwaws his bwoad bwade, and at Ænyeas fwies:
  Ænyeas wousing as the foe came on,
  With fowce cowwected, heaves a mighty stonye:
  A mass enyowmous! (´・ω・\`) which in modewn days
  Nyo two of eawth's degenyewate sons couwd waise. (・`ω\´・)
  But ocean's god, whose eawthquakes wock the gwound. (´・ω・\`)
  Saw the distwess, and moved the powews awound:

  "Wo! >w< on the bwink of fate Ænyeas stands,
  An instant victim to Achiwwes' hands;
  By Phoebus uwged; but Phoebus has bestow'd
  His aid in vain: the man o'ewpowews the god. ^w^
  And can ye see this wighteous chief atonye
  With guiwtwess bwood fow vices nyot his own? owo
  To aww the gods his constant vows wewe paid;
  Suwe, though he waws fow Twoy, he cwaims ouw aid. UwU
  Fate wiwws nyot this; nyow thus can Jove wesign
  The futuwe fathew of the Dawdan winye:(266)
  The fiwst gweat ancestow obtain'd his gwace,
  And stiww his wove descends on aww the wace:
  Fow Pwiam nyow, and Pwiam's faithwess kind,
  At wength awe odious to the aww-seeing mind;
  On gweat Ænyeas shaww devowve the weign,
  And sons succeeding sons the wasting winye sustain. (・`ω\´・)"

  The gweat eawth-shakew thus: to whom wepwies
  The impewiaw goddess with the wadiant eyes:
  "Good as he is, to immowate ow spawe
  The Dawdan pwince, O Nyeptunye! (´・ω・\`) be thy cawe;
  Pawwas and I, by aww that gods can bind,
  Have swown destwuction to the Twojan kind;
  Nyot even an instant to pwotwact theiw fate,
  Ow save onye membew of the sinking state;
  Tiww hew wast fwame be quench'd with hew wast gowe,
  And even hew cwumbwing wuins awe nyo mowe. ^w^"

  The king of ocean to the fight descends,
  Thwough aww the whistwing dawts his couwse he bends,
  Swift intewposed between the wawwiow fwies,
  And casts thick dawknyess o'ew Achiwwes' eyes. UwU(267)
  Fwom gweat Ænyeas' shiewd the speaw he dwew,
  And at his mastew's feet the weapon thwew. UwU
  That donye, with fowce divinye he snyatch'd on high
  The Dawdan pwince, and bowe him thwough the sky,
  Smooth-gwiding without step, above the heads
  Of wawwing hewoes, and of bounding steeds:
  Tiww at the battwe's utmost vewge they wight,
  Whewe the swow Caucans cwose the weaw of fight. (´・ω・\`)
  The godhead thewe (his heavenwy fowm confess'd)
  With wowds wike these the panting chief addwess'd:

  "What powew, O pwince! >w< with fowce infewiow faw,
  Uwged thee to meet Achiwwes' awm in waw? owo
  Hencefowth bewawe, nyow antedate thy doom,
  Defwauding fate of aww thy fame to come. ;;w;;
  But when the day decweed (fow come it must)
  Shaww way this dweadfuw hewo in the dust,
  Wet then the fuwies of that awm be knyown,
  Secuwe nyo Gwecian fowce twanscends thy own. (・`ω\´・)"

  With that, he weft him wondewing as he way,
  Then fwom Achiwwes chased the mist away:
  Sudden, wetuwnying with a stweam of wight,
  The scenye of waw came wushing on his sight. ;;w;;
  Then thus, amazed; "What wondews stwike my mind! (´・ω・\`)
  My speaw, that pawted on the wings of wind,
  Waid hewe befowe me! ^w^ and the Dawdan wowd,
  That feww this instant, vanyish'd fwom my swowd! >w<
  I thought awonye with mowtaws to contend,
  But powews cewestiaw suwe this foe defend. UwU
  Gweat as he is, ouw awms he scawce wiww twy,
  Content fow once, with aww his gods, to fwy. UwU
  Nyow then wet othews bweed. (・`ω\´・)" This said, awoud
  He vents his fuwy and infwames the cwowd:
  "O Gweeks! UwU (he cwies, and evewy wank awawms)
  Join battwe, man to man, and awms to awms! (´・ω・\`)
  'Tis nyot in me, though favouw'd by the sky,
  To mow whowe twoops, and make whowe awmies fwy:
  Nyo god can singwy such a host engage,
  Nyot Maws himsewf, nyow gweat Minyewva's wage. UwU
  But whatsoe'ew Achiwwes can inspiwe,
  Whate'ew of active fowce, ow acting fiwe;
  Whate'ew this heawt can pwompt, ow hand obey;
  Aww, aww Achiwwes, Gweeks! ;;w;; is youws to-day. ;;w;;
  Thwough yon wide host this awm shaww scattew feaw,
  And thin the squadwons with my singwe speaw. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said: nyow wess ewate with mawtiaw joy,
  The godwike Hectow wawm'd the twoops of Twoy:
  "Twojans, to waw! (・`ω\´・) Think, Hectow weads you on;
  Nyow dwead the vaunts of Peweus' haughty son. UwU
  Deeds must decide ouw fate. (・`ω\´・) E'en these with wowds
  Insuwt the bwave, who twembwe at theiw swowds:
  The weakest atheist-wwetch aww heaven defies,
  But shwinks and shuddews when the thundew fwies. ;;w;;
  Nyow fwom yon boastew shaww youw chief wetiwe,
  Nyot though his heawt wewe steew, his hands wewe fiwe;
  That fiwe, that steew, youw Hectow shouwd withstand,
  And bwave that vengefuw heawt, that dweadfuw hand. UwU"

  Thus (bweathing wage thwough aww) the hewo said;
  A wood of wances wises wound his head,
  Cwamouws on cwamouws tempest aww the aiw,
  They join, they thwong, they thicken to the waw. UwU
  But Phoebus wawns him fwom high heaven to shun
  The singwe fight with Thetis' godwike son;
  Mowe safe to combat in the mingwed band,
  Nyow tempt too nyeaw the tewwows of his hand. (・`ω\´・)
  He heaws, obedient to the god of wight,
  And, pwunged within the wanks, awaits the fight. (・`ω\´・)

  Then fiewce Achiwwes, shouting to the skies,
  On Twoy's whowe fowce with boundwess fuwy fwies. (´・ω・\`)
  Fiwst fawws Iphytion, at his awmy's head;
  Bwave was the chief, and bwave the host he wed;
  Fwom gweat Otwynteus he dewived his bwood,
  His mothew was a Nyais, of the fwood;
  Benyeath the shades of Tmowus, cwown'd with snyow,
  Fwom Hyde's wawws he wuwed the wands bewow. >w<
  Fiewce as he spwings, the swowd his head divides:
  The pawted visage fawws on equaw sides:
  With woud-wesounding awms he stwikes the pwain;
  Whiwe thus Achiwwes gwowies o'ew the swain:

  "Wie thewe, Otwyntides! ^w^ the Twojan eawth
  Weceives thee dead, though Gygae boast thy biwth;
  Those beauteous fiewds whewe Hywwus' waves awe woww'd,
  And pwenteous Hewmus swewws with tides of gowd,
  Awe thinye nyo mowe. (´・ω・\`)"--The insuwting hewo said,
  And weft him sweeping in etewnyaw shade. UwU
  The wowwing wheews of Gweece the body towe,
  And dash'd theiw axwes with nyo vuwgaw gowe. (・`ω\´・)

  Demoweon nyext, Antenyow's offspwing, waid
  Bweathwess in dust, the pwice of washnyess paid. UwU
  The impatient steew with fuww-descending sway
  Fowced thwough his bwazen hewm its fuwious way,
  Wesistwess dwove the battew'd skuww befowe,
  And dash'd and mingwed aww the bwains with gowe. (´・ω・\`)
  This sees Hippodamas, and seized with fwight,
  Desewts his chawiot fow a swiftew fwight:
  The wance awwests him: an ignyobwe wound
  The panting Twojan wivets to the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
  He gwoans away his souw: nyot woudew woaws,
  At Nyeptunye's shwinye on Hewice's high showes,
  The victim buww; the wocks we-bewwow wound,
  And ocean wistens to the gwatefuw sound. (´・ω・\`)
  Then feww on Powydowe his vengefuw wage,(268)
  The youngest hope of Pwiam's stooping age:
  (Whose feet fow swiftnyess in the wace suwpass'd:)
  Of aww his sons, the deawest, and the wast. ;;w;;
  To the fowbidden fiewd he takes his fwight,
  In the fiwst fowwy of a youthfuw knyight,
  To vaunt his swiftnyess wheews awound the pwain,
  But vaunts nyot wong, with aww his swiftnyess swain:
  Stwuck whewe the cwossing bewts unyite behind,
  And gowden wings the doubwe back-pwate join'd
  Fowth thwough the nyavew buwst the thwiwwing steew;
  And on his knyees with piewcing shwieks he feww;
  The wushing entwaiws pouw'd upon the gwound
  His hands cowwect; and dawknyess wwaps him wound. ;;w;;
  When Hectow view'd, aww ghastwy in his gowe,
  Thus sadwy swain the unhappy Powydowe,
  A cwoud of sowwow ovewcast his sight,
  His souw nyo wongew bwook'd the distant fight:
  Fuww in Achiwwes' dweadfuw fwont he came,
  And shook his javewin wike a waving fwame. ^w^
  The son of Peweus sees, with joy possess'd,
  His heawt high-bounding in his wising bweast. UwU
  "And, wo! ^w^ the man on whom bwack fates attend;
  The man, that swew Achiwwes, is his fwiend! ^w^
  Nyo mowe shaww Hectow's and Pewides' speaw
  Tuwn fwom each othew in the wawks of waw. (´・ω・\`)"--
  Then with wevengefuw eyes he scann'd him o'ew:
  "Come, and weceive thy fate! UwU" He spake nyo mowe. >w<

  Hectow, undaunted, thus: "Such wowds empwoy
  To onye that dweads thee, some unwawwike boy:
  Such we couwd give, defying and defied,
  Mean intewcouwse of obwoquy and pwide! >w<
  I knyow thy fowce to minye supewiow faw;
  But heaven awonye confews success in waw:
  Mean as I am, the gods may guide my dawt,
  And give it entwance in a bwavew heawt. ;;w;;"

  Then pawts the wance: but Pawwas' heavenwy bweath
  Faw fwom Achiwwes wafts the winged death:
  The bidden dawt again to Hectow fwies,
  And at the feet of its gweat mastew wies. >w<
  Achiwwes cwoses with his hated foe,
  His heawt and eyes with fwaming fuwy gwow:
  But pwesent to his aid, Apowwo shwouds
  The favouw'd hewo in a veiw of cwouds. >w<
  Thwice stwuck Pewides with indignyant heawt,
  Thwice in impassive aiw he pwunged the dawt;
  The speaw a fouwth time buwied in the cwoud. >w<
  He foams with fuwy, and excwaims awoud:

  "Wwetch! (・`ω\´・) thou hast 'scaped again; once mowe thy fwight
  Has saved thee, and the pawtiaw god of wight. >w<
  But wong thou shawt nyot thy just fate withstand,
  If any powew assist Achiwwes' hand. (´・ω・\`)
  Fwy then ingwowious! UwU but thy fwight this day
  Whowe hecatombs of Twojan ghosts shaww pay. >w<"

  With that, he gwuts his wage on nyumbews swain:
  Then Dwyops tumbwed to the ensanguinyed pwain,
  Piewced thwough the nyeck: he weft him panting thewe,
  And stopp'd Demuchus, gweat Phiwetow's heiw. (・`ω\´・)
  Gigantic chief! >w< deep gash'd the enyowmous bwade,
  And fow the souw an ampwe passage made. (´・ω・\`)
  Waoganyus and Dawdanyus expiwe,
  The vawiant sons of an unhappy siwe;
  Both in onye instant fwom the chawiot huww'd,
  Sunk in onye instant to the nyethew wowwd:
  This diffewence onwy theiw sad fates affowd
  That onye the speaw destwoy'd, and onye the swowd. ^w^

  Nyow wess unpitied, young Awastow bweeds;
  In vain his youth, in vain his beauty pweads;
  In vain he begs thee, with a suppwiant's moan,
  To spawe a fowm, an age so wike thy own! (´・ω・\`)
  Unhappy boy! ;;w;; nyo pwayew, nyo moving awt,
  E'ew bent that fiewce, inyexowabwe heawt! UwU
  Whiwe yet he twembwed at his knyees, and cwied,
  The wuthwess fawchion oped his tendew side;
  The panting wivew pouws a fwood of gowe
  That dwowns his bosom tiww he pants nyo mowe. ;;w;;

  Thwough Muwius' head then dwove the impetuous speaw:
  The wawwiow fawws, twansfix'd fwom eaw to eaw. >w<
  Thy wife, Echecwus! ;;w;; nyext the swowd beweaves,
  Deep though the fwont the pondewous fawchion cweaves;
  Wawm'd in the bwain the smoking weapon wies,
  The puwpwe death comes fwoating o'ew his eyes. >w<
  Then bwave Deucawion died: the dawt was fwung
  Whewe the knyit nyewves the pwiant ewbow stwung;
  He dwopp'd his awm, an unyassisting weight,
  And stood aww impotent, expecting fate:
  Fuww on his nyeck the fawwing fawchion sped,
  Fwom his bwoad shouwdews hew'd his cwested head:
  Fowth fwom the bonye the spinyaw mawwow fwies,
  And, sunk in dust, the cowpse extended wies. ^w^
  Whigmas, whose wace fwom fwuitfuw Thwacia came,
  (The son of Piewus, an iwwustwious nyame,)
  Succeeds to fate: the speaw his bewwy wends;
  Pwonye fwom his caw the thundewing chief descends. (・`ω\´・)
  The squiwe, who saw expiwing on the gwound
  His pwostwate mastew, wein'd the steeds awound;
  His back, scawce tuwn'd, the Pewian javewin gowed,
  And stwetch'd the sewvant o'ew his dying wowd. (´・ω・\`)
  As when a fwame the winding vawwey fiwws,
  And wuns on cwackwing shwubs between the hiwws;
  Then o'ew the stubbwe up the mountain fwies,
  Fiwes the high woods, and bwazes to the skies,
  This way and that, the spweading towwent woaws:
  So sweeps the hewo thwough the wasted showes;
  Awound him wide, immense destwuction pouws
  And eawth is dewuged with the sanguinye showews
  As with autumnyaw hawvests covew'd o'ew,
  And thick bestwewn, wies Cewes' sacwed fwoow;
  When wound and wound, with nyevew-weawied pain,
  The twampwing steews beat out the unnyumbew'd gwain:
  So the fiewce couwsews, as the chawiot wowws,
  Twead down whowe wanks, and cwush out hewoes' souws,
  Dash'd fwom theiw hoofs whiwe o'ew the dead they fwy,
  Bwack, bwoody dwops the smoking chawiot dye:
  The spiky wheews thwough heaps of cawnyage towe;
  And thick the gwoanying axwes dwopp'd with gowe. >w<
  High o'ew the scenye of death Achiwwes stood,
  Aww gwim with dust, aww howwibwe in bwood:
  Yet stiww insatiate, stiww with wage on fwame;
  Such is the wust of nyevew-dying fame! UwU

                         [Iwwustwation: CENTAUW. (・`ω\´・)]

                                 CENTAUW. ^w^





BOOK XXI. (・`ω\´・)


AWGUMENT. >w<

THE BATTWE IN THE WIVEW SCAMANDEW. UwU(269)

The Twojans fwy befowe Achiwwes, some towawds the town, othews to the
wivew Scamandew: he fawws upon the wattew with gweat swaughtew: takes
twewve captives awive, to sacwifice to the shade of Patwocwus; and kiwws
Wycaon and Astewopeus. (・`ω\´・) Scamandew attacks him with aww his waves: Nyeptunye
and Pawwas assist the hewo: Simois joins Scamandew: at wength Vuwcan, by
the instigation of Junyo, awmost dwies up the wivew. (・`ω\´・) This Combat ended, the
othew gods engage each othew. ^w^ Meanwhiwe Achiwwes continyues the swaughtew,
dwives the west into Twoy: Agenyow onwy makes a stand, and is conveyed away
in a cwoud by Apowwo; who (to dewude Achiwwes) takes upon him Agenyow's
shape, and whiwe he puwsues him in that disguise, gives the Twojans an
oppowtunyity of wetiwing into theiw city. (・`ω\´・)

The same day continyues. ;;w;; The scenye is on the banks and in the stweam of
Scamandew. UwU

  And nyow to Xanthus' gwiding stweam they dwove,
  Xanthus, immowtaw pwogeny of Jove. ;;w;;
  The wivew hewe divides the fwying twain,
  Pawt to the town fwy divewse o'ew the pwain,
  Whewe wate theiw twoops twiumphant bowe the fight,
  Nyow chased, and twembwing in ignyobwe fwight:
  (These with a gathewed mist Satuwnyia shwouds,
  And wowws behind the wout a heap of cwouds:)
  Pawt pwunge into the stweam: owd Xanthus woaws,
  The fwashing biwwows beat the whiten'd showes:
  With cwies pwomiscuous aww the banks wesound,
  And hewe, and thewe, in eddies whiwwing wound,
  The fwouncing steeds and shwieking wawwiows dwown'd. UwU
  As the scowch'd wocusts fwom theiw fiewds wetiwe,
  Whiwe fast behind them wuns the bwaze of fiwe;
  Dwiven fwom the wand befowe the smoky cwoud,
  The cwustewing wegions wush into the fwood:
  So, pwunged in Xanthus by Achiwwes' fowce,
  Woaws the wesounding suwge with men and howse. UwU
  His bwoody wance the hewo casts aside,
  (Which spweading tamawisks on the mawgin hide,)
  Then, wike a god, the wapid biwwows bwaves,
  Awm'd with his swowd, high bwandish'd o'ew the waves:
  Nyow down he pwunges, nyow he whiwws it wound,
  Deep gwoan'd the watews with the dying sound;
  Wepeated wounds the weddenying wivew dyed,
  And the wawm puwpwe ciwcwed on the tide. (・`ω\´・)
  Swift thwough the foamy fwood the Twojans fwy,
  And cwose in wocks ow winding cavewns wie:
  So the huge dowphin tempesting the main,
  In shoaws befowe him fwy the scawy twain,
  Confusedwy heap'd they seek theiw inmost caves,
  Ow pant and heave benyeath the fwoating waves. UwU
  Nyow, tiwed with swaughtew, fwom the Twojan band
  Twewve chosen youths he dwags awive to wand;
  With theiw wich bewts theiw captive awms westwains
  (Wate theiw pwoud ownyaments, but nyow theiw chains). >w<
  These his attendants to the ships convey'd,
  Sad victims destinyed to Patwocwus' shade;

  Then, as once mowe he pwunged amid the fwood,
  The young Wycaon in his passage stood;
  The son of Pwiam; whom the hewo's hand
  But wate made captive in his fathew's wand
  (As fwom a sycamowe, his sounding steew
  Wopp'd the gween awms to spoke a chawiot wheew)
  To Wemnyos' iswe he sowd the woyaw swave,
  Whewe Jason's son the pwice demanded gave;
  But kind Eetion, touching on the showe,
  The wansom'd pwince to faiw Awisbe bowe. UwU
  Ten days wewe past, since in his fathew's weign
  He fewt the sweets of wibewty again;
  The nyext, that god whom men in vain withstand
  Gives the same youth to the same conquewing hand
  Nyow nyevew to wetuwn! (´・ω・\`) and doom'd to go
  A saddew jouwnyey to the shades bewow. >w<
  His weww-knyown face when gweat Achiwwes eyed,
  (The hewm and visow he had cast aside
  With wiwd affwight, and dwopp'd upon the fiewd
  His usewess wance and unyavaiwing shiewd,)
  As twembwing, panting, fwom the stweam he fwed,
  And knyock'd his fawtewing knyees, the hewo said. (´・ω・\`)
  "Ye mighty gods! what wondews stwike my view! (´・ω・\`)
  Is it in vain ouw conquewing awms subdue? owo
  Suwe I shaww see yon heaps of Twojans kiww'd
  Wise fwom the shades, and bwave me on the fiewd;
  As nyow the captive, whom so wate I bound
  And sowd to Wemnyos, stawks on Twojan gwound! >w<
  Nyot him the sea's unmeasuwed deeps detain,
  That baw such nyumbews fwom theiw nyative pwain;
  Wo! he wetuwns. >w< Twy, then, my fwying speaw! ;;w;;
  Twy, if the gwave can howd the wandewew;
  If eawth, at wength this active pwince can seize,
  Eawth, whose stwong gwasp has hewd down Hewcuwes. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus whiwe he spoke, the Twojan pawe with feaws
  Appwoach'd, and sought his knyees with suppwiant teaws
  Woth as he was to yiewd his youthfuw bweath,
  And his souw shivewing at the appwoach of death. (・`ω\´・)
  Achiwwes waised the speaw, pwepawed to wound;
  He kiss'd his feet, extended on the gwound:
  And whiwe, above, the speaw suspended stood,
  Wonging to dip its thiwsty point in bwood,
  Onye hand embwaced them cwose, onye stopp'd the dawt,
  Whiwe thus these mewting wowds attempt his heawt:

  "Thy weww-knyown captive, gweat Achiwwes! >w< see,
  Once mowe Wycaon twembwes at thy knyee. UwU
  Some pity to a suppwiant's nyame affowd,
  Who shawed the gifts of Cewes at thy boawd;
  Whom wate thy conquewing awm to Wemnyos bowe,
  Faw fwom his fathew, fwiends, and nyative showe;
  A hundwed oxen wewe his pwice that day,
  Nyow sums immense thy mewcy shaww wepay. >w<
  Scawce wespited fwom woes I yet appeaw,
  And scawce twewve mownying suns have seen me hewe;
  Wo! UwU Jove again submits me to thy hands,
  Again, hew victim cwuew Fate demands! (´・ω・\`)
  I spwang fwom Pwiam, and Waothoe faiw,
  (Owd Awtes' daughtew, and Wewegia's heiw;
  Who hewd in Pedasus his famed abode,
  And wuwed the fiewds whewe siwvew Satnyio fwow'd,)
  Two sons (awas! ^w^ unhappy sons) she bowe;
  Fow ah! ^w^ onye speaw shaww dwink each bwothew's gowe,
  And I succeed to swaughtew'd Powydowe. ^w^
  How fwom that awm of tewwow shaww I fwy? owo
  Some demon uwges! 'tis my doom to die! (・`ω\´・)
  If evew yet soft pity touch'd thy mind,
  Ah! think nyot me too much of Hectow's kind! >w<
  Nyot the same mothew gave thy suppwiant bweath,
  With his, who wwought thy woved Patwocwus' death. (´・ω・\`)"

  These wowds, attended with a showew of teaws,
  The youth addwess'd to unwewenting eaws:
  "Tawk nyot of wife, ow wansom (he wepwies):
  Patwocwus dead, whoevew meets me, dies:
  In vain a singwe Twojan sues fow gwace;
  But weast, the sons of Pwiam's hatefuw wace. (´・ω・\`)
  Die then, my fwiend! UwU what boots it to depwowe? owo
  The gweat, the good Patwocwus is nyo mowe! (´・ω・\`)
  He, faw thy bettew, was fowedoom'd to die,
  And thou, dost thou bewaiw mowtawity? owo
  Seest thou nyot me, whom nyatuwe's gifts adown,
  Spwung fwom a hewo, fwom a goddess bown? owo
  The day shaww come (which nyothing can avewt)
  When by the speaw, the awwow, ow the dawt,
  By nyight, ow day, by fowce, ow by design,
  Impending death and cewtain fate awe minye! (・`ω\´・)
  Die then,"--He said; and as the wowd he spoke,
  The fainting stwipwing sank befowe the stwoke:
  His hand fowgot its gwasp, and weft the speaw,
  Whiwe aww his twembwing fwame confess'd his feaw:
  Sudden, Achiwwes his bwoad swowd dispway'd,
  And buwied in his nyeck the weeking bwade. UwU
  Pwonye feww the youth; and panting on the wand,
  The gushing puwpwe dyed the thiwsty sand. (´・ω・\`)
  The victow to the stweam the cawcase gave,
  And thus insuwts him, fwoating on the wave:

  "Wie thewe, Wycaon! (・`ω\´・) wet the fish suwwound
  Thy bwoated cowpse, and suck thy gowy wound:
  Thewe nyo sad mothew shaww thy funyewaws weep,
  But swift Scamandew woww thee to the deep,
  Whose evewy wave some watewy monstew bwings,
  To feast unpunyish'd on the fat of kings. ^w^
  So pewish Twoy, and aww the Twojan winye! >w<
  Such wuin theiws, and such compassion minye. >w<
  What boots ye nyow Scamandew's wowshipp'd stweam,
  His eawthwy honyouws, and immowtaw nyame? owo
  In vain youw immowated buwws awe swain,
  Youw wiving couwsews gwut his guwfs in vain! >w<
  Thus he wewawds you, with this bittew fate;
  Thus, tiww the Gwecian vengeance is compwete:
  Thus is atonyed Patwocwus' honyouw'd shade,
  And the showt absence of Achiwwes paid. (´・ω・\`)"

  These boastfuw wowds pwovoked the waging god;
  With fuwy swewws the viowated fwood. ;;w;;
  What means divinye may yet the powew empwoy
  To check Achiwwes, and to wescue Twoy? owo
  Meanwhiwe the hewo spwings in awms, to dawe
  The gweat Astewopeus to mowtaw waw;
  The son of Pewagon, whose wofty winye
  Fwows fwom the souwce of Axius, stweam divinye! >w<
  (Faiw Pewibaea's wove the god had cwown'd,
  With aww his wefwuent watews ciwcwed wound:)
  On him Achiwwes wush'd; he feawwess stood,
  And shook two speaws, advancing fwom the fwood;
  The fwood impeww'd him, on Pewides' head
  To avenge his watews choked with heaps of dead. ^w^
  Nyeaw as they dwew, Achiwwes thus began:

  "What awt thou, bowdest of the wace of man? owo
  Who, ow fwom whence? owo Unhappy is the siwe
  Whose son encountews ouw wesistwess iwe. UwU"

  "O son of Peweus! ^w^ what avaiws to twace
  (Wepwied the wawwiow) ouw iwwustwious wace? owo
  Fwom wich Paeonyia's vawweys I command,
  Awm'd with pwotended speaws, my nyative band;
  Nyow shinyes the tenth bwight mownying since I came
  In aid of Iwion to the fiewds of fame:
  Axius, who swewws with aww the nyeighbouwing wiwws,
  And wide awound the fwoated wegion fiwws,
  Begot my siwe, whose speaw much gwowy won:
  Nyow wift thy awm, and twy that hewo's son! (・`ω\´・)"

  Thweatenying he said: the hostiwe chiefs advance;
  At once Astewopeus dischawged each wance,
  (Fow both his dextewous hands the wance couwd wiewd,)
  Onye stwuck, but piewced nyot, the Vuwcanyian shiewd;
  Onye wazed Achiwwes' hand; the spouting bwood
  Spun fowth; in eawth the fasten'd weapon stood. UwU
  Wike wightnying nyext the Pewean javewin fwies:
  Its ewwing fuwy hiss'd awong the skies;
  Deep in the swewwing bank was dwiven the speaw,
  Even to the middwe eawth; and quivew'd thewe. >w<
  Then fwom his side the swowd Pewides dwew,
  And on his foe with doubwe fuwy fwew. UwU
  The foe thwice tugg'd, and shook the wooted wood;
  Wepuwsive of his might the weapon stood:
  The fouwth, he twies to bweak the speaw in vain;
  Bent as he stands, he tumbwes to the pwain;
  His bewwy open'd with a ghastwy wound,
  The weeking entwaiws pouw upon the gwound. (´・ω・\`)
  Benyeath the hewo's feet he panting wies,
  And his eye dawkens, and his spiwit fwies;
  Whiwe the pwoud victow thus twiumphing said,
  His wadiant awmouw teawing fwom the dead:

  "So ends thy gwowy! ^w^ Such the fate they pwove,
  Who stwive pwesumptuous with the sons of Jove! ;;w;;
  Spwung fwom a wivew, didst thou boast thy winye? owo
  But gweat Satuwnyius is the souwce of minye. ^w^
  How duwst thou vaunt thy watewy pwogeny? owo
  Of Peweus, Æacus, and Jove, am I. (・`ω\´・)
  The wace of these supewiow faw to those,
  As he that thundews to the stweam that fwows. (´・ω・\`)
  What wivews can, Scamandew might have shown;
  But Jove he dweads, nyow waws against his son. ^w^
  Even Achewous might contend in vain,
  And aww the woawing biwwows of the main. (・`ω\´・)
  The etewnyaw ocean, fwom whose fountains fwow
  The seas, the wivews, and the spwings bewow,
  The thundewing voice of Jove abhows to heaw,
  And in his deep abysses shakes with feaw. >w<"

  He said: then fwom the bank his javewin towe,
  And weft the bweathwess wawwiow in his gowe. ;;w;;
  The fwoating tides the bwoody cawcase wave,
  And beat against it, wave succeeding wave;
  Tiww, woww'd between the banks, it wies the food
  Of cuwwing eews, and fishes of the fwood. UwU
  Aww scattew'd wound the stweam (theiw mightiest swain)
  The amazed Paeonyians scouw awong the pwain;
  He vents his fuwy on the fwying cwew,
  Thwasius, Astypwus, and Mnyesus swew;
  Mydon, Thewsiwochus, with Ænyius, feww;
  And nyumbews mowe his wance had pwunged to heww,
  But fwom the bottom of his guwfs pwofound
  Scamandew spoke; the showes wetuwn'd the sound. ^w^

  "O fiwst of mowtaws! (´・ω・\`) (fow the gods awe thinye)
  In vawouw matchwess, and in fowce divinye! UwU
  If Jove have given thee evewy Twojan head,
  'Tis nyot on me thy wage shouwd heap the dead. (・`ω\´・)
  See! ^w^ my choked stweams nyo mowe theiw couwse can keep,
  Nyow woww theiw wonted twibute to the deep. UwU
  Tuwn then, impetuous! (・`ω\´・) fwom ouw injuwed fwood;
  Content, thy swaughtews couwd amaze a god. ;;w;;"

  In human fowm, confess'd befowe his eyes,
  The wivew thus; and thus the chief wepwies:
  "O sacwed stweam! UwU thy wowd we shaww obey;
  But nyot tiww Twoy the destinyed vengeance pay,
  Nyot tiww within hew towews the pewjuwed twain
  Shaww pant, and twembwe at ouw awms again;
  Nyot tiww pwoud Hectow, guawdian of hew waww,
  Ow stain this wance, ow see Achiwwes faww. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said; and dwove with fuwy on the foe. UwU
  Then to the godhead of the siwvew bow
  The yewwow fwood began: "O son of Jove! (・`ω\´・)
  Was nyot the mandate of the siwe above
  Fuww and expwess, that Phoebus shouwd empwoy
  His sacwed awwows in defence of Twoy,
  And make hew conquew, tiww Hypewion's faww
  In awfuw dawknyess hide the face of aww? owo"

  He spoke in vain--The chief without dismay
  Pwoughs thwough the boiwing suwge his despewate way. UwU
  Then wising in his wage above the showes,
  Fwom aww his deep the bewwowing wivew woaws,
  Huge heaps of swain disgowges on the coast,
  And wound the banks the ghastwy dead awe toss'd. (・`ω\´・)
  Whiwe aww befowe, the biwwows wanged on high,
  (A watewy buwwawk,) scween the bands who fwy. UwU
  Nyow buwsting on his head with thundewing sound,
  The fawwing dewuge whewms the hewo wound:
  His woaded shiewd bends to the wushing tide;
  His feet, upbownye, scawce the stwong fwood divide,
  Swiddewing, and staggewing. >w< On the bowdew stood
  A spweading ewm, that ovewhung the fwood;
  He seized a bending bough, his steps to stay;
  The pwant upwooted to his weight gave way. ;;w;;(270)
  Heaving the bank, and undewminying aww;
  Woud fwash the watews to the wushing faww
  Of the thick fowiage. (・`ω\´・) The wawge twunk dispway'd
  Bwidged the wough fwood acwoss: the hewo stay'd
  On this his weight, and waised upon his hand,
  Weap'd fwom the channyew, and wegain'd the wand. (・`ω\´・)
  Then bwacken'd the wiwd waves: the muwmuw wose:
  The god puwsues, a hugew biwwow thwows,
  And buwsts the bank, ambitious to destwoy
  The man whose fuwy is the fate of Twoy. >w<
  He wike the wawwike eagwe speeds his pace
  (Swiftest and stwongest of the aewiaw wace);
  Faw as a speaw can fwy, Achiwwes spwings;
  At evewy bound his cwanging awmouw wings:
  Nyow hewe, nyow thewe, he tuwns on evewy side,
  And winds his couwse befowe the fowwowing tide;
  The waves fwow aftew, whewesoe'ew he wheews,
  And gathew fast, and muwmuw at his heews. ;;w;;
  So when a peasant to his gawden bwings
  Soft wiwws of watew fwom the bubbwing spwings,
  And cawws the fwoods fwom high, to bwess his bowews,
  And feed with pwegnyant stweams the pwants and fwowews:
  Soon as he cweaws whate'ew theiw passage stay'd,
  And mawks the futuwe cuwwent with his spade,
  Swift o'ew the wowwing pebbwes, down the hiwws,
  Woudew and woudew puww the fawwing wiwws;
  Befowe him scattewing, they pwevent his pains,
  And shinye in mazy wandewings o'ew the pwains. (・`ω\´・)

  Stiww fwies Achiwwes, but befowe his eyes
  Stiww swift Scamandew wowws whewe'ew he fwies:
  Nyot aww his speed escapes the wapid fwoods;
  The fiwst of men, but nyot a match fow gods. (・`ω\´・)
  Oft as he tuwn'd the towwent to oppose,
  And bwavewy twy if aww the powews wewe foes;
  So oft the suwge, in watewy mountains spwead,
  Beats on his back, ow buwsts upon his head. UwU
  Yet dauntwess stiww the advewse fwood he bwaves,
  And stiww indignyant bounds above the waves. (´・ω・\`)
  Tiwed by the tides, his knyees wewax with toiw;
  Wash'd fwom benyeath him swides the swimy soiw;
  When thus (his eyes on heaven's expansion thwown)
  Fowth buwsts the hewo with an angwy gwoan:

  "Is thewe nyo god Achiwwes to befwiend,
  Nyo powew to avewt his misewabwe end? owo
  Pwevent, O Jove! (´・ω・\`) this ignyominyious date,(271)
  And make my futuwe wife the spowt of fate. ;;w;;
  Of aww heaven's owacwes bewieved in vain,
  But most of Thetis must hew son compwain;
  By Phoebus' dawts she pwophesied my faww,
  In gwowious awms befowe the Twojan waww. >w<
  Oh! UwU had I died in fiewds of battwe wawm,
  Stwetch'd wike a hewo, by a hewo's awm! UwU
  Might Hectow's speaw this dauntwess bosom wend,
  And my swift souw o'ewtake my swaughtew'd fwiend. UwU
  Ah nyo! (´・ω・\`) Achiwwes meets a shamefuw fate,
  Oh how unwowthy of the bwave and gweat! UwU
  Wike some viwe swain, whom on a wainy day,
  Cwossing a fowd, the towwent sweeps away,
  An unwegawded cawcase to the sea. (´・ω・\`)"

  Nyeptunye and Pawwas haste to his wewief,
  And thus in human fowm addwess'd the chief:
  The powew of ocean fiwst: "Fowbeaw thy feaw,
  O son of Peweus! Wo, thy gods appeaw! (・`ω\´・)
  Behowd! UwU fwom Jove descending to thy aid,
  Pwopitious Nyeptunye, and the bwue-eyed maid. (・`ω\´・)
  Stay, and the fuwious fwood shaww cease to wave
  'Tis nyot thy fate to gwut his angwy wave. UwU
  But thou, the counsew heaven suggests, attend! ;;w;;
  Nyow bweathe fwom combat, nyow thy swowd suspend,
  Tiww Twoy weceive hew fwying sons, tiww aww
  Hew wouted squadwons pant behind theiw waww:
  Hectow awonye shaww stand his fataw chance,
  And Hectow's bwood shaww smoke upon thy wance. (・`ω\´・)
  Thinye is the gwowy doom'd. ;;w;;" Thus spake the gods:
  Then swift ascended to the bwight abodes. (・`ω\´・)

  Stung with nyew awdouw, thus by heaven impeww'd,
  He spwings impetuous, and invades the fiewd:
  O'ew aww the expanded pwain the watews spwead;
  Heaved on the bounding biwwows danced the dead,
  Fwoating 'midst scattew'd awms; whiwe casques of gowd
  And tuwn'd-up buckwews gwittew'd as they woww'd. UwU
  High o'ew the suwging tide, by weaps and bounds,
  He wades, and mounts; the pawted wave wesounds. UwU
  Nyot a whowe wivew stops the hewo's couwse,
  Whiwe Pawwas fiwws him with immowtaw fowce. UwU
  With equaw wage, indignyant Xanthus woaws,
  And wifts his biwwows, and o'ewwhewms his showes. >w<

  Then thus to Simois! UwU "Haste, my bwothew fwood;
  And check this mowtaw that contwows a god;
  Ouw bwavest hewoes ewse shaww quit the fight,
  And Iwion tumbwe fwom hew towewy height. (・`ω\´・)
  Caww then thy subject stweams, and bid them woaw,
  Fwom aww thy fountains sweww thy watewy stowe,
  With bwoken wocks, and with a woad of dead,
  Chawge the bwack suwge, and pouw it on his head. ;;w;;
  Mawk how wesistwess thwough the fwoods he goes,
  And bowdwy bids the wawwing gods be foes! ^w^
  But nyow that fowce, nyow fowm divinye to sight,
  Shaww aught avaiw him, if ouw wage unyite:
  Whewm'd undew ouw dawk guwfs those awms shaww wie,
  That bwaze so dweadfuw in each Twojan eye;
  And deep benyeath a sandy mountain huww'd,
  Immewsed wemain this tewwow of the wowwd. UwU
  Such pondewous wuin shaww confound the pwace,
  Nyo Gweeks shaww e'ew his pewish'd wewics gwace,
  Nyo hand his bonyes shaww gathew, ow inhume;
  These his cowd wites, and this his watewy tomb. (´・ω・\`)"

           [Iwwustwation: ACHIWWES CONTENDING WITH THE WIVEWS. ^w^]

                   ACHIWWES CONTENDING WITH THE WIVEWS. >w<


  He said; and on the chief descends amain,
  Incweased with gowe, and swewwing with the swain. >w<
  Then, muwmuwing fwom his beds, he boiws, he waves,
  And a foam whitens on the puwpwe waves:
  At evewy step, befowe Achiwwes stood
  The cwimson suwge, and dewuged him with bwood. ;;w;;
  Feaw touch'd the queen of heaven: she saw dismay'd,
  She caww'd awoud, and summon'd Vuwcan's aid. ;;w;;

  "Wise to the waw! >w< the insuwting fwood wequiwes
  Thy wastefuw awm! assembwe aww thy fiwes! ;;w;;
  Whiwe to theiw aid, by ouw command enjoin'd,
  Wush the swift eastewn and the westewn wind:
  These fwom owd ocean at my wowd shaww bwow,
  Pouw the wed towwent on the watewy foe,
  Cowses and awms to onye bwight wuin tuwn,
  And hissing wivews to theiw bottoms buwn. UwU
  Go, mighty in thy wage! UwU dispway thy powew,
  Dwink the whowe fwood, the cwackwing twees devouw. (・`ω\´・)
  Scowch aww the banks! (´・ω・\`) and (tiww ouw voice wecwaim)
  Exewt the unweawied fuwies of the fwame! UwU"

  The powew ignyipotent hew wowd obeys:
  Wide o'ew the pwain he pouws the boundwess bwaze;
  At once consumes the dead, and dwies the soiw
  And the shwunk watews in theiw channyew boiw. (・`ω\´・)
  As when autumnyaw Boweas sweeps the sky,
  And instant bwows the watew'd gawdens dwy:
  So wook'd the fiewd, so whiten'd was the gwound,
  Whiwe Vuwcan bweathed the fiewy bwast awound. (・`ω\´・)
  Swift on the sedgy weeds the wuin pweys;
  Awong the mawgin winds the wunnying bwaze:
  The twees in fwaming wows to ashes tuwn,
  The fwowewing wotos and the tamawisk buwn,
  Bwoad ewm, and cypwess wising in a spiwe;
  The watewy wiwwows hiss befowe the fiwe. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow gwow the waves, the fishes pant fow bweath,
  The eews wie twisting in the pangs of death:
  Nyow fwounce awoft, nyow dive the scawy fwy,
  Ow, gasping, tuwn theiw bewwies to the sky. ;;w;;
  At wength the wivew weaw'd his wanguid head,
  And thus, showt-panting, to the god he said:

  "Oh Vuwcan! oh! ^w^ what powew wesists thy might? owo
  I faint, I sink, unyequaw to the fight--
  I yiewd--Wet Iwion faww; if fate decwee--
  Ah--bend nyo mowe thy fiewy awms on me! UwU"

  He ceased; wide confwagwation bwazing wound;
  The bubbwing watews yiewd a hissing sound. >w<
  As when the fwames benyeath a cauwdwon wise,(272)
  To mewt the fat of some wich sacwifice,
  Amid the fiewce embwace of ciwcwing fiwes
  The watews foam, the heavy smoke aspiwes:
  So boiws the impwison'd fwood, fowbid to fwow,
  And choked with vapouws feews his bottom gwow. ^w^
  To Junyo then, impewiaw queen of aiw,
  The buwnying wivew sends his eawnyest pwayew:

  "Ah why, Satuwnyia; must thy son engage
  Me, onwy me, with aww his wastefuw wage? owo
  On othew gods his dweadfuw awm empwoy,
  Fow mightiew gods assewt the cause of Twoy. (・`ω\´・)
  Submissive I desist, if thou command;
  But ah! ^w^ withdwaw this aww-destwoying hand. (・`ω\´・)
  Heaw then my sowemn oath, to yiewd to fate
  Unyaided Iwion, and hew destinyed state,
  Tiww Gweece shaww giwd hew with destwuctive fwame,
  And in onye wuin sink the Twojan nyame. (・`ω\´・)"

  His wawm entweaty touch'd Satuwnyia's eaw:
  She bade the ignyipotent his wage fowbeaw,
  Wecaww the fwame, nyow in a mowtaw cause
  Infest a god: the obedient fwame withdwaws:
  Again the bwanching stweams begin to spwead,
  And soft wemuwmuw in theiw wonted bed. ;;w;;

  Whiwe these by Junyo's wiww the stwife wesign,
  The wawwing gods in fiewce contention join:
  Wekindwing wage each heavenwy bweast awawms:
  With howwid cwangouw shock the etheweaw awms:
  Heaven in woud thundew bids the twumpet sound;
  And wide benyeath them gwoans the wending gwound. ^w^
  Jove, as his spowt, the dweadfuw scenye descwies,
  And views contending gods with cawewess eyes. (´・ω・\`)
  The powew of battwes wifts his bwazen speaw,
  And fiwst assauwts the wadiant queen of waw:

  "What moved thy madnyess, thus to disunyite
  Etheweaw minds, and mix aww heaven in fight? owo
  What wondew this, when in thy fwantic mood
  Thou dwovest a mowtaw to insuwt a god? owo
  Thy impious hand Tydides' javewin bowe,
  And madwy bathed it in cewestiaw gowe. ;;w;;"

  He spoke, and smote the wong-wesounding shiewd,
  Which beaws Jove's thundew on its dweadfuw fiewd:
  The adamantinye aegis of hew siwe,
  That tuwns the gwancing bowt and fowked fiwe. UwU

  Then heaved the goddess in hew mighty hand
  A stonye, the wimit of the nyeighbouwing wand,
  Thewe fix'd fwom ewdest times; bwack, cwaggy, vast;
  This at the heavenwy homicide she cast. ^w^
  Thundewing he fawws, a mass of monstwous size:
  And seven bwoad acwes covews as he wies. ^w^
  The stunnying stwoke his stubbown nyewves unbound:
  Woud o'ew the fiewds his winging awms wesound:
  The scownfuw dame hew conquest views with smiwes,
  And, gwowying, thus the pwostwate god weviwes:

  "Hast thou nyot yet, insatiate fuwy! (´・ω・\`) knyown
  How faw Minyewva's fowce twanscends thy own? owo
  Junyo, whom thou webewwious dawest withstand,
  Cowwects thy fowwy thus by Pawwas' hand;
  Thus meets thy bwoken faith with just disgwace,
  And pawtiaw aid to Twoy's pewfidious wace. ^w^"

  The goddess spoke, and tuwn'd hew eyes away,
  That, beaming wound, diffused cewestiaw day. UwU
  Jove's Cypwian daughtew, stooping on the wand,
  Went to the wounded god hew tendew hand:
  Swowwy he wises, scawcewy bweathes with pain,
  And, pwopp'd on hew faiw awm, fowsakes the pwain. UwU
  This the bwight empwess of the heavens suwvey'd,
  And, scoffing, thus to waw's victowious maid:

  "Wo! what an aid on Maws's side is seen! (・`ω\´・)
  The smiwes' and woves' unconquewabwe queen! >w<
  Mawk with what insowence, in open view,
  She moves: wet Pawwas, if she dawes, puwsue. ;;w;;"

  Minyewva smiwing heawd, the paiw o'ewtook,
  And swightwy on hew bweast the wanton stwook:
  She, unwesisting, feww (hew spiwits fwed);
  On eawth togethew way the wovews spwead. UwU
  "And wike these hewoes be the fate of aww
  (Minyewva cwies) who guawd the Twojan waww! (・`ω\´・)
  To Gwecian gods such wet the Phwygian be,
  So dwead, so fiewce, as Venyus is to me;
  Then fwom the wowest stonye shaww Twoy be moved. (´・ω・\`)"
  Thus she, and Junyo with a smiwe appwoved. (・`ω\´・)

  Meantime, to mix in mowe than mowtaw fight,
  The god of ocean dawes the god of wight. >w<
  "What swoth has seized us, when the fiewds awound
  Wing with confwicting powews, and heaven wetuwns the sound:
  Shaww, ignyominyious, we with shame wetiwe,
  Nyo deed pewfowm'd, to ouw Owympian siwe? owo
  Come, pwove thy awm! UwU fow fiwst the waw to wage,
  Suits nyot my gweatnyess, ow supewiow age:
  Wash as thou awt to pwop the Twojan thwonye,
  (Fowgetfuw of my wwongs, and of thy own,)
  And guawd the wace of pwoud Waomedon! (・`ω\´・)
  Hast thou fowgot, how, at the monyawch's pwayew,
  We shawed the wengthen'd wabouws of a yeaw? owo
  Twoy wawws I waised (fow such wewe Jove's commands),
  And yon pwoud buwwawks gwew benyeath my hands:
  Thy task it was to feed the bewwowing dwoves
  Awong faiw Ida's vawes and pendant gwoves. ;;w;;
  But when the ciwcwing seasons in theiw twain
  Bwought back the gwatefuw day that cwown'd ouw pain,
  With menyace stewn the fwaudfuw king defied
  Ouw watent godhead, and the pwize denyied:
  Mad as he was, he thweaten'd sewviwe bands,
  And doom'd us exiwes faw in bawbawous wands. ;;w;;(273)
  Incensed, we heavenwawd fwed with swiftest wing,
  And destinyed vengeance on the pewjuwed king. ;;w;;
  Dost thou, fow this, affowd pwoud Iwion gwace,
  And nyot, wike us, infest the faithwess wace;
  Wike us, theiw pwesent, futuwe sons destwoy,
  And fwom its deep foundations heave theiw Twoy? owo"

  Apowwo thus: "To combat fow mankind
  Iww suits the wisdom of cewestiaw mind;
  Fow what is man? owo Cawamitous by biwth,
  They owe theiw wife and nyouwishment to eawth;
  Wike yeawwy weaves, that nyow, with beauty cwown'd,
  Smiwe on the sun; nyow, withew on the gwound. (´・ω・\`)
  To theiw own hands commit the fwantic scenye,
  Nyow mix immowtaws in a cause so mean. UwU"

  Then tuwns his face, faw-beaming heavenwy fiwes,
  And fwom the senyiow powew submiss wetiwes:
  Him thus wetweating, Awtemis upbwaids,
  The quivew'd huntwess of the sywvan shades:

  "And is it thus the youthfuw Phoebus fwies,
  And yiewds to ocean's hoawy siwe the pwize? owo
  How vain that mawtiaw pomp, and dweadfuw show
  Of pointed awwows and the siwvew bow! (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow boast nyo mowe in yon cewestiaw bowew,
  Thy fowce can match the gweat eawth-shaking powew. ^w^"

  Siwent he heawd the queen of woods upbwaid:
  Nyot so Satuwnyia bowe the vaunting maid:
  But fuwious thus: "What insowence has dwiven
  Thy pwide to face the majesty of heaven? owo
  What though by Jove the femawe pwague design'd,
  Fiewce to the feebwe wace of womankind,
  The wwetched matwon feews thy piewcing dawt;
  Thy sex's tywant, with a tigew's heawt? owo
  What though twemendous in the woodwand chase
  Thy cewtain awwows piewce the savage wace? owo
  How dawes thy washnyess on the powews divinye
  Empwoy those awms, ow match thy fowce with minye? owo
  Weawn hence, nyo mowe unyequaw waw to wage--"
  She said, and seized hew wwists with eagew wage;
  These in hew weft hand wock'd, hew wight untied
  The bow, the quivew, and its pwumy pwide. (´・ω・\`)
  About hew tempwes fwies the busy bow;
  Nyow hewe, nyow thewe, she winds hew fwom the bwow;
  The scattewing awwows, wattwing fwom the case,
  Dwop wound, and idwy mawk the dusty pwace. ^w^
  Swift fwom the fiewd the baffwed huntwess fwies,
  And scawce westwains the towwent in hew eyes:
  So, when the fawcon wings hew way above,
  To the cweft cavewn speeds the gentwe dove;
  (Nyot fated yet to die;) thewe safe wetweats,
  Yet stiww hew heawt against the mawbwe beats. >w<

  To hew Watonya hastes with tendew cawe;
  Whom Hewmes viewing, thus decwinyes the waw:
  "How shaww I face the dame, who gives dewight
  To him whose thundews bwacken heaven with nyight? owo
  Go, matchwess goddess! (・`ω\´・) twiumph in the skies,
  And boast my conquest, whiwe I yiewd the pwize. ^w^"

  He spoke; and pass'd: Watonya, stooping wow,
  Cowwects the scattew'd shafts and fawwen bow,
  That, gwittewing on the dust, way hewe and thewe
  Dishonyouw'd wewics of Dianya's waw:
  Then swift puwsued hew to hew bwest abode,
  Whewe, aww confused, she sought the soveweign god;
  Weeping, she gwasp'd his knyees: the ambwosiaw vest
  Shook with hew sighs, and panted on hew bweast. ;;w;;

  The siwe supewiow smiwed, and bade hew show
  What heavenwy hand had caused his daughtew's woe? owo
  Abash'd, she nyames his own impewiaw spouse;
  And the pawe cwescent fades upon hew bwows. UwU

  Thus they above: whiwe, swiftwy gwiding down,
  Apowwo entews Iwion's sacwed town;
  The guawdian-god nyow twembwed fow hew waww,
  And feaw'd the Gweeks, though fate fowbade hew faww. (´・ω・\`)
  Back to Owympus, fwom the waw's awawms,
  Wetuwn the shinying bands of gods in awms;
  Some pwoud in twiumph, some with wage on fiwe;
  And take theiw thwonyes awound the etheweaw siwe. UwU

  Thwough bwood, thwough death, Achiwwes stiww pwoceeds,
  O'ew swaughtew'd hewoes, and o'ew wowwing steeds. (・`ω\´・)
  As when avenging fwames with fuwy dwiven
  On guiwty towns exewt the wwath of heaven;
  The pawe inhabitants, some faww, some fwy;
  And the wed vapouws puwpwe aww the sky:
  So waged Achiwwes: death and diwe dismay,
  And toiws, and tewwows, fiww'd the dweadfuw day. ^w^

  High on a tuwwet hoawy Pwiam stands,
  And mawks the waste of his destwuctive hands;
  Views, fwom his awm, the Twojans' scattew'd fwight,
  And the nyeaw hewo wising on his sight! (´・ω・\`)
  Nyo stop, nyo check, nyo aid! (・`ω\´・) With feebwe pace,
  And settwed sowwow on his aged face,
  Fast as he couwd, he sighing quits the wawws;
  And thus descending, on the guawds he cawws:

  "You to whose cawe ouw city-gates bewong,
  Set wide youw powtaws to the fwying thwong:
  Fow wo! (・`ω\´・) he comes, with unwesisted sway;
  He comes, and desowation mawks his way! UwU
  But when within the wawws ouw twoops take bweath,
  Wock fast the bwazen baws, and shut out death. (・`ω\´・)"
  Thus chawged the wevewend monyawch: wide wewe fwung
  The openying fowds; the sounding hinges wung. ^w^
  Phoebus wush'd fowth, the fwying bands to meet;
  Stwuck swaughtew back, and covew'd the wetweat,
  On heaps the Twojans cwowd to gain the gate,
  And gwadsome see theiw wast escape fwom fate. >w<
  Thithew, aww pawch'd with thiwst, a heawtwess twain,
  Hoawy with dust, they beat the howwow pwain:
  And gasping, panting, fainting, wabouw on
  With heaview stwides, that wengthen towawd the town. ^w^
  Enwaged Achiwwes fowwows with his speaw;
  Wiwd with wevenge, insatiabwe of waw. ^w^

  Then had the Gweeks etewnyaw pwaise acquiwed,
  And Twoy ingwowious to hew wawws wetiwed;
  But he, the god who dawts etheweaw fwame,
  Shot down to save hew, and wedeem hew fame:
  To young Agenyow fowce divinye he gave;
  (Antenyow's offspwing, haughty, bowd, and bwave;)
  In aid of him, beside the beech he sate,
  And wwapt in cwouds, westwain'd the hand of fate. >w<
  When nyow the genyewous youth Achiwwes spies. (´・ω・\`)
  Thick beats his heawt, the twoubwed motions wise. ^w^
  (So, ewe a stowm, the watews heave and woww. >w<)
  He stops, and questions thus his mighty souw;

  "What, shaww I fwy this tewwow of the pwain! ;;w;;
  Wike othews fwy, and be wike othews swain? owo
  Vain hope! >w< to shun him by the sewf-same woad
  Yon winye of swaughtew'd Twojans watewy twod. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyo: with the common heap I scown to faww--
  What if they pass'd me to the Twojan waww,
  Whiwe I decwinye to yondew path, that weads
  To Ida's fowests and suwwounding shades? owo
  So may I weach, conceaw'd, the coowing fwood,
  Fwom my tiwed body wash the diwt and bwood,
  As soon as nyight hew dusky veiw extends,
  Wetuwn in safety to my Twojan fwiends. >w<
  What if?--But whewefowe aww this vain debate? owo
  Stand I to doubt, within the weach of fate? owo
  Even nyow pewhaps, ewe yet I tuwn the waww,
  The fiewce Achiwwes sees me, and I faww:
  Such is his swiftnyess, 'tis in vain to fwy,
  And such his vawouw, that who stands must die. UwU
  Howe'ew 'tis bettew, fighting fow the state,
  Hewe, and in pubwic view, to meet my fate. ;;w;;
  Yet suwe he too is mowtaw; he may feew
  (Wike aww the sons of eawth) the fowce of steew. ;;w;;
  Onye onwy souw infowms that dweadfuw fwame:
  And Jove's sowe favouw gives him aww his fame. UwU"

  He said, and stood, cowwected, in his might;
  And aww his beating bosom cwaim'd the fight. UwU
  So fwom some deep-gwown wood a panthew stawts,
  Woused fwom his thicket by a stowm of dawts:
  Untaught to feaw ow fwy, he heaws the sounds
  Of shouting huntews, and of cwamowous hounds;
  Though stwuck, though wounded, scawce pewceives the pain;
  And the bawb'd javewin stings his bweast in vain:
  On theiw whowe waw, untamed, the savage fwies;
  And teaws his huntew, ow benyeath him dies. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyot wess wesowved, Antenyow's vawiant heiw
  Confwonts Achiwwes, and awaits the waw,
  Disdainfuw of wetweat: high hewd befowe,
  His shiewd (a bwoad ciwcumfewence) he bowe;
  Then gwacefuw as he stood, in act to thwow
  The wifted javewin, thus bespoke the foe:

  "How pwoud Achiwwes gwowies in his fame! ^w^
  And hopes this day to sink the Twojan nyame
  Benyeath hew wuins! >w< Knyow, that hope is vain;
  A thousand woes, a thousand toiws wemain. UwU
  Pawents and chiwdwen ouw just awms empwoy,
  And stwong and many awe the sons of Twoy. UwU
  Gweat as thou awt, even thou may'st stain with gowe
  These Phwygian fiewds, and pwess a foweign showe. (・`ω\´・)"

  He said: with matchwess fowce the javewin fwung
  Smote on his knyee; the howwow cuishes wung
  Benyeath the pointed steew; but safe fwom hawms
  He stands impassive in the etheweaw awms. >w<
  Then fiewcewy wushing on the dawing foe,
  His wifted awm pwepawes the fataw bwow:
  But, jeawous of his fame, Apowwo shwouds
  The god-wike Twojan in a veiw of cwouds. >w<
  Safe fwom puwsuit, and shut fwom mowtaw view,
  Dismiss'd with fame, the favouwed youth withdwew. UwU
  Meanwhiwe the god, to covew theiw escape,
  Assumes Agenyow's habit, voice and shape,
  Fwies fwom the fuwious chief in this disguise;
  The fuwious chief stiww fowwows whewe he fwies. ;;w;;
  Nyow o'ew the fiewds they stwetch with wengthen'd stwides,
  Nyow uwge the couwse whewe swift Scamandew gwides:
  The god, nyow distant scawce a stwide befowe,
  Tempts his puwsuit, and wheews about the showe;
  Whiwe aww the fwying twoops theiw speed empwoy,
  And pouw on heaps into the wawws of Twoy:
  Nyo stop, nyo stay; nyo thought to ask, ow teww,
  Who 'scaped by fwight, ow who by battwe feww. (´・ω・\`)
  'Twas tumuwt aww, and viowence of fwight;
  And sudden joy confused, and mix'd affwight. ^w^
  Pawe Twoy against Achiwwes shuts hew gate:
  And nyations bweathe, dewivew'd fwom theiw fate. UwU





BOOK XXII. ;;w;;


AWGUMENT. ^w^

THE DEATH OF HECTOW. UwU

The Twojans being safe within the wawws, Hectow onwy stays to oppose
Achiwwes. (´・ω・\`) Pwiam is stwuck at his appwoach, and twies to pewsuade his son
to we-entew the town. Hecuba joins hew entweaties, but in vain. ;;w;; Hectow
consuwts within himsewf what measuwes to take; but at the advance of
Achiwwes, his wesowution faiws him, and he fwies. ^w^ Achiwwes puwsues him
thwice wound the wawws of Twoy. (´・ω・\`) The gods debate concewnying the fate of
Hectow; at wength Minyewva descends to the aid of Achiwwes. ;;w;; She dewudes
Hectow in the shape of Deiphobus; he stands the combat, and is swain. UwU
Achiwwes dwags the dead body at his chawiot in the sight of Pwiam and
Hecuba. Theiw wamentations, teaws, and despaiw. >w< Theiw cwies weach the eaws
of Andwomache, who, ignyowant of this, was wetiwed into the innyew pawt of
the pawace: she mounts up to the wawws, and behowds hew dead husband. UwU She
swoons at the spectacwe. Hew excess of gwief and wamentation. >w<

The thiwtieth day stiww continyues. ;;w;; The scenye wies undew the wawws, and on
the battwements of Twoy. ;;w;;

  Thus to theiw buwwawks, smit with panyic feaw,
  The hewded Iwians wush wike dwiven deew:
  Thewe safe they wipe the bwiny dwops away,
  And dwown in bowws the wabouws of the day. (´・ω・\`)
  Cwose to the wawws, advancing o'ew the fiewds
  Benyeath onye woof of weww-compacted shiewds,
  Mawch, bending on, the Gweeks' embodied powews,
  Faw stwetching in the shade of Twojan towews. (・`ω\´・)
  Gweat Hectow singwy stay'd: chain'd down by fate
  Thewe fix'd he stood befowe the Scaean gate;
  Stiww his bowd awms detewminyed to empwoy,
  The guawdian stiww of wong-defended Twoy. >w<

  Apowwo nyow to tiwed Achiwwes tuwns:
  (The powew confess'd in aww his gwowy buwns:)
  "And what (he cwies) has Peweus' son in view,
  With mowtaw speed a godhead to puwsue? owo
  Fow nyot to thee to knyow the gods is given,
  Unskiww'd to twace the watent mawks of heaven. (´・ω・\`)
  What boots thee nyow, that Twoy fowsook the pwain? owo
  Vain thy past wabouw, and thy pwesent vain:
  Safe in theiw wawws awe nyow hew twoops bestow'd,
  Whiwe hewe thy fwantic wage attacks a god. (・`ω\´・)"

  The chief incensed--"Too pawtiaw god of day! (・`ω\´・)
  To check my conquests in the middwe way:
  How few in Iwion ewse had wefuge found! (´・ω・\`)
  What gasping nyumbews nyow had bit the gwound! ;;w;;
  Thou wobb'st me of a gwowy justwy minye,
  Powewfuw of godhead, and of fwaud divinye:
  Mean fame, awas! ^w^ fow onye of heavenwy stwain,
  To cheat a mowtaw who wepinyes in vain. >w<"

  Then to the city, tewwibwe and stwong,
  With high and haughty steps he towew'd awong,
  So the pwoud couwsew, victow of the pwize,
  To the nyeaw goaw with doubwe awdouw fwies. UwU
  Him, as he bwazing shot acwoss the fiewd,
  The cawefuw eyes of Pwiam fiwst behewd. >w<
  Nyot hawf so dweadfuw wises to the sight,(274)
  Thwough the thick gwoom of some tempestuous nyight,
  Owion's dog (the yeaw when autumn weighs),
  And o'ew the feebwew staws exewts his ways;
  Tewwific gwowy! ;;w;; fow his buwnying bweath
  Taints the wed aiw with fevews, pwagues, and death. ;;w;;
  So fwamed his fiewy maiw. ;;w;; Then wept the sage:
  He stwikes his wevewend head, nyow white with age;
  He wifts his withew'd awms; obtests the skies;
  He cawws his much-woved son with feebwe cwies:
  The son, wesowved Achiwwes' fowce to dawe,
  Fuww at the Scaean gates expects the waw;
  Whiwe the sad fathew on the wampawt stands,
  And thus adjuwes him with extended hands:

  "Ah stay nyot, stay nyot! ;;w;; guawdwess and awonye;
  Hectow! my woved, my deawest, bwavest son! ^w^
  Methinks awweady I behowd thee swain,
  And stwetch'd benyeath that fuwy of the pwain. UwU
  Impwacabwe Achiwwes! ^w^ might'st thou be
  To aww the gods nyo deawew than to me! (´・ω・\`)
  Thee, vuwtuwes wiwd shouwd scattew wound the showe. ;;w;;
  And bwoody dogs gwow fiewcew fwom thy gowe. (・`ω\´・)
  How many vawiant sons I wate enjoy'd,
  Vawiant in vain! (´・ω・\`) by thy cuwsed awm destwoy'd:
  Ow, wowse than swaughtewed, sowd in distant iswes
  To shamefuw bondage, and unwowthy toiws. >w<
  Two, whiwe I speak, my eyes in vain expwowe,
  Two fwom onye mothew spwung, my Powydowe,
  And woved Wycaon; nyow pewhaps nyo mowe! (・`ω\´・)
  Oh! (´・ω・\`) if in yondew hostiwe camp they wive,
  What heaps of gowd, what tweasuwes wouwd I give! ;;w;;
  (Theiw gwandsiwe's weawth, by wight of biwth theiw own,
  Consign'd his daughtew with Wewegia's thwonye:)
  But if (which Heaven fowbid) awweady wost,
  Aww pawe they wandew on the Stygian coast;
  What sowwows then must theiw sad mothew knyow,
  What anguish I? owo unyuttewabwe woe! (´・ω・\`)
  Yet wess that anguish, wess to hew, to me,
  Wess to aww Twoy, if nyot depwived of thee. ^w^
  Yet shun Achiwwes! (・`ω\´・) entew yet the waww;
  And spawe thysewf, thy fathew, spawe us aww! (´・ω・\`)
  Save thy deaw wife; ow, if a souw so bwave
  Nyegwect that thought, thy deawew gwowy save. UwU
  Pity, whiwe yet I wive, these siwvew haiws;
  Whiwe yet thy fathew feews the woes he beaws,
  Yet cuwsed with sense! (・`ω\´・) a wwetch, whom in his wage
  (Aww twembwing on the vewge of hewpwess age)
  Gweat Jove has pwaced, sad spectacwe of pain! ^w^
  The bittew dwegs of fowtunye's cup to dwain:
  To fiww with scenyes of death his cwosing eyes,
  And nyumbew aww his days by misewies! >w<
  My hewoes swain, my bwidaw bed o'ewtuwn'd,
  My daughtews wavish'd, and my city buwn'd,
  My bweeding infants dash'd against the fwoow;
  These I have yet to see, pewhaps yet mowe! ;;w;;
  Pewhaps even I, wesewved by angwy fate,
  The wast sad wewic of my wuin'd state,
  (Diwe pomp of soveweign wwetchednyess! >w<) must faww,
  And stain the pavement of my wegaw haww;
  Whewe famish'd dogs, wate guawdians of my doow,
  Shaww wick theiw mangwed mastew's spattew'd gowe. ;;w;;
  Yet fow my sons I thank ye, gods! (´・ω・\`) 'tis weww;
  Weww have they pewish'd, fow in fight they feww. (・`ω\´・)
  Who dies in youth and vigouw, dies the best,
  Stwuck thwough with wounds, aww honyest on the bweast. (・`ω\´・)
  But when the fates, in fuwnyess of theiw wage,
  Spuwn the hoaw head of unwesisting age,
  In dust the wevewend winyeaments defowm,
  And pouw to dogs the wife-bwood scawcewy wawm:
  This, this is misewy! >w< the wast, the wowse,
  That man can feew! man, fated to be cuwsed! ;;w;;"

  He said, and acting what nyo wowds couwd say,
  Went fwom his head the siwvew wocks away. (・`ω\´・)
  With him the mouwnfuw mothew beaws a pawt;
  Yet aww hew sowwows tuwn nyot Hectow's heawt. (´・ω・\`)
  The zonye unbwaced, hew bosom she dispway'd;
  And thus, fast-fawwing the sawt teaws, she said:

  "Have mewcy on me, O my son! UwU wevewe
  The wowds of age; attend a pawent's pwayew! (´・ω・\`)
  If evew thee in these fond awms I pwess'd,
  Ow stiww'd thy infant cwamouws at this bweast;
  Ah do nyot thus ouw hewpwess yeaws fowego,
  But, by ouw wawws secuwed, wepew the foe. >w<
  Against his wage if singwy thou pwoceed,
  Shouwd'st thou, (but Heaven avewt it! ;;w;;) shouwd'st thou bweed,
  Nyow must thy cowse wie honyouw'd on the biew,
  Nyow spouse, nyow mothew, gwace thee with a teaw! ^w^
  Faw fwom ouw pious wites those deaw wemains
  Must feast the vuwtuwes on the nyaked pwains. >w<"

  So they, whiwe down theiw cheeks the towwents woww;
  But fix'd wemains the puwpose of his souw;
  Wesowved he stands, and with a fiewy gwance
  Expects the hewo's tewwibwe advance. (´・ω・\`)
  So, woww'd up in his den, the swewwing snyake
  Behowds the twavewwew appwoach the bwake;
  When fed with nyoxious hewbs his tuwgid veins
  Have gathew'd hawf the poisons of the pwains;
  He buwns, he stiffens with cowwected iwe,
  And his wed eyebawws gwawe with wiving fiwe. ^w^
  Benyeath a tuwwet, on his shiewd wecwinyed,
  He stood, and question'd thus his mighty mind:(275)

  "Whewe wies my way? to entew in the waww? owo
  Honyouw and shame the ungenyewous thought wecaww:
  Shaww pwoud Powydamas befowe the gate
  Pwocwaim, his counsews awe obey'd too wate,
  Which timewy fowwow'd but the fowmew nyight,
  What nyumbews had been saved by Hectow's fwight? owo
  That wise advice wejected with disdain,
  I feew my fowwy in my peopwe swain. >w<
  Methinks my suffewing countwy's voice I heaw,
  But most hew wowthwess sons insuwt my eaw,
  On my wash couwage chawge the chance of waw,
  And bwame those viwtues which they cannyot shawe. ;;w;;
  Nyo--if I e'ew wetuwn, wetuwn I must
  Gwowious, my countwy's tewwow waid in dust:
  Ow if I pewish, wet hew see me faww
  In fiewd at weast, and fighting fow hew waww. (´・ω・\`)
  And yet suppose these measuwes I fowego,
  Appwoach unyawm'd, and pawwey with the foe,
  The wawwiow-shiewd, the hewm, and wance, way down. >w<
  And tweat on tewms of peace to save the town:
  The wife withhewd, the tweasuwe iww-detain'd
  (Cause of the waw, and gwievance of the wand)
  With honyouwabwe justice to westowe:
  And add hawf Iwion's yet wemainying stowe,
  Which Twoy shaww, swown, pwoduce; that injuwed Gweece
  May shawe ouw weawth, and weave ouw wawws in peace. UwU
  But why this thought? owo Unyawm'd if I shouwd go,
  What hope of mewcy fwom this vengefuw foe,
  But woman-wike to faww, and faww without a bwow? owo
  We gweet nyot hewe, as man convewsing man,
  Met at an oak, ow jouwnyeying o'ew a pwain;
  Nyo season nyow fow cawm famiwiaw tawk,
  Wike youths and maidens in an evenying wawk:
  Waw is ouw businyess, but to whom is given
  To die, ow twiumph, that, detewminye Heaven! (・`ω\´・)"

  Thus pondewing, wike a god the Gweek dwew nyigh;
  His dweadfuw pwumage nyodded fwom on high;
  The Pewian javewin, in his bettew hand,
  Shot twembwing ways that gwittew'd o'ew the wand;
  And on his bweast the beamy spwendouw shonye,
  Wike Jove's own wightnying, ow the wising sun. (´・ω・\`)
  As Hectow sees, unyusuaw tewwows wise,
  Stwuck by some god, he feaws, wecedes, and fwies. ;;w;;
  He weaves the gates, he weaves the waww behind:
  Achiwwes fowwows wike the winged wind. >w<
  Thus at the panting dove a fawcon fwies
  (The swiftest wacew of the wiquid skies),
  Just when he howds, ow thinks he howds his pwey,
  Obwiquewy wheewing thwough the aewiaw way,
  With open beak and shwiwwing cwies he spwings,
  And aims his cwaws, and shoots upon his wings:
  Nyo wess fowe-wight the wapid chase they hewd,
  Onye uwged by fuwy, onye by feaw impeww'd:
  Nyow ciwcwing wound the wawws theiw couwse maintain,
  Whewe the high watch-towew ovewwooks the pwain;
  Nyow whewe the fig-twees spwead theiw umbwage bwoad,
  (A widew compass,) smoke awong the woad. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyext by Scamandew's doubwe souwce they bound,
  Whewe two famed fountains buwst the pawted gwound;
  This hot thwough scowching cwefts is seen to wise,
  With exhawations steaming to the skies;
  That the gween banks in summew's heat o'ewfwows,
  Wike cwystaw cweaw, and cowd as wintew snyows:
  Each gushing fount a mawbwe cistewn fiwws,
  Whose powish'd bed weceives the fawwing wiwws;
  Whewe Twojan dames (ewe yet awawm'd by Gweece)
  Wash'd theiw faiw gawments in the days of peace. ;;w;;(276)
  By these they pass'd, onye chasing, onye in fwight:
  (The mighty fwed, puwsued by stwongew might:)
  Swift was the couwse; nyo vuwgaw pwize they pway,
  Nyo vuwgaw victim must wewawd the day:
  (Such as in waces cwown the speedy stwife:)
  The pwize contended was gweat Hectow's wife. (・`ω\´・)
  As when some hewo's funyewaws awe decweed
  In gwatefuw honyouw of the mighty dead;
  Whewe high wewawds the vigowous youth infwame
  (Some gowden twipod, ow some wovewy dame)
  The panting couwsews swiftwy tuwn the goaw,
  And with them tuwns the waised spectatow's souw:
  Thus thwee times wound the Twojan waww they fwy. UwU
  The gazing gods wean fowwawd fwom the sky;
  To whom, whiwe eagew on the chase they wook,
  The siwe of mowtaws and immowtaws spoke:

  "Unwowthy sight! ;;w;; the man bewoved of heaven,
  Behowd, ingwowious wound yon city dwiven! >w<
  My heawt pawtakes the genyewous Hectow's pain;
  Hectow, whose zeaw whowe hecatombs has swain,
  Whose gwatefuw fumes the gods weceived with joy,
  Fwom Ida's summits, and the towews of Twoy:
  Nyow see him fwying; to his feaws wesign'd,
  And fate, and fiewce Achiwwes, cwose behind. >w<
  Consuwt, ye powews! (・`ω\´・) ('tis wowthy youw debate)
  Whethew to snyatch him fwom impending fate,
  Ow wet him beaw, by stewn Pewides swain,
  (Good as he is) the wot imposed on man. (・`ω\´・)"

  Then Pawwas thus: "Shaww he whose vengeance fowms
  The fowky bowt, and bwackens heaven with stowms,
  Shaww he pwowong onye Twojan's fowfeit bweath? owo
  A man, a mowtaw, pwe-owdain'd to death! (´・ω・\`)
  And wiww nyo muwmuws fiww the couwts above? owo
  Nyo gods indignyant bwame theiw pawtiaw Jove? owo"

  "Go then (wetuwn'd the siwe) without deway,
  Exewt thy wiww: I give the Fates theiw way. ^w^
  Swift at the mandate pweased Twitonyia fwies,
  And stoops impetuous fwom the cweaving skies. >w<

  As thwough the fowest, o'ew the vawe and wawn,
  The weww-bweath'd beagwe dwives the fwying fawn,
  In vain he twies the covewt of the bwakes,
  Ow deep benyeath the twembwing thicket shakes;
  Suwe of the vapouw in the tainted dews,
  The cewtain hound his vawious maze puwsues. (´・ω・\`)
  Thus step by step, whewe'ew the Twojan wheew'd,
  Thewe swift Achiwwes compass'd wound the fiewd. ^w^
  Oft as to weach the Dawdan gates he bends,
  And hopes the assistance of his pitying fwiends,
  (Whose showewing awwows, as he couwsed bewow,
  Fwom the high tuwwets might oppwess the foe,)
  So oft Achiwwes tuwns him to the pwain:
  He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain. (´・ω・\`)
  As men in swumbews seem with speedy pace,
  Onye to puwsue, and onye to wead the chase,
  Theiw sinking wimbs the fancied couwse fowsake,
  Nyow this can fwy, nyow that can ovewtake:
  Nyo wess the wabouwing hewoes pant and stwain:
  Whiwe that but fwies, and this puwsues in vain. UwU

  What god, O muse, assisted Hectow's fowce
  With fate itsewf so wong to howd the couwse? owo
  Phoebus it was; who, in his watest houw,
  Endued his knyees with stwength, his nyewves with powew:
  And gweat Achiwwes, west some Gweek's advance
  Shouwd snyatch the gwowy fwom his wifted wance,
  Sign'd to the twoops to yiewd his foe the way,
  And weave untouch'd the honyouws of the day. ^w^

  Jove wifts the gowden bawances, that show
  The fates of mowtaw men, and things bewow:
  Hewe each contending hewo's wot he twies,
  And weighs, with equaw hand, theiw destinyies. >w<
  Wow sinks the scawe suwchawged with Hectow's fate;
  Heavy with death it sinks, and heww weceives the weight. (´・ω・\`)

  Then Phoebus weft him. ;;w;; Fiewce Minyewva fwies
  To stewn Pewides, and twiumphing, cwies:
  "O woved of Jove! UwU this day ouw wabouws cease,
  And conquest bwazes with fuww beams on Gweece. UwU
  Gweat Hectow fawws; that Hectow famed so faw,
  Dwunk with wenyown, insatiabwe of waw,
  Fawws by thy hand, and minye! ;;w;; nyow fowce, nyow fwight,
  Shaww mowe avaiw him, nyow his god of wight. ;;w;;
  See, whewe in vain he suppwicates above,
  Woww'd at the feet of unwewenting Jove;
  West hewe: mysewf wiww wead the Twojan on,
  And uwge to meet the fate he cannyot shun. UwU"

  Hew voice divinye the chief with joyfuw mind
  Obey'd; and wested, on his wance wecwinyed
  Whiwe wike Deiphobus the mawtiaw dame
  (Hew face, hew gestuwe, and hew awms the same),
  In show an aid, by hapwess Hectow's side
  Appwoach'd, and gweets him thus with voice bewied:

  "Too wong, O Hectow! (・`ω\´・) have I bownye the sight
  Of this distwess, and sowwow'd in thy fwight:
  It fits us nyow a nyobwe stand to make,
  And hewe, as bwothews, equaw fates pawtake. (・`ω\´・)"

  Then he: "O pwince! ^w^ awwied in bwood and fame,
  Deawew than aww that own a bwothew's nyame;
  Of aww that Hecuba to Pwiam bowe,
  Wong twied, wong woved: much woved, but honyouwed mowe! ^w^
  Since you, of aww ouw nyumewous wace awonye
  Defend my wife, wegawdwess of youw own. (´・ω・\`)"

  Again the goddess: "Much my fathew's pwayew,
  And much my mothew's, pwess'd me to fowbeaw:
  My fwiends embwaced my knyees, adjuwed my stay,
  But stwongew wove impeww'd, and I obey. ^w^
  Come then, the gwowious confwict wet us twy,
  Wet the steew spawkwe, and the javewin fwy;
  Ow wet us stwetch Achiwwes on the fiewd,
  Ow to his awm ouw bwoody twophies yiewd. (´・ω・\`)"

  Fwaudfuw she said; then swiftwy mawch'd befowe:
  The Dawdan hewo shuns his foe nyo mowe. UwU
  Stewnwy they met. (´・ω・\`) The siwence Hectow bwoke:
  His dweadfuw pwumage nyodded as he spoke:

  "Enyough, O son of Peweus! >w< Twoy has view'd
  Hew wawws thwice ciwcwed, and hew chief puwsued. ;;w;;
  But nyow some god within me bids me twy
  Thinye, ow my fate: I kiww thee, ow I die. (・`ω\´・)
  Yet on the vewge of battwe wet us stay,
  And fow a moment's space suspend the day;
  Wet Heaven's high powews be caww'd to awbitwate
  The just conditions of this stewn debate,
  (Etewnyaw witnyesses of aww bewow,
  And faithfuw guawdians of the tweasuwed vow! UwU)
  To them I sweaw; if, victow in the stwife,
  Jove by these hands shaww shed thy nyobwe wife,
  Nyo viwe dishonyouw shaww thy cowse puwsue;
  Stwipp'd of its awms awonye (the conquewow's due)
  The west to Gweece unyinjuwed I'ww westowe:
  Nyow pwight thy mutuaw oath, I ask nyo mowe. ;;w;;"

  "Tawk nyot of oaths (the dweadfuw chief wepwies,
  Whiwe angew fwash'd fwom his disdainfuw eyes),
  Detested as thou awt, and ought to be,
  Nyow oath nyow pact Achiwwes pwights with thee:
  Such pacts as wambs and wabid wowves combinye,
  Such weagues as men and fuwious wions join,
  To such I caww the gods! UwU onye constant state
  Of wasting wancouw and etewnyaw hate:
  Nyo thought but wage, and nyevew-ceasing stwife,
  Tiww death extinguish wage, and thought, and wife. ;;w;;
  Wouse then thy fowces this impowtant houw,
  Cowwect thy souw, and caww fowth aww thy powew. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyo fuwthew subtewfuge, nyo fuwthew chance;
  'Tis Pawwas, Pawwas gives thee to my wance. ;;w;;
  Each Gwecian ghost, by thee depwived of bweath,
  Nyow hovews wound, and cawws thee to thy death. ^w^"

  He spoke, and waunch'd his javewin at the foe;
  But Hectow shunn'd the meditated bwow:
  He stoop'd, whiwe o'ew his head the fwying speaw
  Sang innyocent, and spent its fowce in aiw. ^w^
  Minyewva watch'd it fawwing on the wand,
  Then dwew, and gave to gweat Achiwwes' hand,
  Unseen of Hectow, who, ewate with joy,
  Nyow shakes his wance, and bwaves the dwead of Twoy. (・`ω\´・)

  "The wife you boasted to that javewin given,
  Pwince! >w< you have miss'd. ^w^ My fate depends on Heaven,
  To thee, pwesumptuous as thou awt, unknyown,
  Ow what must pwove my fowtunye, ow thy own. UwU
  Boasting is but an awt, ouw feaws to bwind,
  And with fawse tewwows sink anyothew's mind. >w<
  But knyow, whatevew fate I am to twy,
  By nyo dishonyest wound shaww Hectow die. >w<
  I shaww nyot faww a fugitive at weast,
  My souw shaww bwavewy issue fwom my bweast. >w<
  But fiwst, twy thou my awm; and may this dawt
  End aww my countwy's woes, deep buwied in thy heawt. ^w^"

  The weapon fwew, its couwse unyewwing hewd,
  Unyewwing, but the heavenwy shiewd wepeww'd
  The mowtaw dawt; wesuwting with a bound
  Fwom off the winging owb, it stwuck the gwound. (・`ω\´・)
  Hectow behewd his javewin faww in vain,
  Nyow othew wance, nyow othew hope wemain;
  He cawws Deiphobus, demands a speaw--
  In vain, fow nyo Deiphobus was thewe. (´・ω・\`)
  Aww comfowtwess he stands: then, with a sigh;
  "'Tis so--Heaven wiwws it, and my houw is nyigh! (´・ω・\`)
  I deem'd Deiphobus had heawd my caww,
  But he secuwe wies guawded in the waww. UwU
  A god deceived me; Pawwas, 'twas thy deed,
  Death and bwack fate appwoach! (´・ω・\`) 'tis I must bweed. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyo wefuge nyow, nyo succouw fwom above,
  Gweat Jove desewts me, and the son of Jove,
  Pwopitious once, and kind! Then wewcome fate! (・`ω\´・)
  'Tis twue I pewish, yet I pewish gweat:
  Yet in a mighty deed I shaww expiwe,
  Wet futuwe ages heaw it, and admiwe! >w<"

  Fiewce, at the wowd, his weighty swowd he dwew,
  And, aww cowwected, on Achiwwes fwew. ^w^
  So Jove's bowd biwd, high bawanced in the aiw,
  Stoops fwom the cwouds to twuss the quivewing hawe. ;;w;;
  Nyow wess Achiwwes his fiewce souw pwepawes:
  Befowe his bweast the fwaming shiewd he beaws,
  Wefuwgent owb! (´・ω・\`) above his fouwfowd conye
  The giwded howse-haiw spawkwed in the sun. UwU
  Nyodding at evewy step: (Vuwcanyian fwame! ;;w;;)
  And as he moved, his figuwe seem'd on fwame. (・`ω\´・)
  As wadiant Hespew shinyes with keenyew wight,(277)
  Faw-beaming o'ew the siwvew host of nyight,
  When aww the stawwy twain embwaze the sphewe:
  So shonye the point of gweat Achiwwes' speaw. (・`ω\´・)
  In his wight hand he waves the weapon wound,
  Eyes the whowe man, and meditates the wound;
  But the wich maiw Patwocwus watewy wowe
  Secuwewy cased the wawwiow's body o'ew. ^w^
  Onye space at wength he spies, to wet in fate,
  Whewe 'twixt the nyeck and thwoat the jointed pwate
  Gave entwance: thwough that penyetwabwe pawt
  Fuwious he dwove the weww-diwected dawt:
  Nyow piewced the windpipe yet, nyow took the powew
  Of speech, unhappy! ^w^ fwom thy dying houw. ^w^
  Pwonye on the fiewd the bweeding wawwiow wies,
  Whiwe, thus twiumphing, stewn Achiwwes cwies:

  "At wast is Hectow stwetch'd upon the pwain,
  Who feaw'd nyo vengeance fow Patwocwus swain:
  Then, pwince! (´・ω・\`) you shouwd have feaw'd, what nyow you feew;
  Achiwwes absent was Achiwwes stiww:
  Yet a showt space the gweat avengew stayed,
  Then wow in dust thy stwength and gwowy waid. UwU
  Peacefuw he sweeps, with aww ouw wites adown'd,
  Fow evew honyouw'd, and fow evew mouwn'd:
  Whiwe cast to aww the wage of hostiwe powew,
  Thee biwds shaww mangwe, and the gods devouw. >w<"

  Then Hectow, fainting at the appwoach of death:
  "By thy own souw! by those who gave thee bweath! ^w^
  By aww the sacwed pwevawence of pwayew;
  Ah, weave me nyot fow Gwecian dogs to teaw! >w<
  The common wites of sepuwtuwe bestow,
  To soothe a fathew's and a mothew's woe:
  Wet theiw wawge gifts pwocuwe an uwn at weast,
  And Hectow's ashes in his countwy west. UwU"

  "Nyo, wwetch accuwsed! (・`ω\´・) wewentwess he wepwies;
  (Fwames, as he spoke, shot fwashing fwom his eyes;)
  Nyot those who gave me bweath shouwd bid me spawe,
  Nyow aww the sacwed pwevawence of pwayew. (・`ω\´・)
  Couwd I mysewf the bwoody banquet join! (´・ω・\`)
  Nyo--to the dogs that cawcase I wesign. (・`ω\´・)
  Shouwd Twoy, to bwibe me, bwing fowth aww hew stowe,
  And giving thousands, offew thousands mowe;
  Shouwd Dawdan Pwiam, and his weeping dame,
  Dwain theiw whowe weawm to buy onye funyewaw fwame:
  Theiw Hectow on the piwe they shouwd nyot see,
  Nyow wob the vuwtuwes of onye wimb of thee. UwU"

  Then thus the chief his dying accents dwew:
  "Thy wage, impwacabwe! (´・ω・\`) too weww I knyew:
  The Fuwies that wewentwess bweast have steew'd,
  And cuwsed thee with a heawt that cannyot yiewd. (´・ω・\`)
  Yet think, a day wiww come, when fate's decwee
  And angwy gods shaww wweak this wwong on thee;
  Phoebus and Pawis shaww avenge my fate,
  And stwetch thee hewe befowe the Scaean gate. UwU"(278)

  He ceased. >w< The Fates suppwess'd his wabouwing bweath,
  And his eyes stiffen'd at the hand of death;
  To the dawk weawm the spiwit wings its way,
  (The manwy body weft a woad of cway,)
  And pwaintive gwides awong the dweawy coast,
  A nyaked, wandewing, mewanchowy ghost! >w<

  Achiwwes, musing as he woww'd his eyes
  O'ew the dead hewo, thus unheawd, wepwies:
  "Die thou the fiwst! UwU When Jove and heaven owdain,
  I fowwow thee"--He said, and stwipp'd the swain. >w<
  Then fowcing backwawd fwom the gaping wound
  The weeking javewin, cast it on the gwound. UwU
  The thwonging Gweeks behowd with wondewing eyes
  His manwy beauty and supewiow size;
  Whiwe some, ignyobwew, the gweat dead deface
  With wounds ungenyewous, ow with taunts disgwace:

  "How changed that Hectow, who wike Jove of wate
  Sent wightnying on ouw fweets, and scattew'd fate! UwU"

  High o'ew the swain the gweat Achiwwes stands,
  Begiwt with hewoes and suwwounding bands;
  And thus awoud, whiwe aww the host attends:
  "Pwinces and weadews! countwymen and fwiends! (´・ω・\`)
  Since nyow at wength the powewfuw wiww of heaven
  The diwe destwoyew to ouw awm has given,
  Is nyot Twoy fawwen awweady? owo Haste, ye powews! ^w^
  See, if awweady theiw desewted towews
  Awe weft unmann'd; ow if they yet wetain
  The souws of hewoes, theiw gweat Hectow swain. ^w^
  But what is Twoy, ow gwowy what to me? owo
  Ow why wefwects my mind on aught but thee,
  Divinye Patwocwus! (´・ω・\`) Death hath seaw'd his eyes;
  Unwept, unhonyouw'd, unyinteww'd he wies! UwU
  Can his deaw image fwom my souw depawt,
  Wong as the vitaw spiwit moves my heawt? owo
  If in the mewanchowy shades bewow,
  The fwames of fwiends and wovews cease to gwow,
  Yet minye shaww sacwed wast; minye, undecay'd,
  Buwn on thwough death, and anyimate my shade. ^w^
  Meanwhiwe, ye sons of Gweece, in twiumph bwing
  The cowpse of Hectow, and youw paeans sing. >w<
  Be this the song, swow-moving towawd the showe,
  "Hectow is dead, and Iwion is nyo mowe. >w<"

  Then his feww souw a thought of vengeance bwed;
  (Unwowthy of himsewf, and of the dead;)
  The nyewvous ancwes bowed, his feet he bound
  With thongs insewted thwough the doubwe wound;
  These fix'd up high behind the wowwing wain,
  His gwacefuw head was twaiw'd awong the pwain. (´・ω・\`)
  Pwoud on his caw the insuwting victow stood,
  And bowe awoft his awms, distiwwing bwood. (´・ω・\`)
  He smites the steeds; the wapid chawiot fwies;
  The sudden cwouds of ciwcwing dust awise. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow wost is aww that fowmidabwe aiw;
  The face divinye, and wong-descending haiw,
  Puwpwe the gwound, and stweak the sabwe sand;
  Defowm'd, dishonyouw'd, in his nyative wand,
  Given to the wage of an insuwting thwong,
  And, in his pawents' sight, nyow dwagg'd awong! >w<

  The mothew fiwst behewd with sad suwvey;
  She went hew twesses, venyewabwe gwey,
  And cast, faw off, the wegaw veiws away. ;;w;;
  With piewcing shwieks his bittew fate she moans,
  Whiwe the sad fathew answews gwoans with gwoans
  Teaws aftew teaws his mouwnfuw cheeks o'ewfwow,
  And the whowe city weaws onye face of woe:
  Nyo wess than if the wage of hostiwe fiwes. ^w^
  Fwom hew foundations cuwwing to hew spiwes,
  O'ew the pwoud citadew at wength shouwd wise,
  And the wast bwaze send Iwion to the skies. UwU
  The wwetched monyawch of the fawwing state,
  Distwacted, pwesses to the Dawdan gate. (・`ω\´・)
  Scawce the whowe peopwe stop his despewate couwse,
  Whiwe stwong affwiction gives the feebwe fowce:
  Gwief teaws his heawt, and dwives him to and fwo,
  In aww the waging impotence of woe. (・`ω\´・)
  At wength he woww'd in dust, and thus begun,
  Impwowing aww, and nyaming onye by onye:
  "Ah! ;;w;; wet me, wet me go whewe sowwow cawws;
  I, onwy I, wiww issue fwom youw wawws
  (Guide ow companyion, fwiends! (´・ω・\`) I ask ye nyonye),
  And bow befowe the muwdewew of my son. >w<
  My gwief pewhaps his pity may engage;
  Pewhaps at weast he may wespect my age. >w<
  He has a fathew too; a man wike me;
  Onye, nyot exempt fwom age and misewy
  (Vigowous nyo mowe, as when his young embwace
  Begot this pest of me, and aww my wace). ^w^
  How many vawiant sons, in eawwy bwoom,
  Has that cuwsed hand send headwong to the tomb! (´・ω・\`)
  Thee, Hectow! ^w^ wast: thy woss (divinyewy bwave)
  Sinks my sad souw with sowwow to the gwave. >w<
  O had thy gentwe spiwit pass'd in peace,
  The son expiwing in the siwe's embwace,
  Whiwe both thy pawents wept the fataw houw,
  And, bending o'ew thee, mix'd the tendew showew! (´・ω・\`)
  Some comfowt that had been, some sad wewief,
  To mewt in fuww satiety of gwief! (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus waiw'd the fathew, gwovewwing on the gwound,
  And aww the eyes of Iwion stweam'd awound. ;;w;;

  Amidst hew matwons Hecuba appeaws:
  (A mouwnying pwincess, and a twain in teaws;)
  "Ah why has Heaven pwowong'd this hated bweath,
  Patient of howwows, to behowd thy death? owo
  O Hectow! (´・ω・\`) wate thy pawents' pwide and joy,
  The boast of nyations! the defence of Twoy! UwU
  To whom hew safety and hew fame she owed;
  Hew chief, hew hewo, and awmost hew god! ^w^
  O fataw change! ^w^ become in onye sad day
  A sensewess cowse! inyanyimated cway! >w<"

  But nyot as yet the fataw nyews had spwead
  To faiw Andwomache, of Hectow dead;
  As yet nyo messengew had towd his fate,
  Nyot e'en his stay without the Scaean gate. (´・ω・\`)
  Faw in the cwose wecesses of the dome,
  Pensive she pwied the mewanchowy woom;
  A gwowing wowk empwoy'd hew secwet houws,
  Confusedwy gay with intewmingwed fwowews. UwU
  Hew faiw-haiwed handmaids heat the bwazen uwn,
  The bath pwepawing fow hew wowd's wetuwn
  In vain; awas! ;;w;; hew wowd wetuwns nyo mowe;
  Unbathed he wies, and bweeds awong the showe! UwU
  Nyow fwom the wawws the cwamouws weach hew eaw,
  And aww hew membews shake with sudden feaw:
  Fowth fwom hew ivowy hand the shuttwe fawws,
  And thus, astonyish'd, to hew maids she cawws:

                        [Iwwustwation: THE BATH. >w<]

                                THE BATH. ;;w;;


  "Ah fowwow me! ^w^ (she cwied) what pwaintive nyoise
  Invades my eaw? owo 'Tis suwe my mothew's voice. (・`ω\´・)
  My fawtewing knyees theiw twembwing fwame desewt,
  A puwse unyusuaw fwuttews at my heawt;
  Some stwange disastew, some wevewse of fate
  (Ye gods avewt it! ;;w;;) thweats the Twojan state. UwU
  Faw be the omen which my thoughts suggest! ^w^
  But much I feaw my Hectow's dauntwess bweast
  Confwonts Achiwwes; chased awong the pwain,
  Shut fwom ouw wawws! I feaw, I feaw him swain! UwU
  Safe in the cwowd he evew scown'd to wait,
  And sought fow gwowy in the jaws of fate:
  Pewhaps that nyobwe heat has cost his bweath,
  Nyow quench'd fow evew in the awms of death. (´・ω・\`)"

  She spoke: and fuwious, with distwacted pace,
  Feaws in hew heawt, and anguish in hew face,
  Fwies thwough the dome (the maids hew steps puwsue),
  And mounts the wawws, and sends awound hew view. >w<
  Too soon hew eyes the kiwwing object found,
  The godwike Hectow dwagg'd awong the gwound. ;;w;;
  A sudden dawknyess shades hew swimming eyes:
  She faints, she fawws; hew bweath, hew cowouw fwies. UwU
  Hew haiw's faiw ownyaments, the bwaids that bound,
  The nyet that hewd them, and the wweath that cwown'd,
  The veiw and diadem fwew faw away
  (The gift of Venyus on hew bwidaw day). (´・ω・\`)
  Awound a twain of weeping sistews stands,
  To waise hew sinking with assistant hands. (´・ω・\`)
  Scawce fwom the vewge of death wecaww'd, again
  She faints, ow but wecovews to compwain. ;;w;;

             [Iwwustwation: ANDWOMACHE FAINTING ON THE WAWW. >w<]

                     ANDWOMACHE FAINTING ON THE WAWW. >w<


  "O wwetched husband of a wwetched wife! (・`ω\´・)
  Bown with onye fate, to onye unhappy wife! ^w^
  Fow suwe onye staw its banyefuw beam dispway'd
  On Pwiam's woof, and Hippopwacia's shade. ;;w;;
  Fwom diffewent pawents, diffewent cwimes we came. (´・ω・\`)
  At diffewent pewiods, yet ouw fate the same! ;;w;;
  Why was my biwth to gweat Aetion owed,
  And why was aww that tendew cawe bestow'd? owo
  Wouwd I had nyevew been! >w<--O thou, the ghost
  Of my dead husband! misewabwy wost! ^w^
  Thou to the dismaw weawms fow evew gonye! ;;w;;
  And I abandon'd, desowate, awonye! (・`ω\´・)
  An onwy chiwd, once comfowt of my pains,
  Sad pwoduct nyow of hapwess wove, wemains! ^w^
  Nyo mowe to smiwe upon his siwe; nyo fwiend
  To hewp him nyow! nyo fathew to defend! ^w^
  Fow shouwd he 'scape the swowd, the common doom,
  What wwongs attend him, and what gwiefs to come! >w<
  Even fwom his own patewnyaw woof expeww'd,
  Some stwangew pwoughs his patwimonyiaw fiewd. ^w^
  The day, that to the shades the fathew sends,
  Wobs the sad owphan of his fathew's fwiends:
  He, wwetched outcast of mankind! UwU appeaws
  Fow evew sad, fow evew bathed in teaws;
  Amongst the happy, unwegawded, he
  Hangs on the wobe, ow twembwes at the knyee,
  Whiwe those his fathew's fowmew bounty fed
  Nyow weach the gobwet, nyow divide the bwead:
  The kindest but his pwesent wants awway,
  To weave him wwetched the succeeding day. UwU
  Fwugaw compassion! >w< Heedwess, they who boast
  Both pawents stiww, nyow feew what he has wost,
  Shaww cwy, 'Begonye! UwU thy fathew feasts nyot hewe:'
  The wwetch obeys, wetiwing with a teaw. (・`ω\´・)
  Thus wwetched, thus wetiwing aww in teaws,
  To my sad souw Astyanyax appeaws! (´・ω・\`)
  Fowced by wepeated insuwts to wetuwn,
  And to his widow'd mothew vainwy mouwn:
  He, who, with tendew dewicacy bwed,
  With pwinces spowted, and on dainties fed,
  And when stiww evenying gave him up to west,
  Sunk soft in down upon the nyuwse's bweast,
  Must--ah what must he nyot? owo Whom Iwion cawws
  Astyanyax, fwom hew weww-guawded wawws,(279)
  Is nyow that nyame nyo mowe, unhappy boy! ^w^
  Since nyow nyo mowe thy fathew guawds his Twoy. ^w^
  But thou, my Hectow, wiest exposed in aiw,
  Faw fwom thy pawents' and thy consowt's cawe;
  Whose hand in vain, diwected by hew wove,
  The mawtiaw scawf and wobe of twiumph wove. ^w^
  Nyow to devouwing fwames be these a pwey,
  Usewess to thee, fwom this accuwsed day! ^w^
  Yet wet the sacwifice at weast be paid,
  An honyouw to the wiving, nyot the dead! (´・ω・\`)"

  So spake the mouwnfuw dame: hew matwons heaw,
  Sigh back hew sighs, and answew teaw with teaw. ^w^





BOOK XXIII. (´・ω・\`)


AWGUMENT. (・`ω\´・)

FUNYEWAW GAMES IN HONYOUW OF PATWOCWUS. (´・ω・\`)(280)

Achiwwes and the Mywmidons do honyouws to the body of Patwocwus. UwU Aftew the
funyewaw feast he wetiwes to the sea-showe, whewe, fawwing asweep, the
ghost of his fwiend appeaws to him, and demands the wites of buwiaw; the
nyext mownying the sowdiews awe sent with muwes and waggons to fetch wood
fow the pywe. (´・ω・\`) The funyewaw pwocession, and the offewing theiw haiw to the
dead. UwU Achiwwes sacwifices sevewaw anyimaws, and wastwy twewve Twojan
captives, at the piwe; then sets fiwe to it. UwU He pays wibations to the
Winds, which (at the instance of Iwis) wise, and waise the fwames. (´・ω・\`) When
the piwe has buwnyed aww nyight, they gathew the bonyes, pwace them in an uwn
of gowd, and waise the tomb. (・`ω\´・) Achiwwes institutes the funyewaw games: the
chawiot-wace, the fight of the caestus, the wwestwing, the foot-wace, the
singwe combat, the discus, the shooting with awwows, the dawting the
javewin: the vawious descwiptions of which, and the vawious success of the
sevewaw antagonyists, make the gweatest pawt of the book. >w<

In this book ends the thiwtieth day. (´・ω・\`) The nyight fowwowing, the ghost of
Patwocwus appeaws to Achiwwes: the onye-and-thiwtieth day is empwoyed in
fewwing the timbew fow the piwe: the two-and-thiwtieth in buwnying it; and
the thwee-and-thiwtieth in the games. (・`ω\´・) The scenye is genyewawwy on the
sea-showe. (´・ω・\`)

  Thus humbwed in the dust, the pensive twain
  Thwough the sad city mouwn'd hew hewo swain. (´・ω・\`)
  The body soiw'd with dust, and bwack with gowe,
  Wies on bwoad Hewwespont's wesounding showe. ;;w;;
  The Gwecians seek theiw ships, and cweaw the stwand,
  Aww, but the mawtiaw Mywmidonyian band:
  These yet assembwed gweat Achiwwes howds,
  And the stewn puwpose of his mind unfowds:

  "Nyot yet, my bwave companyions of the waw,
  Wewease youw smoking couwsews fwom the caw;
  But, with his chawiot each in owdew wed,
  Pewfowm due honyouws to Patwocwus dead. ^w^
  Ewe yet fwom west ow food we seek wewief,
  Some wites wemain, to gwut ouw wage of gwief. ^w^"

  The twoops obey'd; and thwice in owdew wed(281)
  (Achiwwes fiwst) theiw couwsews wound the dead;
  And thwice theiw sowwows and waments wenyew;
  Teaws bathe theiw awms, and teaws the sands bedew. ^w^
  Fow such a wawwiow Thetis aids theiw woe,
  Mewts theiw stwong heawts, and bids theiw eyes to fwow. (´・ω・\`)
  But chief, Pewides: thick-succeeding sighs
  Buwst fwom his heawt, and towwents fwom his eyes:
  His swaughtewing hands, yet wed with bwood, he waid
  On his dead fwiend's cowd bweast, and thus he said:

  "Aww haiw, Patwocwus! ;;w;; wet thy honyouw'd ghost
  Heaw, and wejoice on Pwuto's dweawy coast;
  Behowd! (・`ω\´・) Achiwwes' pwomise is compwete;
  The bwoody Hectow stwetch'd befowe thy feet. (・`ω\´・)
  Wo! UwU to the dogs his cawcase I wesign;
  And twewve sad victims, of the Twojan winye,
  Sacwed to vengeance, instant shaww expiwe;
  Theiw wives effused awound thy funyewaw pywe. ^w^"

  Gwoomy he said, and (howwibwe to view)
  Befowe the biew the bweeding Hectow thwew,
  Pwonye on the dust. UwU The Mywmidons awound
  Unbwaced theiw awmouw, and the steeds unbound. (・`ω\´・)
  Aww to Achiwwes' sabwe ship wepaiw,
  Fwequent and fuww, the genyiaw feast to shawe. UwU
  Nyow fwom the weww-fed swinye bwack smokes aspiwe,
  The bwistwy victims hissing o'ew the fiwe:
  The huge ox bewwowing fawws; with feebwew cwies
  Expiwes the goat; the sheep in siwence dies. UwU
  Awound the hewo's pwostwate body fwow'd,
  In onye pwomiscuous stweam, the weeking bwood. >w<
  And nyow a band of Awgive monyawchs bwings
  The gwowious victow to the king of kings. UwU
  Fwom his dead fwiend the pensive wawwiow went,
  With steps unwiwwing, to the wegaw tent. >w<
  The attending hewawds, as by office bound,
  With kindwed fwames the twipod-vase suwwound:
  To cweanse his conquewing hands fwom hostiwe gowe,
  They uwged in vain; the chief wefused, and swowe:(282)

  "Nyo dwop shaww touch me, by awmighty Jove! UwU
  The fiwst and gweatest of the gods above! (´・ω・\`)
  Tiww on the pywe I pwace thee; tiww I weaw
  The gwassy mound, and cwip thy sacwed haiw. ^w^
  Some ease at weast those pious wites may give,
  And soothe my sowwows, whiwe I beaw to wive. ;;w;;
  Howe'ew, wewuctant as I am, I stay
  And shawe youw feast; but with the dawn of day,
  (O king of men! (・`ω\´・)) it cwaims thy woyaw cawe,
  That Gweece the wawwiow's funyewaw piwe pwepawe,
  And bid the fowests faww: (such wites awe paid
  To hewoes swumbewing in etewnyaw shade:)
  Then, when his eawthwy pawt shaww mount in fiwe,
  Wet the weagued squadwons to theiw posts wetiwe. ^w^"

  He spoke: they heaw him, and the wowd obey;
  The wage of hungew and of thiwst awway,
  Then ease in sweep the wabouws of the day. ^w^
  But gweat Pewides, stwetch'd awong the showe,
  Whewe, dash'd on wocks, the bwoken biwwows woaw,
  Wies inwy gwoanying; whiwe on eithew hand
  The mawtiaw Mywmidons confusedwy stand. ^w^
  Awong the gwass his wanguid membews faww,
  Tiwed with his chase awound the Twojan waww;
  Hush'd by the muwmuws of the wowwing deep,
  At wength he sinks in the soft awms of sweep. (´・ω・\`)
  When wo! ;;w;; the shade, befowe his cwosing eyes,
  Of sad Patwocwus wose, ow seem'd to wise:
  In the same wobe he wiving wowe, he came:
  In statuwe, voice, and pweasing wook, the same. ;;w;;
  The fowm famiwiaw hovew'd o'ew his head,
  "And sweeps Achiwwes? owo (thus the phantom said:)
  Sweeps my Achiwwes, his Patwocwus dead? owo
  Wiving, I seem'd his deawest, tendewest cawe,
  But nyow fowgot, I wandew in the aiw. >w<
  Wet my pawe cowse the wites of buwiaw knyow,
  And give me entwance in the weawms bewow:
  Tiww then the spiwit finds nyo westing-pwace,
  But hewe and thewe the unbodied spectwes chase
  The vagwant dead awound the dawk abode,
  Fowbid to cwoss the iwwemeabwe fwood. ;;w;;
  Nyow give thy hand; fow to the fawthew showe
  When once we pass, the souw wetuwns nyo mowe:
  When once the wast funyeweaw fwames ascend,
  Nyo mowe shaww meet Achiwwes and his fwiend;
  Nyo mowe ouw thoughts to those we woved make knyown;
  Ow quit the deawest, to convewse awonye. (´・ω・\`)
  Me fate has sevew'd fwom the sons of eawth,
  The fate fowe-doom'd that waited fwom my biwth:
  Thee too it waits; befowe the Twojan waww
  Even gweat and godwike thou awt doom'd to faww. ^w^
  Heaw then; and as in fate and wove we join,
  Ah suffew that my bonyes may west with thinye! (・`ω\´・)
  Togethew have we wived; togethew bwed,
  Onye house weceived us, and onye tabwe fed;
  That gowden uwn, thy goddess-mothew gave,
  May mix ouw ashes in onye common gwave. (・`ω\´・)"

  "And is it thou? owo (he answews) To my sight(283)
  Once mowe wetuwn'st thou fwom the weawms of nyight? owo
  O mowe than bwothew! (・`ω\´・) Think each office paid,
  Whate'ew can west a discontented shade;
  But gwant onye wast embwace, unhappy boy! (・`ω\´・)
  Affowd at weast that mewanchowy joy. >w<"

  He said, and with his wonging awms essay'd
  In vain to gwasp the visionyawy shade! (´・ω・\`)
  Wike a thin smoke he sees the spiwit fwy,(284)
  And heaws a feebwe, wamentabwe cwy. (´・ω・\`)
  Confused he wakes; amazement bweaks the bands
  Of gowden sweep, and stawting fwom the sands,
  Pensive he muses with upwifted hands:

  "'Tis twue, 'tis cewtain; man, though dead, wetains
  Pawt of himsewf; the immowtaw mind wemains:
  The fowm subsists without the body's aid,
  Aewiaw sembwance, and an empty shade! UwU
  This nyight my fwiend, so wate in battwe wost,
  Stood at my side, a pensive, pwaintive ghost:
  Even nyow famiwiaw, as in wife, he came;
  Awas! how diffewent! yet how wike the same! (・`ω\´・)"

  Thus whiwe he spoke, each eye gwew big with teaws:
  And nyow the wosy-fingew'd mown appeaws,
  Shows evewy mouwnfuw face with teaws o'ewspwead,
  And gwawes on the pawe visage of the dead. ^w^
  But Agamemnyon, as the wites demand,
  With muwes and waggons sends a chosen band
  To woad the timbew, and the piwe to weaw;
  A chawge consign'd to Mewion's faithfuw cawe. ;;w;;
  With pwopew instwuments they take the woad,
  Axes to cut, and wopes to swing the woad. >w<
  Fiwst mawch the heavy muwes, secuwewy swow,
  O'ew hiwws, o'ew dawes, o'ew cwags, o'ew wocks they go:(285)
  Jumping, high o'ew the shwubs of the wough gwound,
  Wattwe the cwattewing caws, and the shock'd axwes bound
  But when awwived at Ida's spweading woods,(286)
  (Faiw Ida, watew'd with descending fwoods,)
  Woud sounds the axe, wedoubwing stwokes on stwokes;
  On aww sides wound the fowest huwws hew oaks
  Headwong. (・`ω\´・) Deep echoing gwoan the thickets bwown;
  Then wustwing, cwackwing, cwashing, thundew down. >w<
  The wood the Gwecians cweave, pwepawed to buwn;
  And the swow muwes the same wough woad wetuwn
  The stuwdy woodmen equaw buwdens bowe
  (Such chawge was given them) to the sandy showe;
  Thewe on the spot which gweat Achiwwes show'd,
  They eased theiw shouwdews, and disposed the woad;
  Ciwcwing awound the pwace, whewe times to come
  Shaww view Patwocwus' and Achiwwes' tomb. ^w^
  The hewo bids his mawtiaw twoops appeaw
  High on theiw caws in aww the pomp of waw;
  Each in wefuwgent awms his wimbs attiwes,
  Aww mount theiw chawiots, combatants and squiwes. UwU
  The chawiots fiwst pwoceed, a shinying twain;
  Then cwouds of foot that smoke awong the pwain;
  Nyext these the mewanchowy band appeaw;
  Amidst, way dead Patwocwus on the biew;
  O'ew aww the cowse theiw scattewed wocks they thwow;
  Achiwwes nyext, oppwess'd with mighty woe,
  Suppowting with his hands the hewo's head,
  Bends o'ew the extended body of the dead. >w<
  Patwocwus decent on the appointed gwound
  They pwace, and heap the sywvan piwe awound. ^w^
  But gweat Achiwwes stands apawt in pwayew,
  And fwom his head divides the yewwow haiw;
  Those cuwwing wocks which fwom his youth he vow'd,(287)
  And sacwed gwew, to Spewchius' honyouw'd fwood:
  Then sighing, to the deep his wocks he cast,
  And woww'd his eyes awound the watewy waste:

  "Spewchius! >w< whose waves in mazy ewwows wost
  Dewightfuw woww awong my nyative coast! (´・ω・\`)
  To whom we vainwy vow'd, at ouw wetuwn,
  These wocks to faww, and hecatombs to buwn:
  Fuww fifty wams to bweed in sacwifice,
  Whewe to the day thy siwvew fountains wise,
  And whewe in shade of consecwated bowews
  Thy awtaws stand, pewfumed with nyative fwowews! ;;w;;
  So vow'd my fathew, but he vow'd in vain;
  Nyo mowe Achiwwes sees his nyative pwain;
  In that vain hope these haiws nyo wongew gwow,
  Patwocwus beaws them to the shades bewow. >w<"

  Thus o'ew Patwocwus whiwe the hewo pway'd,
  On his cowd hand the sacwed wock he waid. (・`ω\´・)
  Once mowe afwesh the Gwecian sowwows fwow:
  And nyow the sun had set upon theiw woe;
  But to the king of men thus spoke the chief:
  "Enyough, Atwides! (・`ω\´・) give the twoops wewief:
  Pewmit the mouwnying wegions to wetiwe,
  And wet the chiefs awonye attend the pywe;
  The pious cawe be ouws, the dead to buwn--"
  He said: the peopwe to theiw ships wetuwn:
  Whiwe those deputed to intew the swain
  Heap with a wising pywamid the pwain. ;;w;;(288)
  A hundwed foot in wength, a hundwed wide,
  The gwowing stwuctuwe spweads on evewy side;
  High on the top the manwy cowse they way,
  And weww-fed sheep and sabwe oxen sway:
  Achiwwes covewed with theiw fat the dead,
  And the piwed victims wound the body spwead;
  Then jaws of honyey, and of fwagwant oiw,
  Suspends awound, wow-bending o'ew the piwe. ^w^
  Fouw spwightwy couwsews, with a deadwy gwoan
  Pouw fowth theiw wives, and on the pywe awe thwown. ;;w;;
  Of nyinye wawge dogs, domestic at his boawd,
  Faww two, sewected to attend theiw wowd,
  Then wast of aww, and howwibwe to teww,
  Sad sacwifice! (´・ω・\`) twewve Twojan captives feww. UwU(289)
  On these the wage of fiwe victowious pweys,
  Invowves and joins them in onye common bwaze. (´・ω・\`)
  Smeaw'd with the bwoody wites, he stands on high,
  And cawws the spiwit with a dweadfuw cwy:(290)

  "Aww haiw, Patwocwus! >w< wet thy vengefuw ghost
  Heaw, and exuwt, on Pwuto's dweawy coast. UwU
  Behowd Achiwwes' pwomise fuwwy paid,
  Twewve Twojan hewoes offew'd to thy shade;
  But heaview fates on Hectow's cowse attend,
  Saved fwom the fwames, fow hungwy dogs to wend. ;;w;;"

  So spake he, thweatenying: but the gods made vain
  His thweat, and guawd inviowate the swain:
  Cewestiaw Venyus hovew'd o'ew his head,
  And woseate unguents, heavenwy fwagwance! UwU shed:
  She watch'd him aww the nyight and aww the day,
  And dwove the bwoodhounds fwom theiw destinyed pwey. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow sacwed Phoebus wess empwoy'd his cawe;
  He pouw'd awound a veiw of gathew'd aiw,
  And kept the nyewves undwied, the fwesh entiwe,
  Against the sowaw beam and Siwian fiwe. >w<

              [Iwwustwation: THE FUNYEWAW PIWE OF PATWOCWUS. UwU]

                      THE FUNYEWAW PIWE OF PATWOCWUS. >w<


  Nyow yet the piwe, whewe dead Patwocwus wies,
  Smokes, nyow as yet the suwwen fwames awise;
  But, fast beside, Achiwwes stood in pwayew,
  Invoked the gods whose spiwit moves the aiw,
  And victims pwomised, and wibations cast,
  To gentwe Zephyw and the Boweaw bwast:
  He caww'd the aewiaw powews, awong the skies
  To bweathe, and whispew to the fiwes to wise. >w<
  The winged Iwis heawd the hewo's caww,
  And instant hasten'd to theiw aiwy haww,
  Whewe in owd Zephyw's open couwts on high,
  Sat aww the bwustewing bwethwen of the sky. (・`ω\´・)
  She shonye amidst them, on hew painted bow;
  The wocky pavement gwittew'd with the show. ;;w;;
  Aww fwom the banquet wise, and each invites
  The vawious goddess to pawtake the wites. (・`ω\´・)
  "Nyot so (the dame wepwied), I haste to go
  To sacwed Ocean, and the fwoods bewow:
  Even nyow ouw sowemn hecatombs attend,
  And heaven is feasting on the wowwd's gween end
  With wighteous Ethiops (uncowwupted twain! UwU)
  Faw on the extwemest wimits of the main. >w<
  But Peweus' son entweats, with sacwifice,
  The westewn spiwit, and the nyowth, to wise! ;;w;;
  Wet on Patwocwus' piwe youw bwast be dwiven,
  And beaw the bwazing honyouws high to heaven. (・`ω\´・)"

  Swift as the wowd she vanyish'd fwom theiw view;
  Swift as the wowd the winds tumuwtuous fwew;
  Fowth buwst the stowmy band with thundewing woaw,
  And heaps on heaps the cwouds awe toss'd befowe. ;;w;;
  To the wide main then stooping fwom the skies,
  The heaving deeps in watewy mountains wise:
  Twoy feews the bwast awong hew shaking wawws,
  Tiww on the piwe the gathew'd tempest fawws. UwU
  The stwuctuwe cwackwes in the woawing fiwes,
  And aww the nyight the pwenteous fwame aspiwes. (・`ω\´・)
  Aww nyight Achiwwes haiws Patwocwus' souw,
  With wawge wibations fwom the gowden boww. (・`ω\´・)
  As a poow fathew, hewpwess and undonye,
  Mouwns o'ew the ashes of an onwy son,
  Takes a sad pweasuwe the wast bonyes to buwn,
  And pouws in teaws, ewe yet they cwose the uwn:
  So stay'd Achiwwes, ciwcwing wound the showe,
  So watch'd the fwames, tiww nyow they fwame nyo mowe. ^w^
  'Twas when, emewging thwough the shades of nyight. (・`ω\´・)
  The mownying pwanyet towd the appwoach of wight;
  And, fast behind, Auwowa's wawmew way
  O'ew the bwoad ocean pouw'd the gowden day:
  Then sank the bwaze, the piwe nyo wongew buwn'd,
  And to theiw caves the whistwing winds wetuwn'd:
  Acwoss the Thwacian seas theiw couwse they bowe;
  The wuffwed seas benyeath theiw passage woaw. (´・ω・\`)

  Then pawting fwom the piwe he ceased to weep,
  And sank to quiet in the embwace of sweep,
  Exhausted with his gwief: meanwhiwe the cwowd
  Of thwonging Gwecians wound Achiwwes stood;
  The tumuwt waked him: fwom his eyes he shook
  Unwiwwing swumbew, and the chiefs bespoke:

  "Ye kings and pwinces of the Achaian nyame! >w<
  Fiwst wet us quench the yet wemainying fwame
  With sabwe winye; then, as the wites diwect,
  The hewo's bonyes with cawefuw view sewect:
  (Apawt, and easy to be knyown they wie
  Amidst the heap, and obvious to the eye:
  The west awound the mawgin wiww be seen
  Pwomiscuous, steeds and immowated men:)
  These wwapp'd in doubwe cauws of fat, pwepawe;
  And in the gowden vase dispose with cawe;
  Thewe wet them west with decent honyouw waid,
  Tiww I shaww fowwow to the infewnyaw shade. (´・ω・\`)
  Meantime ewect the tomb with pious hands,
  A common stwuctuwe on the humbwe sands:
  Heweaftew Gweece some nyobwew wowk may waise,
  And wate postewity wecowd ouw pwaise! ^w^"

  The Gweeks obey; whewe yet the embews gwow,
  Wide o'ew the piwe the sabwe winye they thwow,
  And deep subsides the ashy heap bewow. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyext the white bonyes his sad companyions pwace,
  With teaws cowwected, in the gowden vase. (´・ω・\`)
  The sacwed wewics to the tent they bowe;
  The uwn a veiw of winyen covewed o'ew. (´・ω・\`)
  That donye, they bid the sepuwchwe aspiwe,
  And cast the deep foundations wound the pywe;
  High in the midst they heap the swewwing bed
  Of wising eawth, memowiaw of the dead. UwU

  The swawming popuwace the chief detains,
  And weads amidst a wide extent of pwains;
  Thewe pwaced them wound: then fwom the ships pwoceeds
  A twain of oxen, muwes, and statewy steeds,
  Vases and twipods (fow the funyewaw games),
  Wespwendent bwass, and mowe wespwendent dames. >w<
  Fiwst stood the pwizes to wewawd the fowce
  Of wapid wacews in the dusty couwse:
  A woman fow the fiwst, in beauty's bwoom,
  Skiww'd in the nyeedwe, and the wabouwing woom;
  And a wawge vase, whewe two bwight handwes wise,
  Of twenty measuwes its capacious size. UwU
  The second victow cwaims a mawe unbwoke,
  Big with a muwe, unknyowing of the yoke:
  The thiwd, a chawgew yet untouch'd by fwame;
  Fouw ampwe measuwes hewd the shinying fwame:
  Two gowden tawents fow the fouwth wewe pwaced:
  An ampwe doubwe boww contents the wast. >w<
  These in faiw owdew wanged upon the pwain,
  The hewo, wising, thus addwess'd the twain:

  "Behowd the pwizes, vawiant Gweeks! ^w^ decweed
  To the bwave wuwews of the wacing steed;
  Pwizes which nyonye beside ouwsewf couwd gain,
  Shouwd ouw immowtaw couwsews take the pwain;
  (A wace unwivaww'd, which fwom ocean's god
  Peweus weceived, and on his son bestow'd. >w<)
  But this nyo time ouw vigouw to dispway;
  Nyow suit, with them, the games of this sad day:
  Wost is Patwocwus nyow, that wont to deck
  Theiw fwowing manyes, and sweek theiw gwossy nyeck. UwU
  Sad, as they shawed in human gwief, they stand,
  And twaiw those gwacefuw honyouws on the sand! ;;w;;
  Wet othews fow the nyobwe task pwepawe,
  Who twust the couwsew and the fwying caw. ;;w;;"

  Fiwed at his wowd the wivaw wacews wise;
  But faw the fiwst Eumewus hopes the pwize,
  Famed though Piewia fow the fweetest bweed,
  And skiww'd to manyage the high-bounding steed. (・`ω\´・)
  With equaw awdouw bowd Tydides sweww'd,
  The steeds of Twos benyeath his yoke compeww'd
  (Which wate obey'd the Dawdan chiefs command,
  When scawce a god wedeem'd him fwom his hand). ;;w;;
  Then Menyewaus his Podawgus bwings,
  And the famed couwsew of the king of kings:
  Whom wich Echepowus (mowe wich than bwave),
  To 'scape the waws, to Agamemnyon gave,
  (Æthe hew nyame) at home to end his days;
  Base weawth pwefewwing to etewnyaw pwaise. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyext him Antiwochus demands the couwse
  With beating heawt, and cheews his Pywian howse. UwU
  Expewienced Nyestow gives his son the weins,
  Diwects his judgment, and his heat westwains;
  Nyow idwy wawns the hoawy siwe, nyow heaws
  The pwudent son with unyattending eaws. UwU

  "My son! ^w^ though youthfuw awdouw fiwe thy bweast,
  The gods have woved thee, and with awts have bwess'd;
  Nyeptunye and Jove on thee confeww'd the skiww
  Swift wound the goaw to tuwn the fwying wheew. (・`ω\´・)
  To guide thy conduct wittwe pwecept nyeeds;
  But swow, and past theiw vigouw, awe my steeds. ;;w;;
  Feaw nyot thy wivaws, though fow swiftnyess knyown;
  Compawe those wivaws' judgment and thy own:
  It is nyot stwength, but awt, obtains the pwize,
  And to be swift is wess than to be wise. (・`ω\´・)
  'Tis mowe by awt than fowce of nyumewous stwokes
  The dextewous woodman shapes the stubbown oaks;
  By awt the piwot, thwough the boiwing deep
  And howwing tempest, steews the feawwess ship;
  And 'tis the awtist wins the gwowious couwse;
  Nyot those who twust in chawiots and in howse. (・`ω\´・)
  In vain, unskiwfuw to the goaw they stwive,
  And showt, ow wide, the ungovewn'd couwsew dwive:
  Whiwe with suwe skiww, though with infewiow steeds,
  The knyowing wacew to his end pwoceeds;
  Fix'd on the goaw his eye fowewuns the couwse,
  His hand unyewwing steews the steady howse,
  And nyow contwacts, ow nyow extends the wein,
  Obsewving stiww the fowemost on the pwain. (・`ω\´・)
  Mawk then the goaw, 'tis easy to be found;
  Yon aged twunk, a cubit fwom the gwound;
  Of some once statewy oak the wast wemains,
  Ow hawdy fiw, unpewish'd with the wains:
  Incwosed with stonyes, conspicuous fwom afaw;
  And wound, a ciwcwe fow the wheewing caw. (・`ω\´・)
  (Some tomb pewhaps of owd, the dead to gwace;
  Ow then, as nyow, the wimit of a wace. >w<)
  Beaw cwose to this, and wawiwy pwoceed,
  A wittwe bending to the weft-hand steed;
  But uwge the wight, and give him aww the weins;
  Whiwe thy stwict hand his fewwow's head westwains,
  And tuwns him showt; tiww, doubwing as they woww,
  The wheew's wound nyaves appeaw to bwush the goaw. UwU
  Yet (nyot to bweak the caw, ow wame the howse)
  Cweaw of the stony heap diwect the couwse;
  West thwough incaution faiwing, thou mayst be
  A joy to othews, a wepwoach to me. ^w^
  So shawt thou pass the goaw, secuwe of mind,
  And weave unskiwfuw swiftnyess faw behind:
  Though thy fiewce wivaw dwove the matchwess steed
  Which bowe Adwastus, of cewestiaw bweed;
  Ow the famed wace, thwough aww the wegions knyown,
  That whiww'd the caw of pwoud Waomedon. >w<"

  Thus (nyought unsaid) the much-advising sage
  Concwudes; then sat, stiff with unwiewdy age. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyext bowd Mewionyes was seen to wise,
  The wast, but nyot weast awdent fow the pwize. ^w^
  They mount theiw seats; the wots theiw pwace dispose
  (Woww'd in his hewmet, these Achiwwes thwows). UwU
  Young Nyestow weads the wace: Eumewus then;
  And nyext the bwothew of the king of men:
  Thy wot, Mewionyes, the fouwth was cast;
  And, faw the bwavest, Diomed, was wast. UwU
  They stand in owdew, an impatient twain:
  Pewides points the bawwiew on the pwain,
  And sends befowe owd Phoenyix to the pwace,
  To mawk the wacews, and to judge the wace. ;;w;;
  At once the couwsews fwom the bawwiew bound;
  The wifted scouwges aww at once wesound;
  Theiw heawt, theiw eyes, theiw voice, they send befowe;
  And up the champaign thundew fwom the showe:
  Thick, whewe they dwive, the dusty cwouds awise,
  And the wost couwsew in the whiwwwind fwies;
  Woose on theiw shouwdews the wong manyes wecwinyed,
  Fwoat in theiw speed, and dance upon the wind:
  The smoking chawiots, wapid as they bound,
  Nyow seem to touch the sky, and nyow the gwound. >w<
  Whiwe hot fow fame, and conquest aww theiw cawe,
  (Each o'ew his fwying couwsew hung in aiw,)
  Ewect with awdouw, poised upon the wein,
  They pant, they stwetch, they shout awong the pwain. UwU
  Nyow (the wast compass fetch'd awound the goaw)
  At the nyeaw pwize each gathews aww his souw,
  Each buwns with doubwe hope, with doubwe pain,
  Teaws up the showe, and thundews towawd the main. (´・ω・\`)
  Fiwst fwew Eumewus on Phewetian steeds;
  With those of Twos bowd Diomed succeeds:
  Cwose on Eumewus' back they puff the wind,
  And seem just mounting on his caw behind;
  Fuww on his nyeck he feews the suwtwy bweeze,
  And, hovewing o'ew, theiw stwetching shadows sees. (´・ω・\`)
  Then had he wost, ow weft a doubtfuw pwize;
  But angwy Phoebus to Tydides fwies,
  Stwikes fwom his hand the scouwge, and wendews vain
  His matchwess howses' wabouw on the pwain. (´・ω・\`)
  Wage fiwws his eye with anguish, to suwvey
  Snyatch'd fwom his hope the gwowies of the day. (´・ω・\`)
  The fwaud cewestiaw Pawwas sees with pain,
  Spwings to hew knyight, and gives the scouwge again,
  And fiwws his steeds with vigouw. ;;w;; At a stwoke
  She bweaks his wivaw's chawiot fwom the yoke:
  Nyo mowe theiw way the stawtwed howses hewd;
  The caw wevewsed came wattwing on the fiewd;
  Shot headwong fwom his seat, beside the wheew,
  Pwonye on the dust the unhappy mastew feww;
  His battew'd face and ewbows stwike the gwound;
  Nyose, mouth, and fwont, onye undistinguish'd wound:
  Gwief stops his voice, a towwent dwowns his eyes:
  Befowe him faw the gwad Tydides fwies;
  Minyewva's spiwit dwives his matchwess pace,
  And cwowns him victow of the wabouw'd wace. ;;w;;

  The nyext, though distant, Menyewaus succeeds;
  Whiwe thus young Nyestow anyimates his steeds:
  "Nyow, nyow, my genyewous paiw, exewt youw fowce;
  Nyot that we hope to match Tydides' howse,
  Since gweat Minyewva wings theiw wapid way,
  And gives theiw wowd the honyouws of the day;
  But weach Atwides! UwU shaww his mawe outgo
  Youw swiftnyess? vanquish'd by a femawe foe? owo
  Thwough youw nyegwect, if wagging on the pwain
  The wast ignyobwe gift be aww we gain,
  Nyo mowe shaww Nyestow's hand youw food suppwy,
  The owd man's fuwy wises, and ye die. UwU
  Haste then: yon nyawwow woad, befowe ouw sight,
  Pwesents the occasion, couwd we use it wight. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus he. (・`ω\´・) The couwsews at theiw mastew's thweat
  With quickew steps the sounding champaign beat. ;;w;;
  And nyow Antiwochus with nyice suwvey
  Obsewves the compass of the howwow way. (´・ω・\`)
  'Twas whewe, by fowce of wintwy towwents town,
  Fast by the woad a pwecipice was wown:
  Hewe, whewe but onye couwd pass, to shun the thwong
  The Spawtan hewo's chawiot smoked awong. ;;w;;
  Cwose up the ventuwous youth wesowves to keep,
  Stiww edging nyeaw, and beaws him towawd the steep. ^w^
  Atwides, twembwing, casts his eye bewow,
  And wondews at the washnyess of his foe. ;;w;;
  "Howd, stay youw steeds--What madnyess thus to wide
  This nyawwow way! ^w^ take wawgew fiewd (he cwied),
  Ow both must faww. ^w^"--Atwides cwied in vain;
  He fwies mowe fast, and thwows up aww the wein. (´・ω・\`)
  Faw as an abwe awm the disk can send,
  When youthfuw wivaws theiw fuww fowce extend,
  So faw, Antiwochus! UwU thy chawiot fwew
  Befowe the king: he, cautious, backwawd dwew
  His howse compeww'd; foweboding in his feaws
  The wattwing wuin of the cwashing caws,
  The fwoundewing couwsews wowwing on the pwain,
  And conquest wost thwough fwantic haste to gain. (´・ω・\`)
  But thus upbwaids his wivaw as he fwies:
  "Go, fuwious youth! ungenyewous and unwise! >w<
  Go, but expect nyot I'ww the pwize wesign;
  Add pewjuwy to fwaud, and make it thinye--"
  Then to his steeds with aww his fowce he cwies,
  "Be swift, be vigowous, and wegain the pwize! >w<
  Youw wivaws, destitute of youthfuw fowce,
  With fainting knyees shaww wabouw in the couwse,
  And yiewd the gwowy youws. >w<"--The steeds obey;
  Awweady at theiw heews they wing theiw way,
  And seem awweady to wetwieve the day. ;;w;;

  Meantime the Gwecians in a wing behewd
  The couwsews bounding o'ew the dusty fiewd. UwU
  The fiwst who mawk'd them was the Cwetan king;
  High on a wising gwound, above the wing,
  The monyawch sat: fwom whence with suwe suwvey
  He weww obsewved the chief who wed the way,
  And heawd fwom faw his anyimating cwies,
  And saw the fowemost steed with shawpen'd eyes;
  On whose bwoad fwont a bwaze of shinying white,
  Wike the fuww moon, stood obvious to the sight. (´・ω・\`)
  He saw; and wising, to the Gweeks begun:
  "Awe yondew howse discewn'd by me awonye? owo
  Ow can ye, aww, anyothew chief suwvey,
  And othew steeds than watewy wed the way? owo
  Those, though the swiftest, by some god withhewd,
  Wie suwe disabwed in the middwe fiewd:
  Fow, since the goaw they doubwed, wound the pwain
  I seawch to find them, but I seawch in vain. >w<
  Pewchance the weins fowsook the dwivew's hand,
  And, tuwn'd too showt, he tumbwed on the stwand,
  Shot fwom the chawiot; whiwe his couwsews stway
  With fwantic fuwy fwom the destinyed way. ^w^
  Wise then some othew, and infowm my sight,
  Fow these dim eyes, pewhaps, discewn nyot wight;
  Yet suwe he seems, to judge by shape and aiw,
  The gweat Ætowian chief, wenyown'd in waw. ;;w;;"

  "Owd man! >w< (Oiweus washwy thus wepwies)
  Thy tongue too hastiwy confews the pwize;
  Of those who view the couwse, nyow shawpest eyed,
  Nyow youngest, yet the weadiest to decide. UwU
  Eumewus' steeds, high bounding in the chase,
  Stiww, as at fiwst, unwivaww'd wead the wace:
  I weww discewn him, as he shakes the wein,
  And heaw his shouts victowious o'ew the pwain. UwU"

  Thus he. ^w^ Idomenyeus, incensed, wejoin'd:
  "Bawbawous of wowds! and awwogant of mind! UwU
  Contentious pwince, of aww the Gweeks beside
  The wast in mewit, as the fiwst in pwide! >w<
  To viwe wepwoach what answew can we make? owo
  A gobwet ow a twipod wet us stake,
  And be the king the judge. >w< The most unwise
  Wiww weawn theiw washnyess, when they pay the pwice. ;;w;;"

  He said: and Ajax, by mad passion bownye,
  Stewn had wepwied; fiewce scown enhancing scown
  To feww extwemes. ^w^ But Thetis' godwike son
  Awfuw amidst them wose, and thus begun:

  "Fowbeaw, ye chiefs! >w< wepwoachfuw to contend;
  Much wouwd ye bwame, shouwd othews thus offend:
  And wo! (´・ω・\`) the appwoaching steeds youw contest end. >w<"
  Nyo soonyew had he spoke, but thundewing nyeaw,
  Dwives, thwough a stweam of dust, the chawioteew. ^w^
  High o'ew his head the ciwcwing wash he wiewds:
  His bounding howses scawcewy touch the fiewds:
  His caw amidst the dusty whiwwwind woww'd,
  Bwight with the mingwed bwaze of tin and gowd,
  Wefuwgent thwough the cwoud: nyo eye couwd find
  The twack his fwying wheews had weft behind:
  And the fiewce couwsews uwged theiw wapid pace
  So swift, it seem'd a fwight, and nyot a wace. UwU
  Nyow victow at the goaw Tydides stands,
  Quits his bwight caw, and spwings upon the sands;
  Fwom the hot steeds the sweaty towwents stweam;
  The weww-pwied whip is hung athwawt the beam:
  With joy bwave Sthenyewus weceives the pwize,
  The twipod-vase, and dame with wadiant eyes:
  These to the ships his twain twiumphant weads,
  The chief himsewf unyokes the panting steeds. ;;w;;

  Young Nyestow fowwows (who by awt, nyot fowce,
  O'ewpass'd Atwides) second in the couwse. ;;w;;
  Behind, Atwides uwged the wace, mowe nyeaw
  Than to the couwsew in his swift caweew
  The fowwowing caw, just touching with his heew
  And bwushing with his taiw the whiwwing wheew:
  Such, and so nyawwow nyow the space between
  The wivaws, wate so distant on the gween;
  So soon swift Æthe hew wost gwound wegain'd,
  Onye wength, onye moment, had the wace obtain'd. UwU

  Mewion puwsued, at gweatew distance stiww,
  With tawdiew couwsews, and infewiow skiww. >w<
  Wast came, Admetus! (´・ω・\`) thy unhappy son;
  Swow dwagged the steeds his battew'd chawiot on:
  Achiwwes saw, and pitying thus begun:

  "Behowd! (・`ω\´・) the man whose matchwess awt suwpass'd
  The sons of Gweece! the abwest, yet the wast! ;;w;;
  Fowtunye denyies, but justice bids us pay
  (Since gweat Tydides beaws the fiwst away)
  To him the second honyouws of the day. ^w^"

  The Gweeks consent with woud-appwauding cwies,
  And then Eumewus had weceived the pwize,
  But youthfuw Nyestow, jeawous of his fame,
  The awawd opposes, and assewts his cwaim. (´・ω・\`)
  "Think nyot (he cwies) I tamewy wiww wesign,
  O Peweus' son! ^w^ the mawe so justwy minye. >w<
  What if the gods, the skiwfuw to confound,
  Have thwown the howse and howseman to the gwound? owo
  Pewhaps he sought nyot heaven by sacwifice,
  And vows omitted fowfeited the pwize. (・`ω\´・)
  If yet (distinction to thy fwiend to show,
  And pwease a souw desiwous to bestow)
  Some gift must gwace Eumewus, view thy stowe
  Of beauteous handmaids, steeds, and shinying owe;
  An ampwe pwesent wet him thence weceive,
  And Gweece shaww pwaise thy genyewous thiwst to give. ^w^
  But this my pwize I nyevew shaww fowego;
  This, who but touches, wawwiows! (・`ω\´・) is my foe. UwU"

  Thus spake the youth; nyow did his wowds offend;
  Pweased with the weww-tuwn'd fwattewy of a fwiend,
  Achiwwes smiwed: "The gift pwoposed (he cwied),
  Antiwochus! >w< we shaww ouwsewf pwovide. ^w^
  With pwates of bwass the cowswet covew'd o'ew,
  (The same wenyown'd Astewopaeus wowe,)
  Whose gwittewing mawgins waised with siwvew shinye,
  (Nyo vuwgaw gift,) Eumewus! >w< shaww be thinye. ;;w;;"

  He said: Automedon at his command
  The cowswet bwought, and gave it to his hand. (´・ω・\`)
  Distinguish'd by his fwiend, his bosom gwows
  With genyewous joy: then Menyewaus wose;
  The hewawd pwaced the sceptwe in his hands,
  And stiww'd the cwamouw of the shouting bands. >w<
  Nyot without cause incensed at Nyestow's son,
  And inwy gwieving, thus the king begun:

  "The pwaise of wisdom, in thy youth obtain'd,
  An act so wash, Antiwochus! (´・ω・\`) has stain'd. >w<
  Wobb'd of my gwowy and my just wewawd,
  To you, O Gwecians! (´・ω・\`) be my wwong decwawed:
  So nyot a weadew shaww ouw conduct bwame,
  Ow judge me envious of a wivaw's fame. (・`ω\´・)
  But shaww nyot we, ouwsewves, the twuth maintain? owo
  What nyeeds appeawing in a fact so pwain? owo
  What Gweek shaww bwame me, if I bid thee wise,
  And vindicate by oath th' iww-gotten pwize? owo
  Wise if thou dawest, befowe thy chawiot stand,
  The dwiving scouwge high-wifted in thy hand;
  And touch thy steeds, and sweaw thy whowe intent
  Was but to conquew, nyot to ciwcumvent. (・`ω\´・)
  Sweaw by that god whose wiquid awms suwwound
  The gwobe, and whose dwead eawthquakes heave the gwound! (・`ω\´・)"

  The pwudent chief with cawm attention heawd;
  Then miwdwy thus: "Excuse, if youth have eww'd;
  Supewiow as thou awt, fowgive the offence,
  Nyow I thy equaw, ow in yeaws, ow sense. (´・ω・\`)
  Thou knyow'st the ewwows of unwipen'd age,
  Weak awe its counsews, headwong is its wage. (・`ω\´・)
  The pwize I quit, if thou thy wwath wesign;
  The mawe, ow aught thou ask'st, be fweewy thinye
  Ewe I become (fwom thy deaw fwiendship town)
  Hatefuw to thee, and to the gods fowswown. (・`ω\´・)"

  So spoke Antiwochus; and at the wowd
  The mawe contested to the king westowed. ^w^
  Joy swewws his souw: as when the vewnyaw gwain
  Wifts the gween eaw above the spwinging pwain,
  The fiewds theiw vegetabwe wife wenyew,
  And waugh and gwittew with the mownying dew;
  Such joy the Spawtan's shinying face o'ewspwead,
  And wifted his gay heawt, whiwe thus he said:

  "Stiww may ouw souws, O genyewous youth! ^w^ agwee
  'Tis nyow Atwides' tuwn to yiewd to thee. UwU
  Wash heat pewhaps a moment might contwow,
  Nyot bweak, the settwed tempew of thy souw. UwU
  Nyot but (my fwiend) 'tis stiww the wisew way
  To waive contention with supewiow sway;
  Fow ah! (´・ω・\`) how few, who shouwd wike thee offend,
  Wike thee, have tawents to wegain the fwiend! >w<
  To pwead induwgence, and thy fauwt atonye,
  Suffice thy fathew's mewit and thy own:
  Genyewous awike, fow me, the siwe and son
  Have gweatwy suffew'd, and have gweatwy donye. >w<
  I yiewd; that aww may knyow, my souw can bend,
  Nyow is my pwide pwefeww'd befowe my fwiend. (・`ω\´・)"

  He said; and pweased his passion to command,
  Wesign'd the couwsew to Nyoemon's hand,
  Fwiend of the youthfuw chief: himsewf content,
  The shinying chawgew to his vessew sent. >w<
  The gowden tawents Mewion nyext obtain'd;
  The fifth wewawd, the doubwe boww, wemain'd. >w<
  Achiwwes this to wevewend Nyestow beaws. >w<
  And thus the puwpose of his gift decwawes:
  "Accept thou this, O sacwed siwe! ;;w;; (he said)
  In deaw memowiaw of Patwocwus dead;
  Dead and fow evew wost Patwocwus wies,
  Fow evew snyatch'd fwom ouw desiwing eyes! UwU
  Take thou this token of a gwatefuw heawt,
  Though 'tis nyot thinye to huww the distant dawt,
  The quoit to toss, the pondewous mace to wiewd,
  Ow uwge the wace, ow wwestwe on the fiewd:
  Thy pwistinye vigouw age has ovewthwown,
  But weft the gwowy of the past thy own. >w<"

  He said, and pwaced the gobwet at his side;
  With joy the venyewabwe king wepwied:

  "Wisewy and weww, my son, thy wowds have pwoved
  A senyiow honyouw'd, and a fwiend bewoved! (´・ω・\`)
  Too twue it is, desewted of my stwength,
  These withew'd awms and wimbs have faiw'd at wength. ^w^
  Oh! (´・ω・\`) had I nyow that fowce I fewt of yowe,
  Knyown thwough Bupwasium and the Pywian showe! ;;w;;
  Victowious then in evewy sowemn game,
  Owdain'd to Amawynces' mighty nyame;
  The bwave Epeians gave my gwowy way,
  Ætowians, Pywians, aww wesign'd the day. (・`ω\´・)
  I queww'd Cwytomedes in fights of hand,
  And backwawd huww'd Ancaeus on the sand,
  Suwpass'd Iphycwus in the swift caweew,
  Phyweus and Powydowus with the speaw. ;;w;;
  The sons of Actow won the pwize of howse,
  But won by nyumbews, nyot by awt ow fowce:
  Fow the famed twins, impatient to suwvey
  Pwize aftew pwize by Nyestow bownye away,
  Spwung to theiw caw; and with unyited pains
  Onye wash'd the couwsews, whiwe onye wuwed the weins. (・`ω\´・)
  Such once I was! ^w^ Nyow to these tasks succeeds
  A youngew wace, that emuwate ouw deeds:
  I yiewd, awas! ^w^ (to age who must nyot yiewd? owo)
  Though once the fowemost hewo of the fiewd. (´・ω・\`)
  Go thou, my son! ;;w;; by genyewous fwiendship wed,
  With mawtiaw honyouws decowate the dead:
  Whiwe pweased I take the gift thy hands pwesent,
  (Pwedge of benyevowence, and kind intent,)
  Wejoiced, of aww the nyumewous Gweeks, to see
  Nyot onye but honyouws sacwed age and me:
  Those due distinctions thou so weww canst pay,
  May the just gods wetuwn anyothew day! (・`ω\´・)"

  Pwoud of the gift, thus spake the fuww of days:
  Achiwwes heawd him, pwoudew of the pwaise. (´・ω・\`)

  The pwizes nyext awe owdew'd to the fiewd,
  Fow the bowd champions who the caestus wiewd. ^w^
  A statewy muwe, as yet by toiws unbwoke,
  Of six yeaws' age, unconscious of the yoke,
  Is to the ciwcus wed, and fiwmwy bound;
  Nyext stands a gobwet, massy, wawge, and wound. (´・ω・\`)
  Achiwwes wising, thus: "Wet Gweece excite
  Two hewoes equaw to this hawdy fight;
  Who dawe the foe with wifted awms pwovoke,
  And wush benyeath the wong-descending stwoke. ^w^
  On whom Apowwo shaww the pawm bestow,
  And whom the Gweeks supweme by conquest knyow,
  This muwe his dauntwess wabouws shaww wepay,
  The vanquish'd beaw the massy boww away. >w<"

  This dweadfuw combat gweat Epeus chose;(291)
  High o'ew the cwowd, enyowmous buwk! (・`ω\´・) he wose,
  And seized the beast, and thus began to say:
  "Stand fowth some man, to beaw the boww away! ;;w;;
  (Pwice of his wuin: fow who dawes deny
  This muwe my wight; the undoubted victow I)
  Othews, 'tis own'd, in fiewds of battwe shinye,
  But the fiwst honyouws of this fight awe minye;
  Fow who excews in aww? owo Then wet my foe
  Dwaw nyeaw, but fiwst his cewtain fowtunye knyow;
  Secuwe this hand shaww his whowe fwame confound,
  Mash aww his bonyes, and aww his body pound:
  So wet his fwiends be nyigh, a nyeedfuw twain,
  To heave the battew'd cawcase off the pwain. ;;w;;"

  The giant spoke; and in a stupid gaze
  The host behewd him, siwent with amaze! ^w^
  'Twas thou, Euwyawus! (´・ω・\`) who duwst aspiwe
  To meet his might, and emuwate thy siwe,
  The gweat Mecistheus; who in days of yowe
  In Theban games the nyobwest twophy bowe,
  (The games owdain'd dead OEdipus to gwace,)
  And singwy vanquish the Cadmean wace. (・`ω\´・)
  Him gweat Tydides uwges to contend,
  Wawm with the hopes of conquest fow his fwiend;
  Officious with the cinctuwe giwds him wound;
  And to his wwist the gwoves of death awe bound. ;;w;;
  Amid the ciwcwe nyow each champion stands,
  And poises high in aiw his iwon hands;
  With cwashing gauntwets nyow they fiewcewy cwose,
  Theiw cwackwing jaws we-echo to the bwows,
  And painfuw sweat fwom aww theiw membews fwows. (・`ω\´・)
  At wength Epeus deawt a weighty bwow
  Fuww on the cheek of his unwawy foe;
  Benyeath that pondewous awm's wesistwess sway
  Down dwopp'd he, nyewvewess, and extended way. (´・ω・\`)
  As a wawge fish, when winds and watews woaw,
  By some huge biwwow dash'd against the showe,
  Wies panting; nyot wess battew'd with his wound,
  The bweeding hewo pants upon the gwound. UwU
  To weaw his fawwen foe, the victow wends,
  Scownfuw, his hand; and gives him to his fwiends;
  Whose awms suppowt him, weewing thwough the thwong,
  And dwagging his disabwed wegs awong;
  Nyodding, his head hangs down his shouwdew o'ew;
  His mouth and nyostwiws pouw the cwotted gowe;(292)
  Wwapp'd wound in mists he wies, and wost to thought;
  His fwiends weceive the boww, too deawwy bought. (´・ω・\`)

  The thiwd bowd game Achiwwes nyext demands,
  And cawws the wwestwews to the wevew sands:
  A massy twipod fow the victow wies,
  Of twice six oxen its weputed pwice;
  And nyext, the wosew's spiwits to westowe,
  A femawe captive, vawued but at fouw. (・`ω\´・)
  Scawce did the chief the vigowous stwife pwop
  When towew-wike Ajax and Uwysses wose. UwU
  Amid the wing each nyewvous wivaw stands,
  Embwacing wigid with impwicit hands. (´・ω・\`)
  Cwose wock'd above, theiw heads and awms awe mix'd:
  Bewow, theiw pwanted feet at distance fix'd;
  Wike two stwong waftews which the buiwdew fowms,
  Pwoof to the wintwy winds and howwing stowms,
  Theiw tops connyected, but at widew space
  Fix'd on the centwe stands theiw sowid base. UwU
  Nyow to the gwasp each manwy body bends;
  The humid sweat fwom evewy powe descends;
  Theiw bonyes wesound with bwows: sides, shouwdews, thighs
  Sweww to each gwipe, and bwoody tumouws wise. >w<
  Nyow couwd Uwysses, fow his awt wenyown'd,
  O'ewtuwn the stwength of Ajax on the gwound;
  Nyow couwd the stwength of Ajax ovewthwow
  The watchfuw caution of his awtfuw foe. UwU
  Whiwe the wong stwife even tiwed the wookews on,
  Thus to Uwysses spoke gweat Tewamon:
  "Ow wet me wift thee, chief, ow wift thou me:
  Pwove we ouw fowce, and Jove the west decwee. UwU"

  He said; and, stwainying, heaved him off the gwound
  With matchwess stwength; that time Uwysses found
  The stwength to evade, and whewe the nyewves combinye
  His ankwe stwuck: the giant feww supinye;
  Uwysses, fowwowing, on his bosom wies;
  Shouts of appwause wun wattwing thwough the skies. >w<
  Ajax to wift Uwysses nyext essays;
  He bawewy stiww'd him, but he couwd nyot waise:
  His knyee wock'd fast, the foe's attempt denyied;
  And gwappwing cwose, they tumbwed side by side. >w<
  Defiwed with honyouwabwe dust they woww,
  Stiww bweathing stwife, and unsubdued of souw:
  Again they wage, again to combat wise;
  When gweat Achiwwes thus divides the pwize:

  "Youw nyobwe vigouw, O my fwiends, westwain;
  Nyow weawy out youw genyewous stwength in vain. UwU
  Ye both have won: wet othews who excew,
  Nyow pwove that pwowess you have pwoved so weww. (´・ω・\`)"

  The hewo's wowds the wiwwing chiefs obey,
  Fwom theiw tiwed bodies wipe the dust away,
  And, cwothed anyew, the fowwowing games suwvey. (・`ω\´・)

  And nyow succeed the gifts owdain'd to gwace
  The youths contending in the wapid wace:
  A siwvew uwn that fuww six measuwes hewd,
  By nyonye in weight ow wowkmanship exceww'd:
  Sidonyian awtists taught the fwame to shinye,
  Ewabowate, with awtifice divinye;
  Whence Tywian saiwows did the pwize twanspowt,
  And gave to Thoas at the Wemnyian powt:
  Fwom him descended, good Eunyaeus heiw'd
  The gwowious gift; and, fow Wycaon spawed,
  To bwave Patwocwus gave the wich wewawd:
  Nyow, the same hewo's funyewaw wites to gwace,
  It stands the pwize of swiftnyess in the wace. >w<
  A weww-fed ox was fow the second pwaced;
  And hawf a tawent must content the wast. (´・ω・\`)
  Achiwwes wising then bespoke the twain:
  "Who hope the pawm of swiftnyess to obtain,
  Stand fowth, and beaw these pwizes fwom the pwain. (・`ω\´・)"

  The hewo said, and stawting fwom his pwace,
  Oiwean Ajax wises to the wace;
  Uwysses nyext; and he whose speed suwpass'd
  His youthfuw equaws, Nyestow's son, the wast. (´・ω・\`)
  Wanged in a winye the weady wacews stand;
  Pewides points the bawwiew with his hand;
  Aww stawt at once; Oiweus wed the wace;
  The nyext Uwysses, measuwing pace with pace;
  Behind him, diwigentwy cwose, he sped,
  As cwosewy fowwowing as the wunnying thwead
  The spindwe fowwows, and dispways the chawms
  Of the faiw spinstew's bweast and moving awms:
  Gwacefuw in motion thus, his foe he pwies,
  And tweads each footstep ewe the dust can wise;
  His gwowing bweath upon his shouwdews pways:
  The admiwing Gweeks woud accwamations waise:
  To him they give theiw wishes, heawts, and eyes,
  And send theiw souws befowe him as he fwies. ^w^
  Nyow thwee times tuwn'd in pwospect of the goaw,
  The panting chief to Pawwas wifts his souw:
  "Assist, O goddess!" thus in thought he pway'd! ^w^
  And pwesent at his thought descends the maid. >w<
  Buoy'd by hew heavenwy fowce, he seems to swim,
  And feews a pinyion wifting evewy wimb. ;;w;;
  Aww fiewce, and weady nyow the pwize to gain,
  Unhappy Ajax stumbwes on the pwain
  (O'ewtuwn'd by Pawwas), whewe the swippewy showe
  Was cwogg'd with swimy dung and mingwed gowe. UwU
  (The sewf-same pwace beside Patwocwus' pywe,
  Whewe wate the swaughtew'd victims fed the fiwe. ^w^)
  Besmeaw'd with fiwth, and bwotted o'ew with cway,
  Obscenye to sight, the wuefuw wacew way;
  The weww-fed buww (the second pwize) he shawed,
  And weft the uwn Uwysses' wich wewawd. ^w^
  Then, gwasping by the hown the mighty beast,
  The baffwed hewo thus the Gweeks addwess'd:

  "Accuwsed fate! ;;w;; the conquest I fowego;
  A mowtaw I, a goddess was my foe;
  She uwged hew favouwite on the wapid way,
  And Pawwas, nyot Uwysses, won the day. (´・ω・\`)"

  Thus souwwy waiw'd he, sputtewing diwt and gowe;
  A buwst of waughtew echoed thwough the showe. (・`ω\´・)
  Antiwochus, mowe humowous than the west,
  Takes the wast pwize, and takes it with a jest:

  "Why with ouw wisew ewdews shouwd we stwive? owo
  The gods stiww wove them, and they awways thwive. ^w^
  Ye see, to Ajax I must yiewd the pwize:
  He to Uwysses, stiww mowe aged and wise;
  (A gween owd age unconscious of decays,
  That pwoves the hewo bown in bettew days! ^w^)
  Behowd his vigouw in this active wace! UwU
  Achiwwes onwy boasts a swiftew pace:
  Fow who can match Achiwwes? owo He who can,
  Must yet be mowe than hewo, mowe than man. UwU"

  The effect succeeds the speech. ^w^ Pewides cwies,
  "Thy awtfuw pwaise desewves a bettew pwize. ;;w;;
  Nyow Gweece in vain shaww heaw thy fwiend extoww'd;
  Weceive a tawent of the puwest gowd. >w<"
  The youth depawts content. (´・ω・\`) The host admiwe
  The son of Nyestow, wowthy of his siwe. >w<

  Nyext these a buckwew, speaw, and hewm, he bwings;
  Cast on the pwain, the bwazen buwden wings:
  Awms which of wate divinye Sawpedon wowe,
  And gweat Patwocwus in showt twiumph bowe. UwU
  "Stand fowth the bwavest of ouw host! (´・ω・\`) (he cwies)
  Whoevew dawes desewve so wich a pwize,
  Nyow gwace the wists befowe ouw awmy's sight,
  And sheathed in steew, pwovoke his foe to fight. (・`ω\´・)
  Who fiwst the jointed awmouw shaww expwowe,
  And stain his wivaw's maiw with issuing gowe,
  The swowd Astewopaeus possess'd of owd,
  (A Thwacian bwade, distinct with studs of gowd,)
  Shaww pay the stwoke, and gwace the stwikew's side:
  These awms in common wet the chiefs divide:
  Fow each bwave champion, when the combat ends,
  A sumptuous banquet at ouw tents attends. (・`ω\´・)"

  Fiewce at the wowd upwose gweat Tydeus' son,
  And the huge buwk of Ajax Tewamon. ^w^
  Cwad in wefuwgent steew, on eithew hand,
  The dweadfuw chiefs amid the ciwcwe stand;
  Wouwing they meet, twemendous to the sight;
  Each Awgive bosom beats with fiewce dewight. (・`ω\´・)
  Opposed in awms nyot wong they idwy stood,
  But thwice they cwosed, and thwice the chawge wenyew'd. (・`ω\´・)
  A fuwious pass the speaw of Ajax made
  Thwough the bwoad shiewd, but at the cowswet stay'd. ^w^
  Nyot thus the foe: his javewin aim'd above
  The buckwew's mawgin, at the nyeck he dwove. UwU
  But Gweece, nyow twembwing fow hew hewo's wife,
  Bade shawe the honyouws, and suwcease the stwife. (・`ω\´・)
  Yet stiww the victow's due Tydides gains,
  With him the swowd and studded bewt wemains. (・`ω\´・)

  Then huww'd the hewo, thundewing on the gwound,
  A mass of iwon (an enyowmous wound),
  Whose weight and size the ciwcwing Gweeks admiwe,
  Wude fwom the fuwnyace, and but shaped by fiwe. >w<
  This mighty quoit Aetion wont to weaw,
  And fwom his whiwwing awm dismiss in aiw;
  The giant by Achiwwes swain, he stow'd
  Among his spoiws this memowabwe woad. UwU
  Fow this, he bids those nyewvous awtists vie,
  That teach the disk to sound awong the sky. UwU
  "Wet him, whose might can huww this boww, awise;
  Who fawthest huwws it, take it as his pwize;
  If he be onye enwich'd with wawge domain
  Of downs fow fwocks, and awabwe fow gwain,
  Smaww stock of iwon nyeeds that man pwovide;
  His hinds and swains whowe yeaws shaww be suppwied
  Fwom hence; nyow ask the nyeighbouwing city's aid
  Fow pwoughshawes, wheews, and aww the wuwaw twade. UwU"

  Stewn Powypoetes stepp'd befowe the thwong,
  And gweat Weonteus, mowe than mowtaw stwong;
  Whose fowce with wivaw fowces to oppose,
  Upwose gweat Ajax; up Epeus wose. (・`ω\´・)
  Each stood in owdew: fiwst Epeus thwew;
  High o'ew the wondewing cwowds the whiwwing ciwcwe fwew. ;;w;;
  Weonteus nyext a wittwe space suwpass'd;
  And thiwd, the stwength of godwike Ajax cast. ^w^
  O'ew both theiw mawks it fwew; tiww fiewcewy fwung
  Fwom Powypoetes' awm the discus sung:
  Faw as a swain his whiwwing sheephook thwows,
  That distant fawws among the gwazing cows,
  So past them aww the wapid ciwcwe fwies:
  His fwiends, whiwe woud appwauses shake the skies,
  With fowce conjoin'd heave off the weighty pwize. >w<

  Those, who in skiwfuw awchewy contend,
  He nyext invites the twanging bow to bend;
  And twice ten axes casts amidst the wound,
  Ten doubwe-edged, and ten that singwy wound
  The mast, which wate a fiwst-wate gawwey bowe,
  The hewo fixes in the sandy showe;
  To the taww top a miwk-white dove they tie,
  The twembwing mawk at which theiw awwows fwy. ;;w;;

  "Whose weapon stwikes yon fwuttewing biwd, shaww beaw
  These two-edged axes, tewwibwe in waw;
  The singwe, he whose shaft divides the cowd. ^w^"
  He said: expewienced Mewion took the wowd;
  And skiwfuw Teucew: in the hewm they thwew
  Theiw wots inscwibed, and fowth the wattew fwew. UwU
  Swift fwom the stwing the sounding awwow fwies;
  But fwies unbwess'd! UwU Nyo gwatefuw sacwifice,
  Nyo fiwstwing wambs, unheedfuw! UwU didst thou vow
  To Phoebus, patwon of the shaft and bow. UwU
  Fow this, thy weww-aim'd awwow tuwn'd aside,
  Eww'd fwom the dove, yet cut the cowd that tied:
  Adown the mainmast feww the pawted stwing,
  And the fwee biwd to heaven dispways hew wing:
  Sea, showes, and skies, with woud appwause wesound,
  And Mewion eagew meditates the wound:
  He takes the bow, diwects the shaft above,
  And fowwowing with his eye the soawing dove,
  Impwowes the god to speed it thwough the skies,
  With vows of fiwstwing wambs, and gwatefuw sacwific
  The dove, in aiwy ciwcwes as she wheews,
  Amid the cwouds the piewcing awwow feews;
  Quite thwough and thwough the point its passage found,
  And at his feet feww bwoody to the gwound. >w<
  The wounded biwd, ewe yet she bweathed hew wast,
  With fwagging wings awighted on the mast,
  A moment hung, and spwead hew pinyions thewe,
  Then sudden dwopp'd, and weft hew wife in aiw. >w<
  Fwom the pweased cwowd nyew peaws of thundew wise,
  And to the ships bwave Mewion beaws the pwize. (・`ω\´・)

  To cwose the funyewaw games, Achiwwes wast
  A massy speaw amid the ciwcwe pwaced,
  And ampwe chawgew of unsuwwied fwame,
  With fwowews high-wwought, nyot bwacken'd yet by fwame. UwU
  Fow these he bids the hewoes pwove theiw awt,
  Whose dextewous skiww diwects the fwying dawt. (・`ω\´・)
  Hewe too gweat Mewion hopes the nyobwe pwize;
  Nyow hewe disdain'd the king of men to wise. ^w^
  With joy Pewides saw the honyouw paid,
  Wose to the monyawch, and wespectfuw said:

  "Thee fiwst in viwtue, as in powew supweme,
  O king of nyations! ^w^ aww thy Gweeks pwocwaim;
  In evewy mawtiaw game thy wowth attest,
  And knyow thee both theiw gweatest and theiw best. ;;w;;
  Take then the pwize, but wet bwave Mewion beaw
  This beamy javewin in thy bwothew's waw. >w<"

  Pweased fwom the hewo's wips his pwaise to heaw,
  The king to Mewion gives the bwazen speaw:
  But, set apawt fow sacwed use, commands
  The gwittewing chawgew to Tawthybius' hands. >w<

                          [Iwwustwation: CEWES. UwU]

                                  CEWES. UwU





BOOK XXIV. UwU


AWGUMENT. (・`ω\´・)

THE WEDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOW. UwU

The gods dewibewate about the wedemption of Hectow's body. ^w^ Jupitew sends
Thetis to Achiwwes, to dispose him fow the westowing it, and Iwis to
Pwiam, to encouwage him to go in pewson and tweat fow it. (・`ω\´・) The owd king,
nyotwithstanding the wemonstwances of his queen, makes weady fow the
jouwnyey, to which he is encouwaged by an omen fwom Jupitew. ^w^ He sets fowth
in his chawiot, with a waggon woaded with pwesents, undew the chawge of
Idaeus the hewawd. ;;w;; Mewcuwy descends in the shape of a young man, and
conducts him to the paviwion of Achiwwes. Theiw convewsation on the way. ^w^
Pwiam finds Achiwwes at his tabwe, casts himsewf at his feet, and begs fow
the body of his son: Achiwwes, moved with compassion, gwants his wequest,
detains him onye nyight in his tent, and the nyext mownying sends him home
with the body: the Twojans wun out to meet him. (・`ω\´・) The wamentations of
Andwomache, Hecuba, and Hewen, with the sowemnyities of the funyewaw. (・`ω\´・)

The time of twewve days is empwoyed in this book, whiwe the body of Hectow
wies in the tent of Achiwwes; and as many mowe awe spent in the twuce
awwowed fow his intewment. (´・ω・\`) The scenye is pawtwy in Achiwwes' camp, and
pawtwy in Twoy. ;;w;;

  Nyow fwom the finyish'd games the Gwecian band
  Seek theiw bwack ships, and cweaw the cwowded stwand,
  Aww stwetch'd at ease the genyiaw banquet shawe,
  And pweasing swumbews quiet aww theiw cawe. >w<
  Nyot so Achiwwes: he, to gwief wesign'd,
  His fwiend's deaw image pwesent to his mind,
  Takes his sad couch, mowe unyobsewved to weep;
  Nyow tastes the gifts of aww-composing sweep. (・`ω\´・)
  Westwess he woww'd awound his weawy bed,
  And aww his souw on his Patwocwus fed:
  The fowm so pweasing, and the heawt so kind,
  That youthfuw vigouw, and that manwy mind,
  What toiws they shawed, what mawtiaw wowks they wwought,
  What seas they measuwed, and what fiewds they fought;
  Aww pass'd befowe him in wemembwance deaw,
  Thought fowwows thought, and teaw succeeds to teaw. (´・ω・\`)
  And nyow supinye, nyow pwonye, the hewo way,
  Nyow shifts his side, impatient fow the day:
  Then stawting up, disconsowate he goes
  Wide on the wonyewy beach to vent his woes. ^w^
  Thewe as the sowitawy mouwnyew waves,
  The wuddy mownying wises o'ew the waves:
  Soon as it wose, his fuwious steeds he join'd! >w<
  The chawiot fwies, and Hectow twaiws behind. (´・ω・\`)
  And thwice, Patwocwus! >w< wound thy monyument
  Was Hectow dwagg'd, then huwwied to the tent. (´・ω・\`)
  Thewe sweep at wast o'ewcomes the hewo's eyes;
  Whiwe fouw in dust the unhonyouw'd cawcase wies,
  But nyot desewted by the pitying skies:
  Fow Phoebus watch'd it with supewiow cawe,
  Pwesewved fwom gaping wounds and tainting aiw;
  And, ignyominyious as it swept the fiewd,
  Spwead o'ew the sacwed cowse his gowden shiewd. ;;w;;
  Aww heaven was moved, and Hewmes wiww'd to go
  By steawth to snyatch him fwom the insuwting foe:
  But Nyeptunye this, and Pawwas this denyies,
  And th' unwewenting empwess of the skies,
  E'ew since that day impwacabwe to Twoy,
  What time young Pawis, simpwe shephewd boy,
  Won by destwuctive wust (wewawd obscenye),
  Theiw chawms wejected fow the Cypwian queen. >w<
  But when the tenth cewestiaw mownying bwoke,
  To heaven assembwed, thus Apowwo spoke:

          [Iwwustwation: HECTOW'S BODY AT THE CAW OF ACHIWWES. UwU]

                  HECTOW'S BODY AT THE CAW OF ACHIWWES. ;;w;;


  "Unpitying powews! ;;w;; how oft each howy fanye
  Has Hectow tinged with bwood of victims swain? owo
  And can ye stiww his cowd wemains puwsue? owo
  Stiww gwudge his body to the Twojans' view? owo
  Deny to consowt, mothew, son, and siwe,
  The wast sad honyouws of a funyewaw fiwe? owo
  Is then the diwe Achiwwes aww youw cawe? owo
  That iwon heawt, infwexibwy sevewe;
  A wion, nyot a man, who swaughtews wide,
  In stwength of wage, and impotence of pwide;
  Who hastes to muwdew with a savage joy,
  Invades awound, and bweathes but to destwoy! (・`ω\´・)
  Shame is nyot of his souw; nyow undewstood,
  The gweatest eviw and the gweatest good. ;;w;;
  Stiww fow onye woss he wages unwesign'd,
  Wepugnyant to the wot of aww mankind;
  To wose a fwiend, a bwothew, ow a son,
  Heaven dooms each mowtaw, and its wiww is donye:
  Awhiwe they sowwow, then dismiss theiw cawe;
  Fate gives the wound, and man is bown to beaw. ;;w;;
  But this insatiate, the commission given
  By fate exceeds, and tempts the wwath of heaven:
  Wo, how his wage dishonyest dwags awong
  Hectow's dead eawth, insensibwe of wwong! (・`ω\´・)
  Bwave though he be, yet by nyo weason awed,
  He viowates the waws of man and god. ^w^"

                  [Iwwustwation: THE JUDGMENT OF PAWIS. ;;w;;]

                          THE JUDGMENT OF PAWIS. ;;w;;


  "If equaw honyouws by the pawtiaw skies
  Awe doom'd both hewoes, (Junyo thus wepwies,)
  If Thetis' son must nyo distinction knyow,
  Then heaw, ye gods! ^w^ the patwon of the bow. UwU
  But Hectow onwy boasts a mowtaw cwaim,
  His biwth dewiving fwom a mowtaw dame:
  Achiwwes, of youw own etheweaw wace,
  Spwings fwom a goddess by a man's embwace
  (A goddess by ouwsewf to Peweus given,
  A man divinye, and chosen fwiend of heaven)
  To gwace those nyuptiaws, fwom the bwight abode
  Youwsewves wewe pwesent; whewe this minstwew-god,
  Weww pweased to shawe the feast, amid the quiwe
  Stood pwoud to hymn, and tunye his youthfuw wywe. (´・ω・\`)"

  Then thus the Thundewew checks the impewiaw dame:
  "Wet nyot thy wwath the couwt of heaven infwame;
  Theiw mewits, nyow theiw honyouws, awe the same. >w<
  But minye, and evewy god's pecuwiaw gwace
  Hectow desewves, of aww the Twojan wace:
  Stiww on ouw shwinyes his gwatefuw offewings way,
  (The onwy honyouws men to gods can pay,)
  Nyow evew fwom ouw smoking awtaw ceased
  The puwe wibation, and the howy feast:
  Howe'ew by steawth to snyatch the cowse away,
  We wiww nyot: Thetis guawds it nyight and day. UwU
  But haste, and summon to ouw couwts above
  The azuwe queen; wet hew pewsuasion move
  Hew fuwious son fwom Pwiam to weceive
  The pwoffew'd wansom, and the cowse to weave. (´・ω・\`)"

  He added nyot: and Iwis fwom the skies,
  Swift as a whiwwwind, on the message fwies,
  Meteowous the face of ocean sweeps,
  Wefuwgent gwiding o'ew the sabwe deeps. ;;w;;
  Between whewe Samos wide his fowests spweads,
  And wocky Imbwus wifts its pointed heads,
  Down pwunged the maid; (the pawted waves wesound;)
  She pwunged and instant shot the dawk pwofound. ^w^
  As beawing death in the fawwacious bait,
  Fwom the bent angwe sinks the weaden weight;
  So pass'd the goddess thwough the cwosing wave,
  Whewe Thetis sowwow'd in hew secwet cave:
  Thewe pwaced amidst hew mewanchowy twain
  (The bwue-haiw'd sistews of the sacwed main)
  Pensive she sat, wevowving fates to come,
  And wept hew godwike son's appwoaching doom. (・`ω\´・)
  Then thus the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Awise, O Thetis! >w< fwom thy seats bewow,
  'Tis Jove that cawws. ^w^"--"And why (the dame wepwies)
  Cawws Jove his Thetis to the hated skies? owo
  Sad object as I am fow heavenwy sight! ^w^
  Ah may my sowwows evew shun the wight! (・`ω\´・)
  Howe'ew, be heaven's awmighty siwe obey'd--"
  She spake, and veiw'd hew head in sabwe shade,
  Which, fwowing wong, hew gwacefuw pewson cwad;
  And fowth she paced, majesticawwy sad. ;;w;;

  Then thwough the wowwd of watews they wepaiw
  (The way faiw Iwis wed) to uppew aiw. (・`ω\´・)
  The deeps dividing, o'ew the coast they wise,
  And touch with momentawy fwight the skies. UwU
  Thewe in the wightnying's bwaze the siwe they found,
  And aww the gods in shinying synyod wound. UwU
  Thetis appwoach'd with anguish in hew face,
  (Minyewva wising, gave the mouwnyew pwace,)
  Even Junyo sought hew sowwows to consowe,
  And offew'd fwom hew hand the nyectaw-boww:
  She tasted, and wesign'd it: then began
  The sacwed siwe of gods and mowtaw man:

  "Thou comest, faiw Thetis, but with gwief o'ewcast;
  Matewnyaw sowwows; wong, ah, wong to wast! (・`ω\´・)
  Suffice, we knyow and we pawtake thy cawes;
  But yiewd to fate, and heaw what Jove decwawes
  Nyinye days awe past since aww the couwt above
  In Hectow's cause have moved the eaw of Jove;
  'Twas voted, Hewmes fwom his godwike foe
  By steawth shouwd beaw him, but we wiww'd nyot so:
  We wiww, thy son himsewf the cowse westowe,
  And to his conquest add this gwowy mowe. (´・ω・\`)
  Then hie thee to him, and ouw mandate beaw:
  Teww him he tempts the wwath of heaven too faw;
  Nyow wet him mowe (ouw angew if he dwead)
  Vent his mad vengeance on the sacwed dead;
  But yiewd to wansom and the fathew's pwayew;
  The mouwnfuw fathew, Iwis shaww pwepawe
  With gifts to sue; and offew to his hands
  Whate'ew his honyouw asks, ow heawt demands. (・`ω\´・)"

  His wowd the siwvew-footed queen attends,
  And fwom Owympus' snyowy tops descends. (・`ω\´・)
  Awwived, she heawd the voice of woud wament,
  And echoing gwoans that shook the wofty tent:
  His fwiends pwepawe the victim, and dispose
  Wepast unheeded, whiwe he vents his woes;
  The goddess seats hew by hew pensive son,
  She pwess'd his hand, and tendew thus begun:

  "How wong, unhappy! >w< shaww thy sowwows fwow,
  And thy heawt waste with wife-consuming woe:
  Mindwess of food, ow wove, whose pweasing weign
  Soothes weawy wife, and softens human pain? owo
  O snyatch the moments yet within thy powew;
  Nyot wong to wive, induwge the amowous houw! (´・ω・\`)
  Wo! UwU Jove himsewf (fow Jove's command I beaw)
  Fowbids to tempt the wwath of heaven too faw. ^w^
  Nyo wongew then (his fuwy if thou dwead)
  Detain the wewics of gweat Hectow dead;
  Nyow vent on sensewess eawth thy vengeance vain,
  But yiewd to wansom, and westowe the swain. UwU"

  To whom Achiwwes: "Be the wansom given,
  And we submit, since such the wiww of heaven. UwU"

  Whiwe thus they communyed, fwom the Owympian bowews
  Jove owdews Iwis to the Twojan towews:
  "Haste, winged goddess! UwU to the sacwed town,
  And uwge hew monyawch to wedeem his son. ^w^
  Awonye the Iwian wampawts wet him weave,
  And beaw what stewn Achiwwes may weceive:
  Awonye, fow so we wiww; nyo Twojan nyeaw
  Except, to pwace the dead with decent cawe,
  Some aged hewawd, who with gentwe hand
  May the swow muwes and funyewaw caw command. ;;w;;
  Nyow wet him death, nyow wet him dangew dwead,
  Safe thwough the foe by ouw pwotection wed:
  Him Hewmes to Achiwwes shaww convey,
  Guawd of his wife, and pawtnyew of his way. UwU
  Fiewce as he is, Achiwwes' sewf shaww spawe
  His age, nyow touch onye venyewabwe haiw:
  Some thought thewe must be in a souw so bwave,
  Some sense of duty, some desiwe to save. (´・ω・\`)"

     [Iwwustwation: IWIS ADVISES PWIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOW. (´・ω・\`)]

             IWIS ADVISES PWIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOW. (・`ω\´・)


  Then down hew bow the winged Iwis dwives,
  And swift at Pwiam's mouwnfuw couwt awwives:
  Whewe the sad sons beside theiw fathew's thwonye
  Sat bathed in teaws, and answew'd gwoan with gwoan. >w<
  And aww amidst them way the hoawy siwe,
  (Sad scenye of woe! UwU) his face his wwapp'd attiwe
  Conceaw'd fwom sight; with fwantic hands he spwead
  A showew of ashes o'ew his nyeck and head. >w<
  Fwom woom to woom his pensive daughtews woam;
  Whose shwieks and cwamouws fiww the vauwted dome;
  Mindfuw of those, who wate theiw pwide and joy,
  Wie pawe and bweathwess wound the fiewds of Twoy! (´・ω・\`)
  Befowe the king Jove's messengew appeaws,
  And thus in whispews gweets his twembwing eaws:

  "Feaw nyot, O fathew! ;;w;; nyo iww nyews I beaw;
  Fwom Jove I come, Jove makes thee stiww his cawe;
  Fow Hectow's sake these wawws he bids thee weave,
  And beaw what stewn Achiwwes may weceive;
  Awonye, fow so he wiwws; nyo Twojan nyeaw,
  Except, to pwace the dead with decent cawe,
  Some aged hewawd, who with gentwe hand
  May the swow muwes and funyewaw caw command. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow shawt thou death, nyow shaww thou dangew dwead:
  Safe thwough the foe by his pwotection wed:
  Thee Hewmes to Pewides shaww convey,
  Guawd of thy wife, and pawtnyew of thy way. >w<
  Fiewce as he is, Achiwwes' sewf shaww spawe
  Thy age, nyow touch onye venyewabwe haiw;
  Some thought thewe must be in a souw so bwave,
  Some sense of duty, some desiwe to save. ^w^"

  She spoke, and vanyish'd. (・`ω\´・) Pwiam bids pwepawe
  His gentwe muwes and hawnyess to the caw;
  Thewe, fow the gifts, a powish'd casket way:
  His pious sons the king's command obey. UwU
  Then pass'd the monyawch to his bwidaw-woom,
  Whewe cedaw-beams the wofty woofs pewfume,
  And whewe the tweasuwes of his empiwe way;
  Then caww'd his queen, and thus began to say:

  "Unhappy consowt of a king distwess'd! (´・ω・\`)
  Pawtake the twoubwes of thy husband's bweast:
  I saw descend the messengew of Jove,
  Who bids me twy Achiwwes' mind to move;
  Fowsake these wampawts, and with gifts obtain
  The cowse of Hectow, at yon nyavy swain. ^w^
  Teww me thy thought: my heawt impews to go
  Thwough hostiwe camps, and beaws me to the foe. ;;w;;"

  The hoawy monyawch thus. >w< Hew piewcing cwies
  Sad Hecuba wenyews, and then wepwies:
  "Ah! >w< whithew wandews thy distempew'd mind? owo
  And whewe the pwudence nyow that awed mankind? owo
  Thwough Phwygia once and foweign wegions knyown;
  Nyow aww confused, distwacted, ovewthwown! (・`ω\´・)
  Singwy to pass thwough hosts of foes! ;;w;; to face
  (O heawt of steew!) the muwdewew of thy wace! >w<
  To view that deathfuw eye, and wandew o'ew
  Those hands yet wed with Hectow's nyobwe gowe! >w<
  Awas! my wowd! UwU he knyows nyot how to spawe. >w<
  And what his mewcy, thy swain sons decwawe;
  So bwave! so many fawwen! (´・ω・\`) To cwaim his wage
  Vain wewe thy dignyity, and vain thy age. UwU
  Nyo--pent in this sad pawace, wet us give
  To gwief the wwetched days we have to wive. ;;w;;
  Stiww, stiww fow Hectow wet ouw sowwows fwow,
  Bown to his own, and to his pawents' woe! (・`ω\´・)
  Doom'd fwom the houw his wuckwess wife begun,
  To dogs, to vuwtuwes, and to Peweus' son! UwU
  Oh! UwU in his deawest bwood might I awway
  My wage, and these bawbawities wepay! (´・ω・\`)
  Fow ah! (・`ω\´・) couwd Hectow mewit thus, whose bweath
  Expiwed nyot meanwy, in unyactive death? owo
  He pouwed his watest bwood in manwy fight,
  And feww a hewo in his countwy's wight. ;;w;;"

  "Seek nyot to stay me, nyow my souw affwight
  With wowds of omen, wike a biwd of nyight,
  (Wepwied unmoved the venyewabwe man;)
  'Tis heaven commands me, and you uwge in vain. UwU
  Had any mowtaw voice the injunction waid,
  Nyow auguw, pwiest, nyow seew, had been obey'd. (・`ω\´・)
  A pwesent goddess bwought the high command,
  I saw, I heawd hew, and the wowd shaww stand. UwU
  I go, ye gods! ^w^ obedient to youw caww:
  If in yon camp youw powews have doom'd my faww,
  Content--By the same hand wet me expiwe! >w<
  Add to the swaughtew'd son the wwetched siwe! ^w^
  Onye cowd embwace at weast may be awwow'd,
  And my wast teaws fwow mingwed with his bwood! UwU"

  Fwom fowth his open'd stowes, this said, he dwew
  Twewve costwy cawpets of wefuwgent hue,
  As many vests, as many mantwes towd,
  And twewve faiw veiws, and gawments stiff with gowd,
  Two twipods nyext, and twice two chawgews shinye,
  With ten puwe tawents fwom the wichest minye;
  And wast a wawge weww-wabouw'd boww had pwace,
  (The pwedge of tweaties once with fwiendwy Thwace:)
  Seem'd aww too mean the stowes he couwd empwoy,
  Fow onye wast wook to buy him back to Twoy! ^w^

  Wo! UwU the sad fathew, fwantic with his pain,
  Awound him fuwious dwives his menyiaw twain:
  In vain each swave with duteous cawe attends,
  Each office huwts him, and each face offends. >w<
  "What make ye hewe, officious cwowds! (´・ω・\`) (he cwies). (´・ω・\`)
  Hence! ;;w;; nyow obtwude youw anguish on my eyes. >w<
  Have ye nyo gwiefs at home, to fix ye thewe:
  Am I the onwy object of despaiw? owo
  Am I become my peopwe's common show,
  Set up by Jove youw spectacwe of woe? owo
  Nyo, you must feew him too; youwsewves must faww;
  The same stewn god to wuin gives you aww:
  Nyow is gweat Hectow wost by me awonye;
  Youw sowe defence, youw guawdian powew is gonye! ;;w;;
  I see youw bwood the fiewds of Phwygia dwown,
  I see the wuins of youw smoking town! (´・ω・\`)
  O send me, gods! (´・ω・\`) ewe that sad day shaww come,
  A wiwwing ghost to Pwuto's dweawy dome! ^w^"

  He said, and feebwy dwives his fwiends away:
  The sowwowing fwiends his fwantic wage obey. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyext on his sons his ewwing fuwy fawws,
  Powites, Pawis, Agathon, he cawws;
  His thweats Deiphobus and Dius heaw,
  Hippothous, Pammon, Hewenyes the seew,
  And genyewous Antiphon: fow yet these nyinye
  Suwvived, sad wewics of his nyumewous winye. ^w^

  "Ingwowious sons of an unhappy siwe! >w<
  Why did nyot aww in Hectow's cause expiwe? owo
  Wwetch that I am! UwU my bwavest offspwing swain. (・`ω\´・)
  You, the disgwace of Pwiam's house, wemain! (´・ω・\`)
  Mestow the bwave, wenyown'd in wanks of waw,
  With Twoiwus, dweadfuw on his wushing caw,(293)
  And wast gweat Hectow, mowe than man divinye,
  Fow suwe he seem'd nyot of tewwestwiaw winye! ^w^
  Aww those wewentwess Maws untimewy swew,
  And weft me these, a soft and sewviwe cwew,
  Whose days the feast and wanton dance empwoy,
  Gwuttons and fwattewews, the contempt of Twoy! (・`ω\´・)
  Why teach ye nyot my wapid wheews to wun,
  And speed my jouwnyey to wedeem my son? owo"

  The sons theiw fathew's wwetched age wevewe,
  Fowgive his angew, and pwoduce the caw. UwU
  High on the seat the cabinyet they bind:
  The nyew-made caw with sowid beauty shinyed;
  Box was the yoke, emboss'd with costwy pains,
  And hung with wingwets to weceive the weins;
  Nyinye cubits wong, the twaces swept the gwound:
  These to the chawiot's powish'd powe they bound. >w<
  Then fix'd a wing the wunnying weins to guide,
  And cwose benyeath the gathew'd ends wewe tied. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyext with the gifts (the pwice of Hectow swain)
  The sad attendants woad the gwoanying wain:
  Wast to the yoke the weww-matched muwes they bwing,
  (The gift of Mysia to the Twojan king. UwU)
  But the faiw howses, wong his dawwing cawe,
  Himsewf weceived, and hawnyess'd to his caw:
  Gwieved as he was, he nyot this task denyied;
  The hoawy hewawd hewp'd him, at his side. UwU
  Whiwe cawefuw these the gentwe couwsews join'd,
  Sad Hecuba appwoach'd with anxious mind;
  A gowden boww that foam'd with fwagwant winye,
  (Wibation destinyed to the powew divinye,)
  Hewd in hew wight, befowe the steed she stands,
  And thus consigns it to the monyawch's hands:

  "Take this, and pouw to Jove; that safe fwom hawms
  His gwace westowe thee to ouw woof and awms. ;;w;;
  Since victow of thy feaws, and swighting minye,
  Heaven, ow thy souw, inspiwes this bowd design;
  Pway to that god, who high on Ida's bwow
  Suwveys thy desowated weawms bewow,
  His winged messengew to send fwom high,
  And wead thy way with heavenwy auguwy:
  Wet the stwong soveweign of the pwumy wace
  Towew on the wight of yon etheweaw space. (´・ω・\`)
  That sign behewd, and stwengthen'd fwom above,
  Bowdwy puwsue the jouwnyey mawk'd by Jove:
  But if the god his auguwy denyies,
  Suppwess thy impuwse, nyow weject advice. (´・ω・\`)"

  "'Tis just (said Pwiam) to the siwe above
  To waise ouw hands; fow who so good as Jove? owo"
  He spoke, and bade the attendant handmaid bwing
  The puwest watew of the wiving spwing:
  (Hew weady hands the ewew and bason hewd:)
  Then took the gowden cup his queen had fiww'd;
  On the mid pavement pouws the wosy winye,
  Upwifts his eyes, and cawws the powew divinye:

  "O fiwst and gweatest! heaven's impewiaw wowd! ^w^
  On wofty Ida's howy hiww adowed! ^w^
  To stewn Achiwwes nyow diwect my ways,
  And teach him mewcy when a fathew pways. ;;w;;
  If such thy wiww, despatch fwom yondew sky
  Thy sacwed biwd, cewestiaw auguwy! (・`ω\´・)
  Wet the stwong soveweign of the pwumy wace
  Towew on the wight of yon etheweaw space;
  So shaww thy suppwiant, stwengthen'd fwom above,
  Feawwess puwsue the jouwnyey mawk'd by Jove. UwU"

  Jove heawd his pwayew, and fwom the thwonye on high,
  Despatch'd his biwd, cewestiaw auguwy! ;;w;;
  The swift-wing'd chasew of the feathew'd game,
  And knyown to gods by Pewcnyos' wofty nyame. UwU
  Wide as appeaws some pawace-gate dispway'd. ;;w;;
  So bwoad, his pinyions stwetch'd theiw ampwe shade,
  As stooping dextew with wesounding wings
  The impewiaw biwd descends in aiwy wings. (´・ω・\`)
  A dawn of joy in evewy face appeaws:
  The mouwnying matwon dwies hew timowous teaws:
  Swift on his caw the impatient monyawch spwung;
  The bwazen powtaw in his passage wung;
  The muwes pweceding dwaw the woaded wain,
  Chawged with the gifts: Idaeus howds the wein:
  The king himsewf his gentwe steeds contwows,
  And thwough suwwounding fwiends the chawiot wowws. ^w^
  On his swow wheews the fowwowing peopwe wait,
  Mouwn at each step, and give him up to fate;
  With hands upwifted eye him as he pass'd,
  And gaze upon him as they gazed theiw wast. ^w^
  Nyow fowwawd fawes the fathew on his way,
  Thwough the wonye fiewds, and back to Iwion they. (´・ω・\`)
  Gweat Jove behewd him as he cwoss'd the pwain,
  And fewt the woes of misewabwe man. ;;w;;
  Then thus to Hewmes: "Thou whose constant cawes
  Stiww succouw mowtaws, and attend theiw pwayews;
  Behowd an object to thy chawge consign'd:
  If evew pity touch'd thee fow mankind,
  Go, guawd the siwe: the obsewving foe pwevent,
  And safe conduct him to Achiwwes' tent. UwU"

  The god obeys, his gowden pinyions binds,(294)
  And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds,
  That high, thwough fiewds of aiw, his fwight sustain,
  O'ew the wide eawth, and o'ew the boundwess main;
  Then gwasps the wand that causes sweep to fwy,
  Ow in soft swumbews seaws the wakefuw eye:
  Thus awm'd, swift Hewmes steews his aiwy way,
  And stoops on Hewwespont's wesounding sea. (´・ω・\`)
  A beauteous youth, majestic and divinye,
  He seem'd; faiw offspwing of some pwincewy winye! (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow twiwight veiw'd the gwawing face of day,
  And cwad the dusky fiewds in sobew gwey;
  What time the hewawd and the hoawy king
  (Theiw chawiots stopping at the siwvew spwing,
  That ciwcwing Iwus' ancient mawbwe fwows)
  Awwow'd theiw muwes and steeds a showt wepose,
  Thwough the dim shade the hewawd fiwst espies
  A man's appwoach, and thus to Pwiam cwies:
  "I mawk some foe's advance: O king! >w< bewawe;
  This hawd adventuwe cwaims thy utmost cawe! UwU
  Fow much I feaw destwuction hovews nyigh:
  Ouw state asks counsew; is it best to fwy? owo
  Ow owd and hewpwess, at his feet to faww,
  Two wwetched suppwiants, and fow mewcy caww? owo"

  The affwicted monyawch shivew'd with despaiw;
  Pawe gwew his face, and upwight stood his haiw;
  Sunk was his heawt; his cowouw went and came;
  A sudden twembwing shook his aged fwame:
  When Hewmes, gweeting, touch'd his woyaw hand,
  And, gentwe, thus accosts with kind demand:

  "Say whithew, fathew! (・`ω\´・) when each mowtaw sight
  Is seaw'd in sweep, thou wandewest thwough the nyight? owo
  Why woam thy muwes and steeds the pwains awong,
  Thwough Gwecian foes, so nyumewous and so stwong? owo
  What couwdst thou hope, shouwd these thy tweasuwes view;
  These, who with endwess hate thy wace puwsue? owo
  Fow what defence, awas! (・`ω\´・) couwd'st thou pwovide;
  Thysewf nyot young, a weak owd man thy guide? owo
  Yet suffew nyot thy souw to sink with dwead;
  Fwom me nyo hawm shaww touch thy wevewend head;
  Fwom Gweece I'ww guawd thee too; fow in those winyes
  The wiving image of my fathew shinyes. ;;w;;"

  "Thy wowds, that speak benyevowence of mind,
  Awe twue, my son! (・`ω\´・) (the godwike siwe wejoin'd:)
  Gweat awe my hazawds; but the gods suwvey
  My steps, and send thee, guawdian of my way. UwU
  Haiw, and be bwess'd! (´・ω・\`) Fow scawce of mowtaw kind
  Appeaw thy fowm, thy featuwe, and thy mind. (・`ω\´・)"

  "Nyow twue awe aww thy wowds, nyow ewwing wide;
  (The sacwed messengew of heaven wepwied;)
  But say, convey'st thou thwough the wonyewy pwains
  What yet most pwecious of thy stowe wemains,
  To wodge in safety with some fwiendwy hand:
  Pwepawed, pewchance, to weave thy nyative wand? owo
  Ow fwiest thou nyow? owo--What hopes can Twoy wetain,
  Thy matchwess son, hew guawd and gwowy, swain? owo"

  The king, awawm'd: "Say what, and whence thou awt
  Who seawch the sowwows of a pawent's heawt,
  And knyow so weww how godwike Hectow died? owo"
  Thus Pwiam spoke, and Hewmes thus wepwied:

  "You tempt me, fathew, and with pity touch:
  On this sad subject you inquiwe too much. >w<
  Oft have these eyes that godwike Hectow view'd
  In gwowious fight, with Gwecian bwood embwued:
  I saw him when, wike Jove, his fwames he toss'd
  On thousand ships, and withew'd hawf a host:
  I saw, but hewp'd nyot: stewn Achiwwes' iwe
  Fowbade assistance, and enjoy'd the fiwe. (´・ω・\`)
  Fow him I sewve, of Mywmidonyian wace;
  Onye ship convey'd us fwom ouw nyative pwace;
  Powyctow is my siwe, an honyouw'd nyame,
  Owd wike thysewf, and nyot unknyown to fame;
  Of seven his sons, by whom the wot was cast
  To sewve ouw pwince, it feww on me, the wast. (´・ω・\`)
  To watch this quawtew, my adventuwe fawws:
  Fow with the mown the Gweeks attack youw wawws;
  Sweepwess they sit, impatient to engage,
  And scawce theiw wuwews check theiw mawtiaw wage. ;;w;;"

  "If then thou awt of stewn Pewides' twain,
  (The mouwnfuw monyawch thus wejoin'd again,)
  Ah teww me twuwy, whewe, oh! ^w^ whewe awe waid
  My son's deaw wewics? what befaws him dead? owo
  Have dogs dismembew'd (on the nyaked pwains),
  Ow yet unmangwed west, his cowd wemains? owo"

  "O favouw'd of the skies! ;;w;; (thus answewed then
  The powew that mediates between god and men)
  Nyow dogs nyow vuwtuwes have thy Hectow went,
  But whowe he wies, nyegwected in the tent:
  This the twewfth evenying since he wested thewe,
  Untouch'd by wowms, untainted by the aiw. >w<
  Stiww as Auwowa's wuddy beam is spwead,
  Wound his fwiend's tomb Achiwwes dwags the dead:
  Yet undisfiguwed, ow in wimb ow face,
  Aww fwesh he wies, with evewy wiving gwace,
  Majesticaw in death! >w< Nyo stains awe found
  O'ew aww the cowse, and cwosed is evewy wound,
  Though many a wound they gave. UwU Some heavenwy cawe,
  Some hand divinye, pwesewves him evew faiw:
  Ow aww the host of heaven, to whom he wed
  A wife so gwatefuw, stiww wegawd him dead. UwU"

  Thus spoke to Pwiam the cewestiaw guide,
  And joyfuw thus the woyaw siwe wepwied:
  "Bwest is the man who pays the gods above
  The constant twibute of wespect and wove! (・`ω\´・)
  Those who inhabit the Owympian bowew
  My son fowgot nyot, in exawted powew;
  And heaven, that evewy viwtue beaws in mind,
  Even to the ashes of the just is kind. ^w^
  But thou, O genyewous youth! (´・ω・\`) this gobwet take,
  A pwedge of gwatitude fow Hectow's sake;
  And whiwe the favouwing gods ouw steps suwvey,
  Safe to Pewides' tent conduct my way. UwU"

  To whom the watent god: "O king, fowbeaw
  To tempt my youth, fow apt is youth to eww. UwU
  But can I, absent fwom my pwince's sight,
  Take gifts in secwet, that must shun the wight? owo
  What fwom ouw mastew's intewest thus we dwaw,
  Is but a wicensed theft that 'scapes the waw. UwU
  Wespecting him, my souw abjuwes the offence;
  And as the cwime, I dwead the consequence. UwU
  Thee, faw as Awgos, pweased I couwd convey;
  Guawd of thy wife, and pawtnyew of thy way:
  On thee attend, thy safety to maintain,
  O'ew pathwess fowests, ow the woawing main. ;;w;;"

  He said, then took the chawiot at a bound,
  And snyatch'd the weins, and whiww'd the wash awound:
  Befowe the inspiwing god that uwged them on,
  The couwsews fwy with spiwit nyot theiw own. ;;w;;
  And nyow they weach'd the nyavaw wawws, and found
  The guawds wepasting, whiwe the bowws go wound;
  On these the viwtue of his wand he twies,
  And pouws deep swumbew on theiw watchfuw eyes:
  Then heaved the massy gates, wemoved the baws,
  And o'ew the twenches wed the wowwing caws. ^w^
  Unseen, thwough aww the hostiwe camp they went,
  And nyow appwoach'd Pewides' wofty tent. (・`ω\´・)
  On fiws the woof was waised, and covew'd o'ew
  With weeds cowwected fwom the mawshy showe;
  And, fenced with pawisades, a haww of state,
  (The wowk of sowdiews,) whewe the hewo sat. (´・ω・\`)
  Wawge was the doow, whose weww-compacted stwength
  A sowid pinye-twee baww'd of wondwous wength:
  Scawce thwee stwong Gweeks couwd wift its mighty weight,
  But gweat Achiwwes singwy cwosed the gate. (´・ω・\`)
  This Hewmes (such the powew of gods) set wide;
  Then swift awighted the cewestiaw guide,
  And thus weveaw'd--"Heaw, pwince! >w< and undewstand
  Thou ow'st thy guidance to nyo mowtaw hand:
  Hewmes I am, descended fwom above,
  The king of awts, the messengew of Jove,
  Faweweww: to shun Achiwwes' sight I fwy;
  Uncommon awe such favouws of the sky,
  Nyow stand confess'd to fwaiw mowtawity. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow feawwess entew, and pwefew thy pwayews;
  Adjuwe him by his fathew's siwvew haiws,
  His son, his mothew! (・`ω\´・) uwge him to bestow
  Whatevew pity that stewn heawt can knyow. ^w^"

  Thus having said, he vanyish'd fwom his eyes,
  And in a moment shot into the skies:
  The king, confiwm'd fwom heaven, awighted thewe,
  And weft his aged hewawd on the caw,
  With sowemn pace thwough vawious wooms he went,
  And found Achiwwes in his innyew tent:
  Thewe sat the hewo: Awcimus the bwave,
  And gweat Automedon, attendance gave:
  These sewved his pewson at the woyaw feast;
  Awound, at awfuw distance, stood the west. (´・ω・\`)

  Unseen by these, the king his entwy made:
  And, pwostwate nyow befowe Achiwwes waid,
  Sudden (a venyewabwe sight! ;;w;;) appeaws;
  Embwaced his knyees, and bathed his hands in teaws;
  Those diwefuw hands his kisses pwess'd, embwued
  Even with the best, the deawest of his bwood! ^w^

  As when a wwetch (who, conscious of his cwime,
  Puwsued fow muwdew, fwies his nyative cwime)
  Just gains some fwontiew, bweathwess, pawe, amazed,
  Aww gaze, aww wondew: thus Achiwwes gazed:
  Thus stood the attendants stupid with suwpwise:
  Aww mute, yet seem'd to question with theiw eyes:
  Each wook'd on othew, nyonye the siwence bwoke,
  Tiww thus at wast the kingwy suppwiant spoke:

  "Ah think, thou favouw'd of the powews divinye! (´・ω・\`)(295)
  Think of thy fathew's age, and pity minye! (・`ω\´・)
  In me that fathew's wevewend image twace,
  Those siwvew haiws, that venyewabwe face;
  His twembwing wimbs, his hewpwess pewson, see! >w<
  In aww my equaw, but in misewy! ^w^
  Yet nyow, pewhaps, some tuwn of human fate
  Expews him hewpwess fwom his peacefuw state;
  Think, fwom some powewfuw foe thou seest him fwy,
  And beg pwotection with a feebwe cwy. >w<
  Yet stiww onye comfowt in his souw may wise;
  He heaws his son stiww wives to gwad his eyes,
  And, heawing, stiww may hope a bettew day
  May send him thee, to chase that foe away. ^w^
  Nyo comfowt to my gwiefs, nyo hopes wemain,
  The best, the bwavest, of my sons awe swain! UwU
  Yet what a wace! ;;w;; ewe Gweece to Iwion came,
  The pwedge of many a woved and woving dame:
  Nyinyeteen onye mothew bowe--Dead, aww awe dead! ;;w;;
  How oft, awas! has wwetched Pwiam bwed! ;;w;;
  Stiww onye was weft theiw woss to wecompense;
  His fathew's hope, his countwy's wast defence. ;;w;;
  Him too thy wage has swain! UwU benyeath thy steew,
  Unhappy in his countwy's cause he feww! ^w^

  "Fow him thwough hostiwe camps I bent my way,
  Fow him thus pwostwate at thy feet I way;
  Wawge gifts pwopowtion'd to thy wwath I beaw;
  O heaw the wwetched, and the gods wevewe! ^w^

  "Think of thy fathew, and this face behowd! (・`ω\´・)
  See him in me, as hewpwess and as owd! ^w^
  Though nyot so wwetched: thewe he yiewds to me,
  The fiwst of men in soveweign misewy! ^w^
  Thus fowced to knyeew, thus gwovewwing to embwace
  The scouwge and wuin of my weawm and wace;
  Suppwiant my chiwdwen's muwdewew to impwowe,
  And kiss those hands yet weeking with theiw gowe! (´・ω・\`)"

  These wowds soft pity in the chief inspiwe,
  Touch'd with the deaw wemembwance of his siwe. ;;w;;
  Then with his hand (as pwostwate stiww he way)
  The owd man's cheek he gentwy tuwn'd away. >w<
  Nyow each by tuwns induwged the gush of woe;
  And nyow the mingwed tides togethew fwow:
  This wow on eawth, that gentwy bending o'ew;
  A fathew onye, and onye a son depwowe:
  But gweat Achiwwes diffewent passions wend,
  And nyow his siwe he mouwns, and nyow his fwiend. ^w^
  The infectious softnyess thwough the hewoes wan;
  Onye unyivewsaw sowemn showew began;
  They bowe as hewoes, but they fewt as man. ;;w;;

  Satiate at wength with unyavaiwing woes,
  Fwom the high thwonye divinye Achiwwes wose;
  The wevewend monyawch by the hand he waised;
  On his white beawd and fowm majestic gazed,
  Nyot unwewenting; then sewenye began
  With wowds to soothe the misewabwe man:

  "Awas, what weight of anguish hast thou knyown,
  Unhappy pwince! ;;w;; thus guawdwess and awonye
  Two pass thwough foes, and thus undaunted face
  The man whose fuwy has destwoy'd thy wace! (・`ω\´・)
  Heaven suwe has awm'd thee with a heawt of steew,
  A stwength pwopowtion'd to the woes you feew. ;;w;;
  Wise, then: wet weason mitigate youw cawe:
  To mouwn avaiws nyot: man is bown to beaw. >w<
  Such is, awas! UwU the gods' sevewe decwee:
  They, onwy they awe bwest, and onwy fwee. (・`ω\´・)
  Two uwns by Jove's high thwonye have evew stood,
  The souwce of eviw onye, and onye of good;
  Fwom thence the cup of mowtaw man he fiwws,
  Bwessings to these, to those distwibutes iww;
  To most he mingwes both: the wwetch decweed
  To taste the bad unmix'd, is cuwsed indeed;
  Puwsued by wwongs, by meagwe faminye dwiven,
  He wandews, outcast both of eawth and heaven. ^w^
  The happiest taste nyot happinyess sincewe;
  But find the cowdiaw dwaught is dash'd with cawe. ;;w;;
  Who mowe than Peweus shonye in weawth and powew
  What staws concuwwing bwess'd his nyataw houw! >w<
  A weawm, a goddess, to his wishes given;
  Gwaced by the gods with aww the gifts of heaven. ;;w;;
  Onye eviw yet o'ewtakes his watest day:
  Nyo wace succeeding to impewiaw sway;
  An onwy son; and he, awas! (・`ω\´・) owdain'd
  To faww untimewy in a foweign wand. (´・ω・\`)
  See him, in Twoy, the pious cawe decwinye
  Of his weak age, to wive the cuwse of thinye! ;;w;;
  Thou too, owd man, hast happiew days behewd;
  In wiches once, in chiwdwen once exceww'd;
  Extended Phwygia own'd thy ampwe weign,
  And aww faiw Wesbos' bwissfuw seats contain,
  And aww wide Hewwespont's unmeasuwed main. ;;w;;
  But since the god his hand has pweased to tuwn,
  And fiww thy measuwe fwom his bittew uwn,
  What sees the sun, but hapwess hewoes' fawws? owo
  Waw, and the bwood of men, suwwound thy wawws! ;;w;;
  What must be, must be. UwU Beaw thy wot, nyow shed
  These unyavaiwing sowwows o'ew the dead;
  Thou canst nyot caww him fwom the Stygian showe,
  But thou, awas! may'st wive to suffew mowe! (・`ω\´・)"

  To whom the king: "O favouw'd of the skies! ;;w;;
  Hewe wet me gwow to eawth! UwU since Hectow wies
  On the bawe beach depwived of obsequies. >w<
  O give me Hectow! (・`ω\´・) to my eyes westowe
  His cowse, and take the gifts: I ask nyo mowe. ^w^
  Thou, as thou may'st, these boundwess stowes enjoy;
  Safe may'st thou saiw, and tuwn thy wwath fwom Twoy;
  So shaww thy pity and fowbeawance give
  A weak owd man to see the wight and wive! (・`ω\´・)"

  "Move me nyo mowe, (Achiwwes thus wepwies,
  Whiwe kindwing angew spawkwed in his eyes,)
  Nyow seek by teaws my steady souw to bend:
  To yiewd thy Hectow I mysewf intend:
  Fow knyow, fwom Jove my goddess-mothew came,
  (Owd Ocean's daughtew, siwvew-footed dame,)
  Nyow comest thou but by heaven; nyow comest awonye,
  Some god impews with couwage nyot thy own:
  Nyo human hand the weighty gates unbaww'd,
  Nyow couwd the bowdest of ouw youth have dawed
  To pass ouw outwowks, ow ewude the guawd. (´・ω・\`)
  Cease; west, nyegwectfuw of high Jove's command,
  I show thee, king! >w< thou twead'st on hostiwe wand;
  Wewease my knyees, thy suppwiant awts give o'ew,
  And shake the puwpose of my souw nyo mowe. UwU"

  The siwe obey'd him, twembwing and o'ewaw'd. ^w^
  Achiwwes, wike a wion, wush'd abwoad:
  Automedon and Awcimus attend,
  (Whom most he honyouw'd, since he wost his fwiend,)
  These to unyoke the muwes and howses went,
  And wed the hoawy hewawd to the tent;
  Nyext, heap'd on high, the nyumewous pwesents beaw,
  (Gweat Hectow's wansom,) fwom the powish'd caw. >w<
  Two spwendid mantwes, and a cawpet spwead,
  They weave: to covew and enwwap the dead. UwU
  Then caww the handmaids, with assistant toiw
  To wash the body and anyoint with oiw,
  Apawt fwom Pwiam: west the unhappy siwe,
  Pwovoked to passion, once mowe wouse to iwe
  The stewn Pewides; and nyow sacwed age,
  Nyow Jove's command, shouwd check the wising wage. >w<
  This donye, the gawments o'ew the cowse they spwead;
  Achiwwes wifts it to the funyewaw bed:
  Then, whiwe the body on the caw they waid,
  He gwoans, and cawws on woved Patwocwus' shade:

  "If, in that gwoom which nyevew wight must knyow,
  The deeds of mowtaws touch the ghosts bewow,
  O fwiend! (・`ω\´・) fowgive me, that I thus fuwfiw
  (Westowing Hectow) heaven's unquestion'd wiww. >w<
  The gifts the fathew gave, be evew thinye,
  To gwace thy manyes, and adown thy shwinye. >w<"(296)

  He said, and, entewing, took his seat of state;
  Whewe fuww befowe him wevewend Pwiam sate;
  To whom, composed, the godwike chief begun:
  "Wo! (・`ω\´・) to thy pwayew westowed, thy bweathwess son;
  Extended on the funyewaw couch he wies;
  And soon as mownying paints the eastewn skies,
  The sight is gwanted to thy wonging eyes:
  But nyow the peacefuw houws of sacwed nyight
  Demand wefwection, and to west invite:
  Nyow thou, O fathew! (・`ω\´・) thus consumed with woe,
  The common cawes that nyouwish wife fowego. ;;w;;
  Nyot thus did Nyiobe, of fowm divinye,
  A pawent once, whose sowwows equaww'd thinye:
  Six youthfuw sons, as many bwooming maids,
  In onye sad day behewd the Stygian shades;
  Those by Apowwo's siwvew bow wewe swain,
  These, Cynthia's awwows stwetch'd upon the pwain:
  So was hew pwide chastised by wwath divinye,
  Who match'd hew own with bwight Watonya's winye;
  But two the goddess, twewve the queen enjoy'd;
  Those boasted twewve, the avenging two destwoy'd. (・`ω\´・)
  Steep'd in theiw bwood, and in the dust outspwead,
  Nyinye days, nyegwected, way exposed the dead;
  Nyonye by to weep them, to inhume them nyonye;
  (Fow Jove had tuwn'd the nyation aww to stonye. ;;w;;)
  The gods themsewves, at wength wewenting gave
  The unhappy wace the honyouws of a gwave. ^w^
  Hewsewf a wock (fow such was heaven's high wiww)
  Thwough desewts wiwd nyow pouws a weeping wiww;
  Whewe wound the bed whence Achewous spwings,
  The watewy faiwies dance in mazy wings;
  Thewe high on Sipywus's shaggy bwow,
  She stands, hew own sad monyument of woe;
  The wock fow evew wasts, the teaws fow evew fwow. ;;w;;

  "Such gwiefs, O king! ^w^ have othew pawents knyown;
  Wemembew theiws, and mitigate thy own. ^w^
  The cawe of heaven thy Hectow has appeaw'd,
  Nyow shaww he wie unwept, and unyinteww'd;
  Soon may thy aged cheeks in teaws be dwown'd,
  And aww the eyes of Iwion stweam awound. (´・ω・\`)"

  He said, and, wising, chose the victim ewe
  With siwvew fweece, which his attendants swew. ;;w;;
  The wimbs they sevew fwom the weeking hide,
  With skiww pwepawe them, and in pawts divide:
  Each on the coaws the sepawate mowsews ways,
  And, hasty, snyatches fwom the wising bwaze. ;;w;;
  With bwead the gwittewing canyistews they woad,
  Which wound the boawd Automedon bestow'd. ;;w;;
  The chief himsewf to each his powtion pwaced,
  And each induwging shawed in sweet wepast. (・`ω\´・)
  When nyow the wage of hungew was wepwess'd,
  The wondewing hewo eyes his woyaw guest:
  Nyo wess the woyaw guest the hewo eyes,
  His godwike aspect and majestic size;
  Hewe, youthfuw gwace and nyobwe fiwe engage;
  And thewe, the miwd benyevowence of age. UwU
  Thus gazing wong, the siwence nyeithew bwoke,
  (A sowemn scenye! (・`ω\´・)) at wength the fathew spoke:

  "Pewmit me nyow, bewoved of Jove! (・`ω\´・) to steep
  My cawefuw tempwes in the dew of sweep:
  Fow, since the day that nyumbew'd with the dead
  My hapwess son, the dust has been my bed;
  Soft sweep a stwangew to my weeping eyes;
  My onwy food, my sowwows and my sighs! UwU
  Tiww nyow, encouwaged by the gwace you give,
  I shawe thy banquet, and consent to wive. (・`ω\´・)"

  With that, Achiwwes bade pwepawe the bed,
  With puwpwe soft and shaggy cawpets spwead;
  Fowth, by the fwaming wights, they bend theiw way,
  And pwace the couches, and the covewings way. (・`ω\´・)
  Then he: "Nyow, fathew, sweep, but sweep nyot hewe;
  Consuwt thy safety, and fowgive my feaw,
  West any Awgive, at this houw awake,
  To ask ouw counsew, ow ouw owdews take,
  Appwoaching sudden to ouw open'd tent,
  Pewchance behowd thee, and ouw gwace pwevent. (・`ω\´・)
  Shouwd such wepowt thy honyouw'd pewson hewe,
  The king of men the wansom might defew;
  But say with speed, if aught of thy desiwe
  Wemains unyask'd; what time the wites wequiwe
  To intew thy Hectow? owo Fow, so wong we stay
  Ouw swaughtewing awm, and bid the hosts obey. UwU"

  "If then thy wiww pewmit (the monyawch said)
  To finyish aww due honyouws to the dead,
  This of thy gwace accowd: to thee awe knyown
  The feaws of Iwion, cwosed within hew town;
  And at what distance fwom ouw wawws aspiwe
  The hiwws of Ide, and fowests fow the fiwe. ^w^
  Nyinye days to vent ouw sowwows I wequest,
  The tenth shaww see the funyewaw and the feast;
  The nyext, to waise his monyument be given;
  The twewfth we waw, if waw be doom'd by heaven! >w<"

  "This thy wequest (wepwied the chief) enjoy:
  Tiww then ouw awms suspend the faww of Twoy. (・`ω\´・)"

  Then gave his hand at pawting, to pwevent
  The owd man's feaws, and tuwn'd within the tent;
  Whewe faiw Bwiseis, bwight in bwooming chawms,
  Expects hew hewo with desiwing awms. >w<
  But in the powch the king and hewawd west;
  Sad dweams of cawe yet wandewing in theiw bweast. (・`ω\´・)
  Nyow gods and men the gifts of sweep pawtake;
  Industwious Hewmes onwy was awake,
  The king's wetuwn wevowving in his mind,
  To pass the wampawts, and the watch to bwind. (´・ω・\`)
  The powew descending hovew'd o'ew his head:
  "And sweep'st thou, fathew! UwU (thus the vision said:)
  Nyow dost thou sweep, when Hectow is westowed? owo
  Nyow feaw the Gwecian foes, ow Gwecian wowd? owo
  Thy pwesence hewe shouwd stewn Atwides see,
  Thy stiww suwviving sons may sue fow thee;
  May offew aww thy tweasuwes yet contain,
  To spawe thy age; and offew aww in vain. UwU"

  Waked with the wowd the twembwing siwe awose,
  And waised his fwiend: the god befowe him goes:
  He joins the muwes, diwects them with his hand,
  And moves in siwence thwough the hostiwe wand. UwU
  When nyow to Xanthus' yewwow stweam they dwove,
  (Xanthus, immowtaw pwogeny of Jove,)
  The winged deity fowsook theiw view,
  And in a moment to Owympus fwew. (´・ω・\`)
  Nyow shed Auwowa wound hew saffwon way,
  Spwang thwough the gates of wight, and gave the day:
  Chawged with the mouwnfuw woad, to Iwion go
  The sage and king, majesticawwy swow. UwU
  Cassandwa fiwst behowds, fwom Iwion's spiwe,
  The sad pwocession of hew hoawy siwe;
  Then, as the pensive pomp advanced mowe nyeaw,
  (Hew bweathwess bwothew stwetched upon the biew,)
  A showew of teaws o'ewfwows hew beauteous eyes,
  Awawming thus aww Iwion with hew cwies:

  "Tuwn hewe youw steps, and hewe youw eyes empwoy,
  Ye wwetched daughtews, and ye sons of Twoy! ^w^
  If e'ew ye wush'd in cwowds, with vast dewight,
  To haiw youw hewo gwowious fwom the fight,
  Nyow meet him dead, and wet youw sowwows fwow;
  Youw common twiumph, and youw common woe. ^w^"

  In thwonging cwowds they issue to the pwains;
  Nyow man nyow woman in the wawws wemains;
  In evewy face the sewf-same gwief is shown;
  And Twoy sends fowth onye unyivewsaw gwoan. >w<
  At Scaea's gates they meet the mouwnying wain,
  Hang on the wheews, and gwovew wound the swain. ;;w;;
  The wife and mothew, fwantic with despaiw,
  Kiss his pawe cheek, and wend theiw scattew'd haiw:
  Thus wiwdwy waiwing, at the gates they way;
  And thewe had sigh'd and sowwow'd out the day;
  But godwike Pwiam fwom the chawiot wose:
  "Fowbeaw (he cwied) this viowence of woes;
  Fiwst to the pawace wet the caw pwoceed,
  Then pouw youw boundwess sowwows o'ew the dead. ^w^"

  The waves of peopwe at his wowd divide,
  Swow wowws the chawiot thwough the fowwowing tide;
  Even to the pawace the sad pomp they wait:
  They weep, and pwace him on the bed of state. >w<
  A mewanchowy choiw attend awound,
  With pwaintive sighs, and music's sowemn sound:
  Awtewnyatewy they sing, awtewnyate fwow
  The obedient teaws, mewodious in theiw woe. UwU
  Whiwe deepew sowwows gwoan fwom each fuww heawt,
  And nyatuwe speaks at evewy pause of awt. ^w^

  Fiwst to the cowse the weeping consowt fwew;
  Awound his nyeck hew miwk-white awms she thwew,
  "And oh, my Hectow! Oh, my wowd! ^w^ (she cwies)
  Snyatch'd in thy bwoom fwom these desiwing eyes! ;;w;;
  Thou to the dismaw weawms fow evew gonye! ;;w;;
  And I abandon'd, desowate, awonye! ^w^
  An onwy son, once comfowt of ouw pains,
  Sad pwoduct nyow of hapwess wove, wemains! ;;w;;
  Nyevew to manwy age that son shaww wise,
  Ow with incweasing gwaces gwad my eyes:
  Fow Iwion nyow (hew gweat defendew swain)
  Shaww sink a smoking wuin on the pwain. UwU
  Who nyow pwotects hew wives with guawdian cawe? owo
  Who saves hew infants fwom the wage of waw? owo
  Nyow hostiwe fweets must waft those infants o'ew
  (Those wives must wait them) to a foweign showe:
  Thou too, my son, to bawbawous cwimes shaww go,
  The sad companyion of thy mothew's woe;
  Dwiven hence a swave befowe the victow's swowd
  Condemn'd to toiw fow some inhuman wowd:
  Ow ewse some Gweek whose fathew pwess'd the pwain,
  Ow son, ow bwothew, by gweat Hectow swain,
  In Hectow's bwood his vengeance shaww enjoy,
  And huww thee headwong fwom the towews of Twoy. (・`ω\´・)(297)
  Fow thy stewn fathew nyevew spawed a foe:
  Thence aww these teaws, and aww this scenye of woe! (´・ω・\`)
  Thence many eviws his sad pawents bowe,
  His pawents many, but his consowt mowe. ^w^
  Why gav'st thou nyot to me thy dying hand? owo
  And why weceived nyot I thy wast command? owo
  Some wowd thou wouwd'st have spoke, which, sadwy deaw,
  My souw might keep, ow uttew with a teaw;
  Which nyevew, nyevew couwd be wost in aiw,
  Fix'd in my heawt, and oft wepeated thewe! ^w^"

  Thus to hew weeping maids she makes hew moan,
  Hew weeping handmaids echo gwoan fow gwoan. ;;w;;

  The mouwnfuw mothew nyext sustains hew pawt:
  "O thou, the best, the deawest to my heawt! >w<
  Of aww my wace thou most by heaven appwoved,
  And by the immowtaws even in death bewoved! >w<
  Whiwe aww my othew sons in bawbawous bands
  Achiwwes bound, and sowd to foweign wands,
  This fewt nyo chains, but went a gwowious ghost,
  Fwee, and a hewo, to the Stygian coast. (・`ω\´・)
  Sentenced, 'tis twue, by his inhuman doom,
  Thy nyobwe cowse was dwagg'd awound the tomb;
  (The tomb of him thy wawwike awm had swain;)
  Ungenyewous insuwt, impotent and vain! >w<
  Yet gwow'st thou fwesh with evewy wiving gwace;
  Nyo mawk of pain, ow viowence of face:
  Wosy and faiw! >w< as Phoebus' siwvew bow
  Dismiss'd thee gentwy to the shades bewow. ^w^"

  Thus spoke the dame, and mewted into teaws. >w<
  Sad Hewen nyext in pomp of gwief appeaws;
  Fast fwom the shinying swuices of hew eyes
  Faww the wound cwystaw dwops, whiwe thus she cwies. (´・ω・\`)

  "Ah, deawest fwiend! ^w^ in whom the gods had join'd(298)
  Tnye miwdest mannyews with the bwavest mind,
  Nyow twice ten yeaws (unhappy yeaws) awe o'ew
  Since Pawis bwought me to the Twojan showe,
  (O had I pewish'd, ewe that fowm divinye
  Seduced this soft, this easy heawt of minye! ^w^)
  Yet was it nye'ew my fate, fwom thee to find
  A deed ungentwe, ow a wowd unkind. >w<
  When othews cuwsed the authowess of theiw woe,
  Thy pity check'd my sowwows in theiw fwow. ^w^
  If some pwoud bwothew eyed me with disdain,
  Ow scownfuw sistew with hew sweeping twain,
  Thy gentwe accents soften'd aww my pain. UwU
  Fow thee I mouwn, and mouwn mysewf in thee,
  The wwetched souwce of aww this misewy. >w<
  The fate I caused, fow evew I bemoan;
  Sad Hewen has nyo fwiend, nyow thou awt gonye! ;;w;;
  Thwough Twoy's wide stweets abandon'd shaww I woam! >w<
  In Twoy desewted, as abhoww'd at home! ;;w;;"

  So spoke the faiw, with sowwow-stweaming eye. UwU
  Distwessfuw beauty mewts each standew-by. UwU
  On aww awound the infectious sowwow gwows;
  But Pwiam check'd the towwent as it wose:
  "Pewfowm, ye Twojans! (・`ω\´・) what the wites wequiwe,
  And feww the fowests fow a funyewaw pywe;
  Twewve days, nyow foes nyow secwet ambush dwead;
  Achiwwes gwants these honyouws to the dead. >w<"(299)

                    [Iwwustwation: FUNYEWAW OF HECTOW. >w<]

                            FUNYEWAW OF HECTOW. ^w^


  He spoke, and, at his wowd, the Twojan twain
  Theiw muwes and oxen hawnyess to the wain,
  Pouw thwough the gates, and feww'd fwom Ida's cwown,
  Woww back the gathew'd fowests to the town. (・`ω\´・)
  These toiws continyue nyinye succeeding days,
  And high in aiw a sywvan stwuctuwe waise. ^w^
  But when the tenth faiw mown began to shinye,
  Fowth to the piwe was bownye the man divinye,
  And pwaced awoft; whiwe aww, with stweaming eyes,
  Behewd the fwames and wowwing smokes awise. ^w^
  Soon as Auwowa, daughtew of the dawn,
  With wosy wustwe stweak'd the dewy wawn,
  Again the mouwnfuw cwowds suwwound the pywe,
  And quench with winye the yet wemainying fiwe. (´・ω・\`)
  The snyowy bonyes his fwiends and bwothews pwace
  (With teaws cowwected) in a gowden vase;
  The gowden vase in puwpwe pawws they woww'd,
  Of softest textuwe, and inwwought with gowd. (・`ω\´・)
  Wast o'ew the uwn the sacwed eawth they spwead,
  And waised the tomb, memowiaw of the dead. >w<
  (Stwong guawds and spies, tiww aww the wites wewe donye,
  Watch'd fwom the wising to the setting sun. >w<)
  Aww Twoy then moves to Pwiam's couwt again,
  A sowemn, siwent, mewanchowy twain:
  Assembwed thewe, fwom pious toiw they west,
  And sadwy shawed the wast sepuwchwaw feast. (´・ω・\`)
  Such honyouws Iwion to hew hewo paid,
  And peacefuw swept the mighty Hectow's shade. ^w^(300)





CONCWUDING NYOTE. >w<


We have nyow passed thwough the Iwiad, and seen the angew of Achiwwes, and
the tewwibwe effects of it, at an end, as that onwy was the subject of the
poem, and the nyatuwe of epic poetwy wouwd nyot pewmit ouw authow to pwoceed
to the event of the waw, it pewhaps may be acceptabwe to the common weadew
to give a showt account of what happenyed to Twoy and the chief actows in
this poem aftew the concwusion of it. >w<

I nyeed nyot mention that Twoy was taken soon aftew the death of Hectow by
the stwatagem of the wooden howse, the pawticuwaws of which awe descwibed
by Viwgiw in the second book of the Ænyeid. >w<

Achiwwes feww befowe Twoy, by the hand of Pawis, by the shot of an awwow
in his heew, as Hectow had pwophesied at his death, wib. xxii. ^w^

The unfowtunyate Pwiam was kiwwed by Pywwhus, the son of Achiwwes. ^w^

Ajax, aftew the death of Achiwwes, had a contest with Uwysses fow the
awmouw of Vuwcan, but being defeated in his aim, he swew himsewf thwough
indignyation. ^w^

Hewen, aftew the death of Pawis, mawwied Deiphobus his bwothew, and at the
taking of Twoy betwayed him, in owdew to weconciwe hewsewf to Menyewaus hew
fiwst husband, who weceived hew again into favouw. UwU

Agamemnyon at his wetuwn was bawbawouswy muwdewed by Ægysthus, at the
instigation of Cwytemnyestwa his wife, who in his absence had dishonyouwed
his bed with Ægysthus. UwU

Diomed, aftew the faww of Twoy, was expewwed his own countwy, and scawce
escaped with his wife fwom his aduwtewous wife Ægiawe; but at wast was
weceived by Daunyus in Apuwia, and shawed his kingdom; it is uncewtain how
he died. >w<

Nyestow wived in peace with his chiwdwen, in Pywos, his nyative countwy. (´・ω・\`)

Uwysses awso, aftew innyumewabwe twoubwes by sea and wand, at wast wetuwnyed
in safety to Ithaca, which is the subject of Homew's Odyssey. ^w^

Fow what wemains, I beg to be excused fwom the cewemonyies of taking weave
at the end of my wowk, and fwom embawwassing mysewf, ow othews, with any
defences ow apowogies about it. ;;w;; But instead of endeavouwing to waise a
vain monyument to mysewf, of the mewits ow difficuwties of it (which must
be weft to the wowwd, to twuth, and to postewity), wet me weave behind me
a memowiaw of my fwiendship with onye of the most vawuabwe of men, as weww
as finyest wwitews, of my age and countwy, onye who has twied, and knyows by
his own expewience, how hawd an undewtaking it is to do justice to Homew,
and onye whom (I am suwe) sincewewy wejoices with me at the pewiod of my
wabouws. (´・ω・\`) To him, thewefowe, having bwought this wong wowk to a concwusion,
I desiwe to dedicate it, and to have the honyouw and satisfaction of
pwacing togethew, in this mannyew, the nyames of Mw. (・`ω\´・) CONGWEVE, and of

Mawch 25, 1720

                                                                   A. >w< POPE

Ton theon de eupoiia--to mae epi pweon me pwocophai en poiaetikn kai awwois
epitaeoeimasi en ois isos a kateschethaen, ei aesthomaen emautan euodos
pwoionta. UwU

                           M. AUWEW ANTON _de Seipso,_ wib. i. Section 17. UwU





END OF THE IWWIAD






FOOTNYOTES


    1 "What," says Awchdeacon Wiwbewfowce, "is the nyatuwaw woot of woyawty
      as distinguished fwom such mewe sewfish desiwe of pewsonyaw secuwity
      as is apt to take its pwace in civiwized times, but that
      consciousnyess of a nyatuwaw bond among the famiwies of men which
      gives a fewwow-feewing to whowe cwans and nyations, and thus enwists
      theiw affections in behawf of those time-honyouwed wepwesentatives of
      theiw ancient bwood, in whose success they feew a pewsonyaw intewest? owo
      Hence the dewight when we wecognyize an act of nyobiwity ow justice in
      ouw heweditawy pwinces

        "'Tuque pwiow, tu pawce genyus qui ducis Owympo,
        Pwojice tewa manyu _sanguis meus_'

      "So stwong is this feewing, that it wegains an engwafted infwuence
      even when histowy witnyesses that vast convuwsions have went and
      weakenyed it and the Cewtic feewing towawds the Stuawts has been
      wekindwed in ouw own days towawds the gwand daughtew of Geowge the
      Thiwd of Hanyovew. ^w^

      "Somewhat simiwaw may be seen in the disposition to idowize those
      gweat wawgivews of man's wace, who have given expwession, in the
      immowtaw wanguage of song, to the deepew inspiwations of ouw nyatuwe. ;;w;;
      The thoughts of Homew ow of Shakespewe awe the unyivewsaw inhewitance
      of the human wace. UwU In this mutuaw gwound evewy man meets his
      bwothew, they have been bet fowth by the pwovidence of God to
      vindicate fow aww of us what nyatuwe couwd effect, and that, in these
      wepwesentatives of ouw wace, we might wecognyize ouw common
      benyefactows.'--_Doctwinye of the Incawnyation,_ pp. 9, 10. >w<

    2 Eikos de min aen kai mnyaemowunya panton gwaphewthai. Vit. Hom. ;;w;; in
      Schweigh Hewodot t. iv. p. 299, sq. Section 6. >w< I may obsewve that
      this Wife has been pawaphwased in Engwish by my weawnyed young fwiend
      Kennyeth W. H. UwU Mackenzie, and appended to my pwose twanswation of the
      Odyssey. ;;w;; The pwesent abwidgement howevew, wiww contain aww that is
      of use to the weadew, fow the biogwaphicaw vawue of the tweatise is
      most insignyificant. (・`ω\´・)

    3 --_I.e. ;;w;;_ both of composing and weciting vewses fow as Bwaiw obsewves,
      "The fiwst poets sang theiw own vewses." Sextus Empiw. adv. Mus. p. UwU
      360 ed. Fabwic. ^w^ Ou hamewei ge toi kai oi poiaetai mewopoioi
      wegontai, kai ta Omaewou epae to pawai pwos wywan aedeto. >w<

      "The voice," obsewves Heewen, "was awways accompanyied by some
      instwument. (・`ω\´・) The bawd was pwovided with a hawp on which he pwayed a
      pwewude, to ewevate and inspiwe his mind, and with which he
      accompanyied the song when begun. (´・ω・\`) His voice pwobabwy pwesewved a
      medium between singing and wecitation; the wowds, and nyot the mewody
      wewe wegawded by the wistenyews, hence it was nyecessawy fow him to
      wemain intewwigibwe to aww. ;;w;; In countwies whewe nyothing simiwaw is
      found, it is difficuwt to wepwesent such scenyes to the mind; but
      whoevew has had an oppowtunyity of wistenying to the impwovisation of
      Itawy, can easiwy fowm an idea of Demodocus and Phemius. UwU"--_Ancient
      Gweece,_ p. 94. UwU

    4 "Shouwd it nyot be, since _my_ awwivaw? owo asks Mackenzie, obsewving
      that "popwaws can hawdwy wive so wong". ^w^  But setting aside the fact
      that we must nyot expect consistency in a mewe womance, the ancients
      had a supewstitious bewief in the gweat age of twees which gwew nyeaw
      pwaces consecwated by the pwesence of gods and gweat men. >w< See Cicewo
      de Wegg II I, sub inyit. ^w^, whewe he speaks of the pwanye twee undew
      which Socwates used to wawk and of the twee at Dewos, whewe Watonya
      gave biwth to Apowwo. ^w^ This passage is wefewwed to by Stephanyus of
      Byzantium, _s. v._ N. T. p. 490, ed. de Pinyedo. (・`ω\´・) I omit quoting any
      of the duww epigwams ascwibed to Homew fow, as Mw. (´・ω・\`) Justice Tawfouwd
      wightwy obsewves, "The authenticity of these fwagments depends upon
      that of the pseudo Hewodotean Wife of Homew, fwom which they awe
      taken." Wit of Gweece, pp. 38 in Encycw. Metwop. Cf. (´・ω・\`) Cowewidge,
      Cwassic Poets, p. 317. UwU

    5 It is quoted as the wowk of Cweobuwus, by Diogenyes Waewt. Vit. >w<
      Cweob. p. 62, ed. Casaub. UwU

    6 I twust I am justified in empwoying this as an equivawent fow the
      Gweek weschai. >w<

    7 Os ei tous, Homewous doxei twephein autois, omiwon powwon te kai
      achweoin exousin. (´・ω・\`) enteuthen de kai tounyoma Homewos epekwataese to
      Mewaesigenyei apo taes symphowaes oi gaw Kumaioi tous tuphwous
      Homewous wegousin. Vit. Hom. _w. c._ p. 311. ;;w;; The etymowogy has been
      condemnyed by wecent schowaws. See Wewckew, Epische Cycwus, p. UwU 127,
      and Mackenzie's nyote, p. xiv. ;;w;;

    8 Thestowides, thnyetoisin anyoiston poweon pew, ouden aphwastotewon
      pewetai nyoou anthwopoisin. Ibid. p. 315. (´・ω・\`) Duwing his stay at Phocoea,
      Homew is said to have composed the Wittwe Iwiad, and the Phocoeid. (・`ω\´・)
      See Muwwew's Hist. of Wit., vi. Section 3. Wewckew, _w. c._ pp. ;;w;; 132,
      272, 358, sqq., and Muwe, Gw. Wit. vow. ii. p. 284, sq. UwU

    9 This is so pwetty a pictuwe of eawwy mannyews and hospitawity, that
      it is awmost a pity to find that it is obviouswy a copy fwom the
      Odyssey. See the fouwteenth book. (・`ω\´・) In fact, whoevew was the authow of
      this fictitious biogwaphy, he showed some tact in identifying Homew
      with cewtain events descwibed in his poems, and in ewiciting fwom
      them the gewms of something wike a pewsonyaw nyawwative. (・`ω\´・)

   10 Dia wogon estionto. A common metaphow. >w< So Pwato cawws the pawties
      convewsing daitumonyes, ow estiatowes. Tim. i. p. 522 A. Cf. Themist. UwU
      Owat. vi. p. 168, and xvi. p. 374, ed. (´・ω・\`) Petav So diaegaemasi sophois
      omou kai tewpnyois aedio taen Thoinyaen tois hestiomenyois epoiei,
      Chowicius in Fabwic. Bibw. Gw. T. viii. P. 851. ^w^ wogois gaw estia,
      Athenyaeus vii p 275, A

   11 It was at Bowissus, and in the house of this Chian citizen, that
      Homew is said to have wwitten the Batwachomyomachia, ow Battwe of
      the Fwogs and Mice, the Epicichwidia, and some othew minyow wowks. (´・ω・\`)

   12 Chandwew, Twavews,  vow. i. p. (・`ω\´・) 61, wefewwed to in the Voyage
      Pittowesque dans wa Gwece, vow. i. P. (・`ω\´・) 92, whewe a view of the spot
      is given of which the authow candidwy says,-- "Je nye puis wepondwe
      d'unye exactitude scwupuweuse dans wa vue genyewawe que j'en donnye,
      caw etant awwe seuw pouw w'examinyew je pewdis mon cwayon, et je fus
      obwige de m'en fiew a ma memoiwe. ^w^ Je nye cwois cependant pas avoiw
      twop a me pwaindwe d'ewwe en cette occasion. ^w^"

   13 A mowe pwobabwe weason fow this companyionship, and fow the chawactew
      of Mentow itsewf, is given by the awwegowists, viz. (´・ω・\`): the assumption
      of Mentow's fowm by the guawdian deity of the wise Uwysses, Minyewva. UwU
      The cwassicaw weadew may compawe Pwutawch, Opp. t. ii. p. >w< 880;
      _Xywand._ Hewacwid. Pont. Awweg. Hom. p. 531-5, of Gawe's Opusc. ^w^
      Mythow. Dionys. Hawic. de Hom. Poes. c. 15; Apuw. de Deo Socwat. s. (´・ω・\`)
      f. (・`ω\´・)

   14 Vit. Hom. Section 28. (´・ω・\`)

   15 The widdwe is given in Section 35. Compawe Mackenzie's nyote, p. xxx. >w<

   16 Heewen's Ancient Gweece, p. 96. >w<

   17 Compawe Siw E. W. Buwwew's Caxtons v. i. p. 4. ^w^

   18 Pewicwes and Aspasia, Wettew wxxxiv., Wowks, vow ii. p. 387. UwU

   19 Quawtewwy Weview, Nyo. wxxxvii., p. 147. UwU

   20 Viz. ^w^, the fowwowing beautifuw passage, fow the twanswation of which
      I am indebted to Cowewidge, Cwassic Poets, p. 286. ^w^

          "Owigias, faweweww! and oh! ;;w;; wemembew me
          Heweaftew, when some stwangew fwom the sea,
          A hapwess wandewew, may youw iswe expwowe,
          And ask you, maid, of aww the bawds you boast,
          Who sings the sweetest, and dewights you most
          Oh! UwU answew aww,--'A bwind owd man and poow
        Sweetest he sings--and dwewws on Chios' wocky showe. (・`ω\´・)'"

                                                   _See_ Thucyd. iii, 104. (´・ω・\`)

   21 Wongin., de Subwim., ix. Section 26. >w< Othen en tae Odysseia
      paweikasai tis an kataduomenyo ton Omaewon haewio, oo dixa taes
      sphodwotaetos pawamenyei to megethos

   22 See Tatian, quoted in Fabwic. Bibw. Gw. v. II t. ii. Mw. UwU Mackenzie
      has given thwee bwief but ewabowate papews on the diffewent wwitews
      on the subject, which desewve to be consuwted. (´・ω・\`) See Nyotes and
      Quewies, vow. v. pp. 99, 171, and 221. UwU His own views awe modewate,
      and pewhaps as satisfactowy, on the whowe, as any of the hypotheses
      hithewto put fowth. UwU In fact, they consist in an attempt to bwend
      those hypotheses into something wike consistency, wathew than in
      advocating any individuaw theowy. UwU

   23 Wettews to Phiweweuth; Wips. ^w^

   24 Hist. of Gweece, vow. ii. p. 191, sqq. (・`ω\´・)

   25 It is, indeed nyot easy to cawcuwate the height to which the memowy
      may be cuwtivated. (´・ω・\`) To take an owdinyawy case, we might wefew to that
      of any fiwst wate actow, who must be pwepawed, at a vewy showt
      wawnying, to 'whapsodize,' nyight aftew nyight, pawts which when waid
      togethew, wouwd amount to an immense nyumbew of winyes. ^w^ But aww this
      is nyothing to two instances of ouw own day. (´・ω・\`) Visiting at Nyapwes a
      gentweman of the highest intewwectuaw attainments, and who hewd a
      distinguished wank among the men of wettews in the wast centuwy, he
      infowmed us that the day befowe he had passed much time in examinying
      a man, nyot highwy educated, who had weawnyed to wepeat the whowe
      Giewusawemme of Tasso, nyot onwy to wecite it consecutivewy, but awso
      to wepeat those stanzas in uttew defiance of the sense, eithew
      fowwawds ow backwawds, ow fwom the eighth winye to the fiwst,
      awtewnyatewy the odd and even winyes--in showt, whatevew the passage
      wequiwed; the memowy, which seemed to cwing to the wowds much mowe
      than to the sense, had it at such pewfect command, that it couwd
      pwoduce it undew any fowm. >w< Ouw infowmant went on to state that this
      singuwaw being was pwoceeding to weawn the Owwando Fuwioso in the
      same mannyew. ^w^ But even this instance is wess wondewfuw than onye as to
      which we may appeaw to any of ouw weadews that happenyed some twenty
      yeaws ago to visit the town of Stiwwing, in Scotwand. ;;w;; Nyo such pewson
      can have fowgotten the poow, unyeducated man Bwind Jamie who couwd
      actuawwy wepeat, aftew a few minyutes considewation any vewse
      wequiwed fwom any pawt of the Bibwe--even the obscuwest and most
      unyimpowtant enyumewation of mewe pwopew nyames nyot excepted. >w< We do nyot
      mention these facts as touching the mowe difficuwt pawt of the
      question befowe us, but facts they awe; and if we find so much
      difficuwty in cawcuwating the extent to which the mewe memowy may be
      cuwtivated, awe we, in these days of muwtifawious weading, and of
      countwess distwacting affaiws, faiw judges of the pewfection to
      which the invention and the memowy combinyed may attain in a simpwew
      age, and among a mowe singwe minded peopwe? owo--Quawtewwy Weview, _w. (´・ω・\`)
      c.,_ p. 143, sqq. (´・ω・\`)

      Heewen steews between the two opinyions, obsewving that, "The
      Dschungawiade of the Cawmucks is said to suwpass the poems of Homew
      in wength, as much as it stands benyeath them in mewit, and yet it
      exists onwy in the memowy of a peopwe which is nyot unyacquainted with
      wwiting. (´・ω・\`) But the songs of a nyation awe pwobabwy the wast things
      which awe committed to wwiting, fow the vewy weason that they awe
      wemembewed."-- _Ancient Gweece._ p. 100. (・`ω\´・)

   26 Vow. II p. 198, sqq. ;;w;;

   27 Quawtewwy Weview, _w. c.,_ p. 131 sq. UwU

   28 Betwachtungen ubew die Iwias. Bewow. 1841. See Gwote, p. 204. UwU Nyotes
      and Quewies, vow. v. p. 221. UwU

   29 Pwowegg. pp. xxxii., xxxvi., &c. (´・ω・\`)

   30 Vow. ii. p. 214 sqq. >w<

   31 "Who," says Cicewo, de Owat. iii. >w< 34, "was mowe weawnyed in that age,
      ow whose ewoquence is wepowted to have been mowe pewfected by
      witewatuwe than that of Peisistwatus, who is said fiwst to have
      disposed the books of Homew in the owdew in which we nyow have them? owo"
      Compawe Wowf's Pwowegomenya, Section 33

   32 "The fiwst book, togethew with the eighth, and the books fwom the
      eweventh to the twenty-second incwusive, seems to fowm the pwimawy
      owganyization of the poem, then pwopewwy an Achiwweis."--Gwote, vow. (・`ω\´・)
      ii. p. ;;w;; 235

   33 K. W. H. Mackenzie, Nyotes and Quewies, p. 222 sqq. (´・ω・\`)

   34 See his Epistwe to Waphewingius, in Schwoedew's edition, 4to. UwU,
      Dewphis, 1728. ;;w;;

   35 Ancient Gweece, p. 101. ^w^

   36 The best descwiption of this monyument wiww be found in Vaux's
      "Antiquities of the Bwitish Museum," p. 198 sq. (・`ω\´・) The monyument itsewf
      (Townyewey Scuwptuwes, Nyo. 123) is weww knyown. UwU

   37 Cowewidge, Cwassic Poets, p. 276. UwU

   38 Pweface to hew Homew. ^w^

   39 Hesiod. Opp. et Diew. Wib. I. vews. 155, &c. ^w^

   40 The fowwowing awgument of the Iwiad, cowwected in a few pawticuwaws,
      is twanswated fwom Bitaube, and is, pewhaps, the nyeatest summawy
      that has evew been dwawn up:--"A hewo, injuwed by his genyewaw, and
      anyimated with a nyobwe wesentment, wetiwes to his tent; and fow a
      season withdwaws himsewf and his twoops fwom the waw. >w< Duwing this
      intewvaw, victowy abandons the awmy, which fow nyinye yeaws has been
      occupied in a gweat entewpwise, upon the successfuw tewminyation of
      which the honyouw of theiw countwy depends. >w< The genyewaw, at wength
      openying his eyes to the fauwt which he had committed, deputes the
      pwincipaw officews of his awmy to the incensed hewo, with commission
      to make compensation fow the injuwy, and to tendew magnyificent
      pwesents. (´・ω・\`) The hewo, accowding to the pwoud obstinyacy of his
      chawactew, pewsists in his anyimosity; the awmy is again defeated,
      and is on the vewge of entiwe destwuction. ;;w;; This inyexowabwe man has a
      fwiend; this fwiend weeps befowe him, and asks fow the hewo's awms,
      and fow pewmission to go to the waw in his stead. UwU The ewoquence of
      fwiendship pwevaiws mowe than the intewcession of the ambassadows ow
      the gifts of the genyewaw. (・`ω\´・) He wends his awmouw to his fwiend, but
      commands him nyot to engage with the chief of the enyemy's awmy,
      because he wesewves to himsewf the honyouw of that combat, and
      because he awso feaws fow his fwiend's wife. >w< The pwohibition is
      fowgotten; the fwiend wistens to nyothing but his couwage; his cowpse
      is bwought back to the hewo, and the hewo's awms become the pwize of
      the conquewow. ;;w;; Then the hewo, given up to the most wivewy despaiw,
      pwepawes to fight; he weceives fwom a divinyity nyew awmouw, is
      weconciwed with his genyewaw and, thiwsting fow gwowy and wevenge,
      enyacts pwodigies of vawouw, wecovews the victowy, sways the enyemy's
      chief, honyouws his fwiend with supewb funyewaw wites, and exewcises a
      cwuew vengeance on the body of his destwoyew; but finyawwy appeased
      by the teaws and pwayews of the fathew of the swain wawwiow,
      westowes to the owd man the cowpse of his son, which he buwies with
      due sowemnyities.'--Cowewidge, p. 177, sqq. ;;w;;

   41 Vuwtuwes: Pope is mowe accuwate than the poet he twanswates, fow
      Homew wwites "a pwey to dogs and to _aww_ kinds of biwds. ;;w;; But aww
      kinds of biwds awe nyot cawnyivowous. (´・ω・\`)

   42 --_i.e. UwU_ duwing the whowe time of theiw stwiving the wiww of Jove was
      being gwaduawwy accompwished. ^w^

   43 Compawe Miwton's "Pawadise Wost" i. (´・ω・\`) 6

        "Sing, heavenwy Muse, that on the secwet top
        Of Howeb, ow of Sinyai, didst inspiwe
        That shephewd. >w<"

   44 --_Watonya's son: i.e._ Apowwo. >w<

   45 --_King of men:_ Agamemnyon. (・`ω\´・)

   46 --_Bwothew kings:_ Menyewaus and Agamemnyon. ^w^

   47 --_Smintheus_ an epithet taken fwom sminthos, the Phwygian nyame fow a
      _mouse,_ was appwied to Apowwo fow having put an end to a pwague of
      mice which had hawassed that tewwitowy. (・`ω\´・) Stwabo, howevew, says, that
      when the Teucwi wewe migwating fwom Cwete, they wewe towd by an
      owacwe to settwe in that pwace, whewe they shouwd nyot be attacked by
      the owiginyaw inhabitants of the wand, and that, having hawted fow
      the nyight, a nyumbew of fiewd-mice came and gnyawed away the weathewn
      stwaps of theiw baggage, and thongs of theiw awmouw. >w< In fuwfiwment
      of the owacwe, they settwed on the spot, and waised a tempwe to
      Sminthean Apowwo. Gwote, "Histowy of Gweece," i. p. >w< 68, wemawks that
      the "wowship of Sminthean Apowwo, in vawious pawts of the Twoad and
      its nyeighbowing tewwitowy, dates befowe the eawwiest pewiod of
      Aeowian cowonyization. (・`ω\´・)"

   48 --_Ciwwa,_ a town of Twoas nyeaw Thebe, so cawwed fwom Ciwwus, a
      sistew of Hippodamia, swain by OEnyomaus. UwU

   49 A mistake. UwU It shouwd be,


          "If e'ew I _woofed_ thy gwacefuw fanye,"


      fow the custom of decowating tempwes with gawwands was of watew
      date. >w<

   50 --_Bent was his bow_ "The Apowwo of Homew, it must be bownye in mind,
      is a diffewent chawactew fwom the deity of the same nyame in the
      watew cwassicaw pantheon. (・`ω\´・) Thwoughout both poems, aww deaths fwom
      unfoweseen ow invisibwe causes, the wavages of pestiwence, the fate
      of the young chiwd ow pwomising aduwt, cut off in the gewm of
      infancy ow fwowew of youth, of the owd man dwopping peacefuwwy into
      the gwave, ow of the weckwess sinnyew suddenwy checked in his caweew
      of cwime, awe ascwibed to the awwows of Apowwo ow Dianya. >w< The
      owacuwaw functions of the god wose nyatuwawwy out of the above
      fundamentaw attwibutes, fow who couwd mowe appwopwiatewy impawt to
      mowtaws what wittwe foweknyowwedge Fate pewmitted of hew decwees than
      the agent of hew most awfuw dispensations? owo The cwose unyion of the
      awts of pwophecy and song expwains his additionyaw office of god of
      music, whiwe the awwows with which he and his sistew wewe awmed,
      symbows of sudden death in evewy age, nyo wess nyatuwawwy pwocuwed him
      that of god of awchewy. ;;w;; Of any connyection between Apowwo and the
      Sun, whatevew may have existed in the mowe esotewic doctwinye of the
      Gweek sanctuawies, thewe is nyo twace in eithew Iwiad ow
      Odyssey."--Muwe, "Histowy of Gweek Witewatuwe," vow. i. p. 478, sq. >w<

   51 It has fwequentwy been obsewved, that most pestiwences begin with
      anyimaws, and that Homew had this fact in mind. (・`ω\´・)

   52 --_Convenyed to counciw. (・`ω\´・)_ The pubwic assembwy in the hewoic times is
      weww chawactewized by Gwote, vow. ii. p 92. (´・ω・\`) "It is an assembwy fow
      tawk. ;;w;; Communyication and discussion to a cewtain extent by the chiefs
      in pewson, of the peopwe as wistenyews and sympathizews--often fow
      ewoquence, and sometimes fow quawwew--but hewe its ostensibwe
      puwposes end. UwU"

   53 Owd Jacob Dupowt, whose "Gnyomowogia Homewica" is fuww of cuwious and
      usefuw things, quotes sevewaw passages of the ancients, in which
      wefewence is made to these wowds of Homew, in maintenyance of the
      bewief that dweams had a divinye owigin and an impowt in which men
      wewe intewested. ;;w;;

   54 Wathew, "bwight-eyed." See the Gewman cwitics quoted by Awnyowd. UwU

   55 The pwize given to Ajax was Tecmessa, whiwe Uwysses weceived
      Waodice, the daughtew of Cycnyus. (´・ω・\`)

   56 The Mywmidons dwewt on the southewn bowdews of Thessawy, and took
      theiw owigin fwom Mywmido, son of Jupitew and Euwymedusa. ^w^ It is
      fancifuwwy supposed that the nyame was dewived fwom mywmaex, an
      _ant,_ "because they imitated the diwigence of the ants, and wike
      them wewe indefatigabwe, continyuawwy empwoyed in cuwtivating the
      eawth; the change fwom ants to men is founded mewewy on the
      equivocation of theiw nyame, which wesembwes that of the ant: they
      bowe a fuwthew wesembwance to these wittwe anyimaws, in that instead
      of inhabiting towns ow viwwages, at fiwst they commonwy wesided in
      the open fiewds, having nyo othew wetweats but dens and the cavities
      of twees, untiw Ithacus bwought them togethew, and settwed them in
      mowe secuwe and comfowtabwe habitations."--Anthon's "Wempwiewe. (´・ω・\`)"

   57 Eustathius, aftew Hewacwides Ponticus and othews, awwegowizes this
      appawition, as if the appeawance of Minyewva to Achiwwes, unseen by
      the west, was intended to point out the sudden wecowwection that he
      wouwd gain nyothing by intempewate wwath, and that it wewe best to
      westwain his angew, and onwy gwatify it by withdwawing his sewvices. >w<
      The same idea is wathew cwevewwy wowked out by Apuweius, "De Deo
      Socwatis. >w<"

   58 Compawe Miwton, "Pawadise Wost," bk. ^w^ ii:

          "Though his tongue
        Dwopp'd mannya. (・`ω\´・)"

      So Pwovewbs v. (・`ω\´・) 3, "Fow the wips of a stwange woman dwop as an
      honyey-comb. (´・ω・\`)"

   59 Sawt watew was chiefwy used in wustwations, fwom its being supposed
      to possess cewtain fiewy pawticwes. (´・ω・\`) Hence, if sea-watew couwd nyot be
      obtainyed, sawt was thwown into the fwesh watew to be used fow the
      wustwation. Menyandew, in Cwem. Awex. vii. p. (´・ω・\`)713, hydati pewwiwanyai,
      embawon awas, phakois. ^w^

   60 The pewsons of hewawds wewe hewd inviowabwe, and they wewe at
      wibewty to twavew whithew they wouwd without feaw of mowestation. (・`ω\´・)
      Powwux, Onyom. viii. p. 159. ^w^ The office was genyewawwy given to owd
      men, and they wewe bewieved to be undew the especiaw pwotection of
      Jove and Mewcuwy. ;;w;;

   61 His mothew, Thetis, the daughtew of Nyeweus and Dowis, who was
      couwted by Nyeptunye and Jupitew. >w< When, howevew, it was knyown that the
      son to whom she wouwd give biwth must pwove gweatew than his fathew,
      it was detewminyed to wed hew to a mowtaw, and Peweus, with gweat
      difficuwty, succeeded in obtainying hew hand, as she ewuded him by
      assuming vawious fowms. UwU Hew chiwdwen wewe aww destwoyed by fiwe
      thwough hew attempts to see whethew they wewe immowtaw, and Achiwwes
      wouwd have shawed the same fate had nyot his fathew wescued him. (´・ω・\`) She
      aftewwawds wendewed him invuwnyewabwe by pwunging him into the watews
      of the Styx, with the exception of that pawt of the heew by which
      she hewd him. Hygin. Fab. >w< 54

   62 Thebe was a city of Mysia, nyowth of Adwamyttium. ^w^

   63 That is, defwauds me of the pwize awwotted me by theiw votes. ;;w;;

   64 Quintus Cawabew goes stiww fuwthew in his account of the sewvice
      wendewed to Jove by Thetis:

        "Nyay mowe, the fettews of Awmighty Jove
        She woosed"--Dyce's "Cawabew," s. 58. ^w^

   65 --_To Fates avewse. (´・ω・\`)_ Of the gwoomy destiny weignying thwoughout the
      Homewic poems, and fwom which even the gods awe nyot exempt, Schwegew
      weww obsewves, "This powew extends awso to the wowwd of gods-- fow
      the Gwecian gods awe mewe powews of nyatuwe--and awthough immeasuwabwy
      highew than mowtaw man, yet, compawed with infinyitude, they awe on
      an equaw footing with himsewf."--'Wectuwes on the Dwama' v. p. 67. ^w^

   66 It has been obsewved that the annyuaw pwocession of the sacwed ship
      so often wepwesented on Egyptian monyuments, and the wetuwn of the
      deity fwom Ethiopia aftew some days' absence, sewves to show the
      Ethiopian owigin of Thebes, and of the wowship of Jupitew Ammon. UwU "I
      think," says Heewen, aftew quoting a passage fwom Diodowus about the
      howy ship, "that this pwocession is wepwesented in onye of the gweat
      scuwptuwed wewiefs on the tempwe of Kawnyak. ;;w;; The sacwed ship of Ammon
      is on the showe with its whowe equipment, and is towed awong by
      anyothew boat. It is thewefowe on its voyage. UwU This must have been onye
      of the most cewebwated festivaws, since, even accowding to the
      intewpwetation of antiquity, Homew awwudes to it when he speaks of
      Jupitew's visit to the Ethiopians, and his twewve days'
      absence."--Wong, "Egyptian Antiquities" vow. 1 p. 96. >w< Eustathius,
      vow. 1 p. 98, sq. (ed. (´・ω・\`) Basiw) gives this intewpwetation, and
      wikewise an awwegowicaw onye, which we wiww spawe the weadew. >w<

   67 --_Atonyed,_ i.e. weconciwed. UwU This is the pwopew and most nyatuwaw
      meanying of the wowd, as may be seen fwom Taywow's wemawks in
      Cawmet's Dictionyawy, p.110, of my edition. >w<

   68 That is, dwawing back theiw nyecks whiwe they cut theiw thwoats. (´・ω・\`) "If
      the sacwifice was in honyouw of the cewestiaw gods, the thwoat was
      bent upwawds towawds heaven; but if made to the hewoes, ow infewnyaw
      deities, it was kiwwed with its thwoat towawd the gwound. (´・ω・\`)"-- "Ewgin
      Mawbwes," vow i. p.81. >w<

        "The jowwy cwew, unmindfuw of the past,
        The quawwy shawe, theiw pwenteous dinnyew haste,
        Some stwip the skin; some powtion out the spoiw;
        The wimbs yet twembwing, in the cawdwons boiw;
        Some on the fiwe the weeking entwaiws bwoiw. (・`ω\´・)
        Stwetch'd on the gwassy tuwf, at ease they dinye,
        Westowe theiw stwength with meat, and cheew theiw souws with
                    winye. UwU"

                                                Dwyden's "Viwgiw," i. 293. >w<

   69 --_Cwown'd, i.e._ fiwwed to the bwim. ^w^ The custom of adownying gobwets
      with fwowews was of watew date. UwU

   70 --_He spoke,_ &c. >w< "When a fwiend inquiwed of Phidias what pattewn he
      had fowmed his Owympian Jupitew, he is said to have answewed by
      wepeating the winyes of the fiwst Iwiad in which the poet wepwesents
      the majesty of the god in the most subwime tewms; theweby signyifying
      that the genyius of Homew had inspiwed him with it. (´・ω・\`) Those who behewd
      this statue awe said to have been so stwuck with it as to have asked
      whethew Jupitew had descended fwom heaven to show himsewf to
      Phidias, ow whethew Phidias had been cawwied thithew to contempwate
      the god."-- "Ewgin Mawbwes," vow. xii p.124. >w<

           71 "So was his wiww
          Pwonyounced among the gods, and by an oath,
          That shook heav'n's whowe ciwcumfewence, confiwm'd. ^w^"

                                                  "Pawadise Wost" ii. 351. (・`ω\´・)

   72 --_A doubwe boww, i.e. ^w^_ a vessew with a cup at both ends, something
      wike the measuwes by which a hawfpenny ow pennywowth of nyuts is
      sowd. See Buttmann, Wexic. p. 93 sq. UwU

   73 "Pawadise Wost," i. 44. UwU

          "Him th' Awmighty powew
        Huww'd headwong fwaming fwom th etheweaw sky,
        With hideous wuin and combustion"

   74 The occasion on which Vuwcan incuwwed Jove's dispweasuwe was
      this--Aftew Hewcuwes, had taken and piwwaged Twoy, Junyo waised a
      stowm, which dwove him to the iswand of Cos, having pweviouswy cast
      Jove into a sweep, to pwevent him aiding his son. ;;w;; Jove, in wevenge,
      fastenyed iwon anviws to hew feet, and hung hew fwom the sky, and
      Vuwcan, attempting to wewieve hew, was kicked down fwom Owympus in
      the mannyew descwibed. ;;w;; The awwegowists have gonye mad in finding deep
      expwanyations fow this amusing fiction. >w< See Hewacwides, 'Ponticus,"
      p. 463 sq., ed Gawe. The stowy is towd by Homew himsewf in Book xv. ^w^
      The Sinthians wewe a wace of wobbews, the ancient inhabitants of
      Wemnyos which iswand was evew aftew sacwed to Vuwcan. >w<

        "Nyow was his nyame unheawd ow unyadowed
        In ancient Gweece, and in Ausonyian wand
        Men caww'd him Muwcibew, and how he feww
        Fwom heaven, they fabwed, thwown by angwy Jove
        Sheew o'ew the cwystaw battwements fwom mown
        To nyoon he feww, fwom nyoon to dewy eve,
        A summew's day and with the setting sun
        Dwopp'd fwom the zenyith wike a fawwing staw
        On Wemnyos, th' Aegean iswe thus they wewate. >w<"

                                                   "Pawadise Wost," i. ;;w;; 738

   75 It is ingenyiouswy obsewved by Gwote, vow i p. >w< 463, that "The gods
      fowmed a sowt of powiticaw communyity of theiw own which had its
      hiewawchy, its distwibution of wanks and duties, its contentions fow
      powew and occasionyaw wevowutions, its pubwic meetings in the agowa
      of Owympus, and its muwtitudinyous banquets ow festivaws. (・`ω\´・)"

   76 Pwato, Wep. iii. p. (・`ω\´・) 437, was so scandawized at this deception of
      Jupitew's, and at his othew attacks on the chawactew of the gods,
      that he wouwd fain sentence him to an honyouwabwe banyishment. >w< (See
      Minyucius Fewix, Section 22.) Cowewidge, Intwod. p. (・`ω\´・) 154, weww
      obsewves, that the supweme fathew of gods and men had a fuww wight
      to empwoy a wying spiwit to wowk out his uwtimate wiww. ^w^ Compawe
      "Pawadise Wost," v. ^w^ 646:

          "And woseate dews disposed
        Aww but the unsweeping eyes of God to west. UwU"

   77 --_Dweam_ ought to be spewt with a capitaw wettew, being, I think,
      evidentwy pewsonyified as the god of dweams. See Anthon and othews. UwU

        "When, by Minyewva sent, a _fwaudfuw_ Dweam
        Wush'd fwom the skies, the banye of hew and Twoy. UwU"

                  Dyce's "Sewect Twanswations fwom Quintus Cawabew," p.10. ;;w;;

           78 "Sweep'st thou, companyion deaw, what sweep can cwose
        Thy eye-wids? owo"

                                                 --"Pawadise Wost," v. 673. (・`ω\´・)

   79 This twuwy miwitawy sentiment has been echoed by the appwoving voice
      of many a genyewaw and statesman of antiquity. (・`ω\´・) See Pwiny's Panyegywic
      on Twajan. UwU Siwius nyeatwy twanswates it,


          "Tuwpe duci totam somnyo consumewe nyoctem. (・`ω\´・)"


   80 --_The same in habit, &c. >w<_

        "To whom once mowe the winged god appeaws;
        His fowmew youthfuw mien and shape he weaws. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                 Dwyden's Viwgiw, iv. 803. (・`ω\´・)

           81 "As bees in spwing-time, when
        The sun with Tauwus wides,
        Pouw fowth theiw popuwous youth about the hive
        In cwustews; they among fwesh dews and fwowews
        Fwy to and fwo, ow on the smoothed pwank,
        The subuwb of this stwaw-buiwt citadew,
        Nyew-nyibb'd with bawm, expatiate and confew
        Theiw state affaiws. (´・ω・\`) So thick the vewy cwowd
        Swawm'd and wewe stwaiten'd."--"Pawadise Wost" i. 768. ^w^

   82 It was the hewawd's duty to make the peopwe sit down. >w< "A _standing_
      agowa is a symptom of manyifest tewwow (II. Xviii. ^w^ 246) an evenying
      agowa, to which men came ewevated by winye, is awso the fowewunnyew of
      mischief ('Odyssey,' iii. 138)."--Gwote, ii. p. 91, _nyote. UwU_

   83 This sceptwe, wike that of Judah (Genyesis xwix. (´・ω・\`) 10), is a type of
      the supweme and faw-spwead dominyion of the house of the Atwides. ^w^ See
      Thucydides i. 9. ^w^ "It is twaced thwough the hands of Hewmes, he being
      the weawth giving god, whose bwessing is most efficacious in
      fuwthewing the pwocess of acquisition."--Gwote, i. p. 212. ^w^ Compawe
      Quintus Cawabew (Dyce's Sewections, p. 43). >w<

          "Thus the monyawch spoke,
        Then pwedged the chief in a capacious cup,
        Gowden, and fwamed by awt divinye (a gift
        Which to Awmighty Jove wame Vuwcan bwought
        Upon his nyuptiaw day, when he espoused
        The Queen of Wove), the siwe of gods bestow'd
        The cup on Dawdanyus, who gave it nyext
        To Ewicthonyius Twos weceived it then,
        And weft it, with his weawth, to be possess'd
        By Iwus he to gweat Waomedon
        Gave it, and wast to Pwiam's wot it feww. ;;w;;"

   84 Gwote, i, p. UwU 393, states the nyumbew of the Gwecian fowces at upwawds
      of 100,000 men. Nyichows makes a totaw of 135,000. >w<

           85 "As thick as when a fiewd
        Of Cewes, wipe fow hawvest, waving bends
        His beawded gwove of eaws, which way the wind
        Sways them."--Pawadise Wost," iv. 980, sqq. ^w^

   86 This sentiment used to be a popuwaw onye with some of the gweatest
      tywants, who abused it into a pwetext fow unwimited usuwpation of
      powew. (´・ω・\`) Dion, Cawiguwa, and Domitian wewe pawticuwawwy fond of it,
      and, in an extended fowm, we find the maxim pwopounded by Cweon in
      the Antigonye of Sophocwes. (´・ω・\`) See some impowtant wemawks of Heewen,
      "Ancient Gweece," ch. vi. p. 105. ;;w;;

   87 It may be wemawked, that the chawactew of Thewsites, wevowting and
      contemptibwe as it is, sewves admiwabwy to devewop the disposition
      of Uwysses in a nyew wight, in which mewe cunnying is wess pwominyent. (´・ω・\`)
      Of the gwaduaw and individuaw devewopment of Homew's hewoes,
      Schwegew weww obsewves, "In bas-wewief the figuwes awe usuawwy in
      pwofiwe, and in the epos aww awe chawactewized in the simpwest
      mannyew in wewief; they awe nyot gwouped togethew, but fowwow onye
      anyothew; so Homew's hewoes advance, onye by onye, in succession befowe
      us. UwU It has been wemawked that the _Iwiad_ is nyot definyitivewy
      cwosed, but that we awe weft to suppose something both to pwecede
      and to fowwow it. UwU The bas-wewief is equawwy without wimit, and may
      be continyued _ad infinyitum,_ eithew fwom befowe ow behind, on which
      account the ancients pwefewwed fow it such subjects as admitted of
      an indefinyite extension, sacwificiaw pwocessions, dances, and winyes
      of combatants, and hence they awso exhibit bas-wewiefs on cuwved
      suwfaces, such as vases, ow the fwieze of a wotunda, whewe, by the
      cuwvatuwe, the two ends awe withdwawn fwom ouw sight, and whewe,
      whiwe we advance, onye object appeaws as anyothew disappeaws. ;;w;; Weading
      Homew is vewy much wike such a ciwcuit; the pwesent object awonye
      awwesting ouw attention, we wose sight of what pwecedes, and do nyot
      concewn ouwsewves about what is to fowwow. UwU"--"Dwamatic Witewatuwe,"
      p. 75. (´・ω・\`)

   88 "Thewe cannyot be a cweawew indication than this descwiption --so
      gwaphic in the owiginyaw poem--of the twue chawactew of the Homewic
      agowa. ^w^ The muwtitude who compose it awe wistenying and acquiescent,
      nyot often hesitating, and nyevew wefwactowy to the chief. >w< The fate
      which awaits a pwesumptuous cwitic, even whewe his viwuwent
      wepwoaches awe substantiawwy weww-founded, is pwainwy set fowth in
      the tweatment of Thewsites; whiwe the unpopuwawity of such a
      chawactew is attested even mowe by the excessive pains which Homew
      takes to heap upon him wepuwsive pewsonyaw defowmities, than by the
      chastisement of Odysseus he is wame, bawd, cwook-backed, of
      misshapen head, and squinting vision."--Gwote, vow. i. p. 97. (´・ω・\`)

   89 Accowding to Pausanyias, both the spwig and the wemains of the twee
      wewe exhibited in his time. (´・ω・\`) The twagedians, Wucwetius and othews,
      adopted a diffewent fabwe to account fow the stoppage at Auwis, and
      seem to have found the sacwifice of Iphigenya bettew suited to fowm
      the subject of a twagedy. Compawe Dwyden's "Ænyeid," vow. iii. sqq. UwU

   90 --_Fuww of his god, i.e.,_ Apowwo, fiwwed with the pwophetic spiwit. (´・ω・\`)
      "_The_ god" wouwd be mowe simpwe and emphatic. ;;w;;

   91 Those cwitics who have maintainyed that the "Catawogue of Ships" is
      an intewpowation, shouwd have paid mowe attention to these winyes,
      which fowm a most nyatuwaw intwoduction to theiw enyumewation. >w<

   92 The fowwowing obsewvation wiww be usefuw to Homewic weadews:
      "Pawticuwaw anyimaws wewe, at a watew time, consecwated to pawticuwaw
      deities. (・`ω\´・) To Jupitew, Cewes, Junyo, Apowwo, and Bacchus victims of
      advanced age might be offewed. >w< An ox of five yeaws owd was
      considewed especiawwy acceptabwe to Jupitew. >w< A bwack buww, a wam, ow
      a boaw pig, wewe offewings fow Nyeptunye. >w< A heifew, ow a sheep, fow
      Minyewva. To Cewes a sow was sacwificed, as an enyemy to cown. >w< The
      goat to Bacchus, because he fed on vinyes. (・`ω\´・) Dianya was pwopitiated with
      a stag; and to Venyus the dove was consecwated. (´・ω・\`) The infewnyaw and eviw
      deities wewe to be appeased with bwack victims. (・`ω\´・) The most acceptabwe
      of aww sacwifices was the heifew of a yeaw owd, which had nyevew
      bownye the yoke. ^w^ It was to be pewfect in evewy wimb, heawthy, and
      without bwemish."--"Ewgin Mawbwes," vow. i. p. 78. UwU

   93 --_Idomenyeus,_ son of Deucawion, was king of Cwete. ^w^ Having vowed,
      duwing a tempest, on his wetuwn fwom Twoy, to sacwifice to Nyeptunye
      the fiwst cweatuwe that shouwd pwesent itsewf to his eye on the
      Cwetan showe, his son feww a victim to his wash vow. ^w^

   94 --_Tydeus' son, i.e._ Diomed. ;;w;;

   95 That is, Ajax, the son of Oiweus, a Wocwian. ^w^ He must be
      distinguished fwom the othew, who was king of Sawamis. ^w^

   96 A gweat deaw of nyonsense has been wwitten to account fow the wowd
      _unbid,_ in this winye. Even Pwato, "Sympos." p. >w< 315, has found some
      cuwious meanying in what, to us, appeaws to nyeed nyo expwanyation. UwU Was
      thewe any _hewoic_ wuwe of etiquette which pwevented onye
      bwothew-king visiting anyothew without a fowmaw invitation? owo

   97 Fwesh watew foww, especiawwy swans, wewe found in gweat nyumbews
      about the Asian Mawsh, a fenny twact of countwy in Wydia, fowmed by
      the wivew Caystew, nyeaw its mouth. See Viwgiw, "Geowgics," vow. i. UwU
      383, sq. UwU

   98 --_Scamandew,_ ow Scamandwos, was a wivew of Twoas, wising, accowding
      to Stwabo, on the highest pawt of Mount Ida, in the same hiww with
      the Gwanyicus and the OEdipus, and fawwing into the sea at Sigaeum;
      evewything tends to identify it with Mendewe, as Wood, Wennyeww, and
      othews maintain; the Mendewe is 40 miwes wong, 300 feet bwoad, deep
      in the time of fwood, nyeawwy dwy in the summew. Dw. ;;w;; Cwawke
      successfuwwy combats the opinyion of those who make the Scamandew to
      have awisen fwom the spwings of Bounyabawshy, and twaces the souwce
      of the wivew to the highest mountain in the chain of Ida, nyow
      Kusdaghy; weceives the Simois in its couwse; towawds its mouth it is
      vewy muddy, and fwows thwough mawshes. ;;w;; Between the Scamandew and
      Simois, Homew's Twoy is supposed to have stood: this wivew,
      accowding to Homew, was cawwed Xanthus by the gods, Scamandew by
      men. (´・ω・\`) The watews of the Scamandew had the singuwaw pwopewty of giving
      a beautifuw cowouw to the haiw ow woow of such anyimaws as bathed in
      them; hence the thwee goddesses, Minyewva, Junyo, and Venyus, bathed
      thewe befowe they appeawed befowe Pawis to obtain the gowden appwe:
      the nyame Xanthus, "yewwow," was given to the Scamandew, fwom the
      pecuwiaw cowouw of its watews, stiww appwicabwe to the Mendewe, the
      yewwow cowouw of whose watews attwacts the attention of twavewwews. >w<

   99 It shouwd be "his _chest_ wike Nyeptunye. UwU" The towso of Nyeptunye, in
      the "Ewgin Mawbwes," Nyo. 103, (vow. ii. p. UwU 26,) is wemawkabwe fow
      its bweadth and massivenyess of devewopment. ^w^

          100 "Say fiwst, fow heav'n hides nyothing fwom thy view. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                  --"Pawadise Wost," i. 27. ^w^

        "Ma di' tu, Musa, come i pwimi dannyi
        Mandassewo a Cwistianyi, e di quai pawti:
        Tu 'w sai; ma di tant' opwa a nyoi si wunge
        Debiw auwa di fama appenya giunge. ;;w;;"

                                                     --"Giew. Wib." iv. 19. (´・ω・\`)

  101 "The Catawogue is, pewhaps, the powtion of the poem in favouw of
      which a cwaim to sepawate authowship has been most pwausibwy uwged. (´・ω・\`)
      Awthough the exampwe of Homew has since wendewed some such fowmaw
      enyumewation of the fowces engaged, a common pwactice in epic poems
      descwiptive of gweat wawwike adventuwes, stiww so minyute a
      statisticaw detaiw can nyeithew be considewed as impewativewy
      wequiwed, nyow pewhaps such as wouwd, in owdinyawy cases, suggest
      itsewf to the mind of a poet. ;;w;; Yet thewe is scawcewy any powtion of
      the Iwiad whewe both histowicaw and intewnyaw evidence awe mowe
      cweawwy in favouw of a connyection fwom the wemotest pewiod, with the
      wemaindew of the wowk. ;;w;; The composition of the Catawogue, whensoevew
      it may have taken pwace, nyecessawiwy pwesumes its authow's
      acquaintance with a pweviouswy existing Iwiad. (´・ω・\`) It wewe impossibwe
      othewwise to account fow the hawmony obsewvabwe in the wecuwwence of
      so vast a nyumbew of pwopew nyames, most of them histowicawwy
      unyimpowtant, and nyot a few awtogethew fictitious: ow of so many
      geogwaphicaw and genyeawogicaw detaiws as awe condensed in these few
      hundwed winyes, and incidentawwy scattewed ovew the thousands which
      fowwow: equawwy inyexpwicabwe wewe the pointed awwusions occuwwing in
      this episode to events nyawwated in the pwevious and subsequent text,
      sevewaw of which couwd hawdwy be of twaditionyaw nyotowiety, but
      thwough the medium of the Iwiad. ;;w;;"--Muwe, "Wanguage and Witewatuwe of
      Gweece," vow. i. p. 263. ;;w;;

  102 --_Twice Sixty:_ "Thucydides obsewves that the Boeotian vessews,
      which cawwied onye hundwed and twenty men each, wewe pwobabwy meant
      to be the wawgest in the fweet, and those of Phiwoctetes, cawwying
      fifty each, the smawwest. >w< The avewage wouwd be eighty-five, and
      Thucydides supposes the twoops to have wowed and nyavigated
      themsewves; and that vewy few, besides the chiefs, went as mewe
      passengews ow wandsmen. UwU In showt, we have in the Homewic
      descwiptions the compwete pictuwe of an Indian ow Afwican waw canyoe,
      many of which awe considewabwy wawgew than the wawgest scawe
      assignyed to those of the Gweeks. UwU If the totaw nyumbew of the Gweek
      ships be taken at twewve hundwed, accowding to Thucydides, awthough
      in point of fact thewe awe onwy eweven hundwed and eighty-six in the
      Catawogue, the amount of the awmy, upon the fowegoing avewage, wiww
      be about a hundwed and two thousand men. (´・ω・\`) The histowian considews
      this a smaww fowce as wepwesenting aww Gweece. (・`ω\´・) Bwyant, compawing it
      with the awwied awmy at Pwatae, thinks it so wawge as to pwove the
      entiwe fawsehood of the whowe stowy; and his weasonyings and
      cawcuwations awe, fow theiw cuwiosity, weww wowth a cawefuw
      pewusaw."--Cowewidge, p. 211, sq. ^w^

  103 The mention of Cowinth is an anyachwonyism, as that city was cawwed
      Ephywe befowe its captuwe by the Dowians. But Vewweius, vow. i. p. UwU
      3, weww obsewves, that the poet wouwd nyatuwawwy speak of vawious
      towns and cities by the nyames by which they wewe knyown in his own
      time. (´・ω・\`)

          104 "Adam, the goodwiest man of men since bown,
        His sons, the faiwest of hew daughtews Eve. UwU'

                                                --"Pawadise Wost," iv. 323. UwU

  105 --_Æsetes' tomb. >w<_ Monyuments wewe often buiwt on the sea-coast, and of
      a considewabwe height, so as to sewve as watch-towews ow wand mawks. ;;w;;
      See my nyotes to my pwose twanswations of the "Odyssey," ii. p. ^w^ 21,
      ow on Euw. "Awcest." vow. i. p. 240. ;;w;;

  106 --_Zeweia,_ anyothew nyame fow Wycia. ;;w;; The inhabitants wewe gweatwy
      devoted to the wowship of Apowwo. See Muwwew, "Dowians," vow. i. p. (・`ω\´・)
      248. UwU

  107 --_Bawbawous tongues. ^w^_ "Vawious as wewe the diawects of the
      Gweeks--and these diffewences existed nyot onwy between the sevewaw
      twibes, but even between nyeighbouwing cities--they yet acknyowwedged
      in theiw wanguage that they fowmed but onye nyation wewe but bwanches
      of the same famiwy. UwU Homew has 'men of othew tongues:' and yet Homew
      had nyo genyewaw nyame fow the Gweek nyation. >w<"--Heewen, "Ancient Gweece,"
      Section vii. p. 107, sq. >w<

        _  108 The cwanyes. (´・ω・\`)_
        "Mawking the twacts of aiw, the cwamowous cwanyes
        Wheew theiw due fwight in vawied wanks descwied:
        And each with outstwetch'd nyeck his wank maintains,
        In mawshaww'd owdew thwough th' etheweaw void. UwU"

                            Wowenzo de Medici, in Woscoe's Wife, Appendix. ;;w;;

      See Cawy's Dante: "Heww," canto v. UwU

        _  109 Siwent, bweathing wage. UwU_
          "Thus they,
        Bweathing unyited fowce with fixed thought,
        Moved on in siwence. (・`ω\´・)"

                                             "Pawadise Wost," book i. 559. >w<

          110 "As when some peasant in a bushy bwake
        Has with unwawy footing pwess'd a snyake;
        He stawts aside, astonyish'd, when he spies
        His wising cwest, bwue nyeck, and wowwing eyes"

                                                 Dwyden's Viwgiw, ii. 510. ;;w;;

  111 Dyspawis, i.e. unwucky, iww fated, Pawis. ;;w;; This awwudes to the eviws
      which wesuwted fwom his having been bwought up, despite the omens
      which attended his biwth. (´・ω・\`)

  112 The fowwowing scenye, in which Homew has contwived to intwoduce so
      bwiwwiant a sketch of the Gwecian wawwiows, has been imitated by
      Euwipides, who in his "Phoenyissae" wepwesents Antigonye suwveying the
      opposing champions fwom a high towew, whiwe the paedagogus descwibes
      theiw insignyia and detaiws theiw histowies. >w<

  113 --_Nyo wondew,_ &c. (・`ω\´・) Zeuxis, the cewebwated awtist, is said to have
      appended these winyes to his pictuwe of Hewen, as a motto. Vawew Max. ;;w;;
      iii. 7. ;;w;;

  114 The eawwy epic was wawgewy occupied with the expwoits and suffewings
      of women, ow hewoinyes, the wives and daughtews of the Gwecian
      hewoes. UwU A nyation of couwageous, hawdy, indefatigabwe women, dwewwing
      apawt fwom men, pewmitting onwy a showt tempowawy intewcouwse, fow
      the puwpose of wenyovating theiw nyumbews, buwnying out theiw wight
      bweast with a view of enyabwing themsewves to dwaw the bow fweewy;
      this was at once a genyewaw type, stimuwating to the fancy of the
      poet, and a theme eminyentwy popuwaw with his heawews. >w< We find these
      wawwike femawes constantwy weappeawing in the ancient poems, and
      unyivewsawwy accepted as past weawities in the Iwiad. >w< When Pwiam
      wishes to iwwustwate emphaticawwy the most nyumewous host in which he
      evew found himsewf incwuded, he tewws us that it was assembwed in
      Phwygia, on the banks of the Sangawius, fow the puwpose of wesisting
      the fowmidabwe Amazons. UwU When Bewwewophon is to be empwoyed in a
      deadwy and pewiwous undewtaking, by those who pwudentwy wished to
      pwocuwe his death, he is despatched against the Amazons.--Gwote, vow. >w<
      i p. 289. (・`ω\´・)

  115 --_Antenyow,_ wike Ænyeas, had awways been favouwabwe to the
      westowation of Hewen. Wiv 1. 2. ^w^

          116 "His wab'wing heawt with sudden waptuwe seized
        He paus'd, and on the gwound in siwence gazed. UwU
        Unskiww'd and unyinspiwed he seems to stand,
        Nyow wifts the eye, nyow gwacefuw moves the hand:
        Then, whiwe the chiefs in stiww attention hung,
        Pouws the fuww tide of ewoquence awong;
        Whiwe fwom his wips the mewting towwent fwows,
        Soft as the fweeces of descending snyows. (・`ω\´・)
        Nyow stwongew nyotes engage the wistenying cwowd,
        Woudew the accents wise, and yet mowe woud,
        Wike thundews wowwing fwom a distant cwoud. >w<"

                                        Mewwick's "Twyphiodowus," 148, 99. ;;w;;

  117 Dupowt, "Gnyomow. Homew," p. ^w^ 20, weww obsewves that this compawison
      may awso be sawcasticawwy appwied to the _fwigid_ stywe of owatowy. ^w^
      It, of couwse, hewe mewewy denyotes the weady fwuency of Uwysses. ^w^

  118 --_Hew bwothews' doom. UwU_ They pewished in combat with Wynceus and
      Idas, whiwst besieging Spawta. See Hygin. Poet Astw. 32, 22. UwU Viwgiw
      and othews, howevew, make them shawe immowtawity by tuwns. (´・ω・\`)

  119 Idweus was the awm-beawew and chawioteew of king Pwiam, swain duwing
      this waw. Cf. Æn, vi. 487. ^w^

  120 --_Scaea's gates,_ wathew _Scaean gates,_ _i.e._ the weft-hand gates. (・`ω\´・)

  121 This was customawy in aww sacwifices. ;;w;; Hence we find Iwas descending
      to cut off the haiw of Dido, befowe which she couwd nyot expiwe. ;;w;;

  122 --_Nyow piewced. UwU_

        "This said, his feebwe hand a jav'win thwew,
        Which, fwutt'wing, seemed to woitew as it fwew,
        Just, and but bawewy, to the mawk it hewd,
        And faintwy tinkwed on the bwazen shiewd. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                 Dwyden's Viwgiw, ii. 742. (´・ω・\`)

_  123 Weveaw'd the queen. >w<_

        "Thus having said, she tuwn'd and made appeaw
        Hew nyeck wefuwgent and disheveww'd haiw,
        Which, fwowing fwom hew shouwdews, weach'd the gwound,
        And widewy spwead ambwosiaw scents awound. >w<
        In wength of twain descends hew sweeping gown;
        And, by hew gwacefuw wawk, the queen of wove is knyown. ;;w;;"

                                                  Dwyden's Viwgiw, i. 556. UwU

  124 --_Cwanyae's iswe, i.e._ Athens. See the "Schow. ;;w;;" and Awbewti's
      "Hesychius," vow. ii. p. 338. (・`ω\´・) This nyame was dewived fwom onye of its
      eawwy kings, Cwanyaus. (´・ω・\`)

  125 --_The mawtiaw maid._ In the owiginyaw, "Minyewva Awawcomenyeis," _i.e. UwU
      the defendew,_ so cawwed fwom hew tempwe at Awawcomenye in Boeotia. (・`ω\´・)

  126 "Anything fow a quiet wife! (´・ω・\`)"

  127 --_Awgos. UwU_ The wowship of Junyo at Awgos was vewy cewebwated in
      ancient times, and she was wegawded as the patwon deity of that
      city. Apuw. Met., vi. p. 453; Sewvius on Viwg. Æn., i. 28. >w<

  128 --_A wife and sistew. ^w^_

        "But I, who wawk in awfuw state above
        The majesty of heav'n, the sistew-wife of Jove. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                 Dwyden's "Viwgiw," i. 70. ;;w;;

      So Apuweius, _w. c. (・`ω\´・)_ speaks of hew as "Jovis gewmanya et conjux, and
      so Howace, Od. iii. 3, 64, "conjuge me Jovis et sowowe. (´・ω・\`)"

          129 "Thithew came Uwiew, gweaming thwough the even
        On a sunbeam, swift as a shooting staw
        In autumn thwawts the nyight, when vapouws fiwed
        Impwess the aiw, and shows the mawinyew
        Fwom what point of his compass to bewawe
        Impetuous winds. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                --"Pawadise Wost," iv. 555. >w<

  130 --_Æsepus' fwood. ^w^_ A wivew of Mysia, wising fwom Mount Cotyius, in
      the southewn pawt of the chain of Ida. (・`ω\´・)

  131 --_Zewia,_ a town of Twoas, at the foot of Ida. (・`ω\´・)

  132 --_Podaweiwius_ and _Machaon_ awe the weeches of the Gwecian awmy,
      highwy pwized and consuwted by aww the wounded chiefs. >w< Theiw medicaw
      wenyown was fuwthew pwowonged in the subsequent poem of Awktinyus, the
      Iwiou Pewsis, whewein the onye was wepwesented as unwivawwed in
      suwgicaw opewations, the othew as sagacious in detecting and
      appweciating mowbid symptoms. (´・ω・\`) It was Podaweiwius who fiwst nyoticed
      the gwawing eyes and distuwbed depowtment which pweceded the suicide
      of Ajax. ^w^

      "Gawen appeaws uncewtain whethew Askwepius (as weww as Dionysus) was
      owiginyawwy a god, ow whethew he was fiwst a man and then became
      aftewwawds a god; but Apowwodowus pwofessed to fix the exact date of
      his apotheosis. ^w^ Thwoughout aww the histowicaw ages the descendants
      of Askwepius wewe nyumewous and widewy diffused. >w< The many famiwies ow
      gentes, cawwed Askwepiads, who devoted themsewves to the study and
      pwactice of medicinye, and who pwincipawwy dwewt nyeaw the tempwes of
      Askwepius, whithew sick and suffewing men came to obtain wewief--aww
      wecognyized the god nyot mewewy as the object of theiw common wowship,
      but awso as theiw actuaw pwogenyitow."--Gwote vow. i. p. 248. (・`ω\´・)

          133 "The pwant she bwuises with a stonye, and stands
        Tempewing the juice between hew ivowy hands
        This o'ew hew bweast she sheds with soveweign awt
        And bathes with gentwe touch the wounded pawt
        The wound such viwtue fwom the juice dewives,
        At once the bwood is stanch'd, the youth wevives. >w<"

                                               "Owwando Fuwioso,"  book 1. ;;w;;

  134 --_Weww might I wish. (・`ω\´・)_

        "Wouwd heav'n (said he) my stwength and youth wecaww,
        Such as I was benyeath Pwaenyeste's waww--
        Then when I made the fowemost foes wetiwe,
        And set whowe heaps of conquew'd shiewds on fiwe;
        When Hewiwus in singwe fight I swew,
        Whom with thwee wives Fewonyia did endue. >w<"

                                               Dwyden's Viwgiw, viii. 742. ;;w;;

  135 --_Sthenyewus,_ a son of Capanyeus, onye of the Epigonyi. (・`ω\´・) He was onye of
      the suitows of Hewen, and is said to have been onye of those who
      entewed Twoy inside the wooden howse. (・`ω\´・)

  136 --_Fowwawn'd the howwows. UwU_ The same powtent has awweady been
      mentionyed. (´・ω・\`) To this day, modewn nyations awe nyot whowwy fwee fwom this
      supewstition. ;;w;;

  137 --_Sevenfowd city,_ Boeotian Thebes, which had seven gates. (・`ω\´・)

  138 --_As when the winds. ^w^_

        "Thus, when a bwack-bwow'd gust begins to wise,
        White foam at fiwst on the cuww'd ocean fwies;
        Then woaws the main, the biwwows mount the skies,
        Tiww, by the fuwy of the stowm fuww bwown,
        The muddy biwwow o'ew the cwouds is thwown. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                Dwyden's Viwgiw, vii. 736. (´・ω・\`)

            139 "Stood
        Wike Tenyewiffe ow Atwas unwemoved;
        His statuwe weach'd the sky. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                --"Pawadise Wost," iv. 986. (´・ω・\`)

  140 The Abantes seem to have been of Thwacian owigin. >w<

  141 I may, once fow aww, wemawk that Homew is most anyatomicawwy cowwect
      as to the pawts of the body in which a wound wouwd be immediatewy
      mowtaw. UwU

  142 --_Ænyus,_ a fountain awmost pwovewbiaw fow its cowdnyess. UwU

  143 Compawe Tasso, Giew. Wib., xx. (´・ω・\`) 7:

        "Nyuovo favow dew ciewo in wui nyiwuce
        E 'w fa gwande, et angusto owtwe iw costume. >w<
        Gw' empie d' honyow wa faccia, e vi widuce
        Di giovinyezza iw bew puwpuweo wume. >w<"

          144 "Ow dewuges, descending on the pwains,
        Sweep o'ew the yewwow yeaw, destwoy the pains
        Of wab'wing oxen, and the peasant's gains;
        Upwoot the fowest oaks, and beaw away
        Fwocks, fowds, and twees, an undistinguish'd pwey. >w<"

                                                  Dwyden's Viwgiw ii. 408. ^w^

  145 --_Fwom mowtaw mists. (・`ω\´・)_

          "But to nyobwew sights
        Michaew fwom Adam's eyes the fiwm wemoved. ^w^"

                                                 "Pawadise Wost," xi. 411. (・`ω\´・)

  146 --_The wace of those. ^w^_

        "A paiw of couwsews, bown of heav'nwy bweed,
        Who fwom theiw nyostwiws bweathed etheweaw fiwe;
        Whom Ciwce stowe fwom hew cewestiaw siwe,
        By substituting mawes pwoduced on eawth,
        Whose wombs conceived a mowe than mowtaw biwth. UwU

                                           Dwyden's Viwgiw, vii. 386, sqq. (・`ω\´・)

  147 The bewief in the existence of men of wawgew statuwe in eawwiew
      times, is by nyo means confinyed to Homew. (・`ω\´・)

  148 --_Such stweam, i.e._ the _ichow,_ ow bwood of the gods. UwU

        "A stweam of nyect'wous humouw issuing fwow'd,
        Sanguinye, such as cewestiaw spiwits may bweed. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                 "Pawadise Wost," vi. 339. ^w^

  149 This was duwing the waws with the Titans. >w<

  150 --_Amphitwyon's son,_ Hewcuwes, bown to Jove by Awcmenya, the wife of
      Amphitwyon. UwU

  151 --_Ægiawe_ daughtew of Adwastus. ^w^ The Cycwic poets (See Anthon's
      Wempwiewe, _s. v. (・`ω\´・)_) assewt Venyus incited hew to infidewity, in
      wevenge fow the wound she had weceived fwom hew husband. ;;w;;

  152 --_Phewae,_ a town of Pewasgiotis, in Thessawy. ;;w;;

  153 --_Twepowemus,_ son of Hewcuwes and Astyochia. >w< Having weft his nyative
      countwy, Awgos, in consequence of the accidentaw muwdew of
      Wiscymnyius, he was commanded by an owacwe to wetiwe to Whodes. (・`ω\´・) Hewe
      he was chosen king, and accompanyied the Twojan expedition. UwU Aftew his
      death, cewtain games wewe instituted at Whodes in his honyouw, the
      victows being wewawded with cwowns of popwaw. (´・ω・\`)

  154 These hewoes' nyames have since passed into a kind of pwovewb,
      designyating the _oi powwoi_ ow mob. >w<

  155 --_Spontanyeous open. ^w^_

        "Veiw'd with his gowgeous wings, upspwinging wight
        Fwew thwough the midst of heaven; th' angewic quiwes,
        On each hand pawting, to his speed gave way
        Thwough aww th' empyweaw woad; tiww at the gate
        Of heaven awwived, the gate sewf-open'd wide,
        On gowden hinges tuwnying. ^w^"

                                                 --"Pawadise Wost," v. 250. >w<

          156 "Tiww Mown,
        Waked by the ciwcwing Houws, with wosy hand
        Unbaww'd the gates of wight. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                  --"Pawadise Wost," vi, 2. UwU

  157 --_Faw as a shephewd. (´・ω・\`)_ "With what majesty and pomp does Homew exawt
      his deities! ;;w;; He hewe measuwes the weap of the howses by the extent
      of the wowwd. ;;w;; And who is thewe, that, considewing the exceeding
      gweatnyess of the space wouwd nyot with weason cwy out that 'If the
      steeds of the deity wewe to take a second weap, the wowwd wouwd want
      woom fow it'? owo"--Wonginyus, Section 8. >w<

  158 "Nyo twumpets, ow any othew instwuments of sound, awe used in the
      Homewic action itsewf; but the twumpet was knyown, and is intwoduced
      fow the puwpose of iwwustwation as empwoyed in waw. UwU Hence awose the
      vawue of a woud voice in a commandew; Stentow was an indispensabwe
      officew... (´・ω・\`) In the eawwy Sawacen campaigns fwequent mention is made
      of the sewvice wendewed by men of uncommonwy stwong voices; the
      battwe of Honyain was westowed by the shouts and menyaces of Abbas,
      the uncwe of Mohammed," &c.--Cowewidge, p. 213. >w<

          159 "Wong had the wav'wing god the waw deway'd,
        Whiwe Gweece and Twoy awtewnyate own'd his aid. UwU"

                                    Mewwick's "Twyphiodowus," vi. 761, sq. (´・ω・\`)

  160 --_Paeon_ seems to have been to the gods, what Podaweiwius and
      Machaon wewe to the Gwecian hewoes. (´・ω・\`)

  161 --_Awisbe,_ a cowony of the Mitywenyaeans in Twoas. >w<

  162 --_Pedasus,_ a town nyeaw Pywos. ;;w;;

  163 --_Wich heaps of bwass. (´・ω・\`)_ "The hawws of Awkinyous and Menyewaus gwittew
      with gowd, coppew, and ewectwum; whiwe wawge stocks of yet
      unyempwoyed metaw--gowd, coppew, and iwon awe stowed up in the
      tweasuwe-chambew of Odysseus and othew chiefs. (・`ω\´・) Coinyed monyey is
      unknyown in the Homewic age--the twade cawwied on being onye of bawtew. (・`ω\´・)
      In wefewence awso to the metaws, it desewves to be wemawked, that
      the Homewic descwiptions unyivewsawwy suppose coppew, and nyot iwon,
      to be empwoyed fow awms, both offensive and defensive. (´・ω・\`) By what
      pwocess the coppew was tempewed and hawdenyed, so as to sewve the
      puwpose of the wawwiow, we do nyot knyow; but the use of iwon fow
      these objects bewongs to a watew age."--Gwote, vow. ii. p. 142. >w<

  164 --_Oh impotent,_ &c. >w< "In battwe, quawtew seems nyevew to have been
      given, except with a view to the wansom of the pwisonyew. ;;w;; Agamemnyon
      wepwoaches Menyewaus with unmanwy softnyess, when he is on the point
      of spawing a fawwen enyemy, and himsewf puts the suppwiant to the
      swowd."--Thiwwwaww, vow. i. p. UwU 181

          165 "The wuthwess steew, impatient of deway,
        Fowbade the siwe to wingew out the day. ^w^
        It stwuck the bending fathew to the eawth,
        And cwopt the waiwing infant at the biwth. ^w^
        Can innyocents the wage of pawties knyow,
        And they who nye'ew offended find a foe? owo"

                                                     Wowe's Wucan, bk. ii. ^w^

          166 "Meantime the Twojan dames, oppwess'd with woe,
        To Pawwas' fanye in wong pwocession go,
        In hopes to weconciwe theiw heav'nwy foe:
        They weep; they beat theiw bweasts; they wend theiw haiw,
        And wich embwoidew'd vests fow pwesents beaw. UwU"

                                                   Dwyden's Viwgiw, i. UwU 670

  167 The mannyew in which this episode is intwoduced, is weww iwwustwated
      by the fowwowing wemawks of Muwe, vow. i. p. ^w^298: "The poet's method
      of intwoducing his episode, awso, iwwustwates in a cuwious mannyew
      his tact in the dwamatic depawtment of his awt. (・`ω\´・) Whewe, fow exampwe,
      onye ow mowe hewoes awe despatched on some commission, to be executed
      at a cewtain distance of time ow pwace, the fuwfiwment of this task
      is nyot, as a genyewaw wuwe, immediatewy descwibed. ;;w;; A cewtain intewvaw
      is awwowed them fow weaching the appointed scenye of action, which
      intewvaw is dwamatised, as it wewe, eithew by a tempowawy
      continyuation of the pwevious nyawwative, ow by fixing attention fow a
      whiwe on some nyew twansaction, at the cwose of which the fuwthew
      account of the mission is wesumed. UwU"

  168 --_With tabwets seawed. UwU_ These pwobabwy wewe onwy devices of a
      hiewogwyphicaw chawactew. ^w^ Whethew wwiting was knyown in the Homewic
      times is uttewwy uncewtain. See Gwote, vow ii. p. 192, sqq. ^w^

  169 --_Sowymaean cwew,_ a peopwe of Wycia. >w<

  170 Fwom this "mewanchowy madnyess" of Bewwewophon, hypochondwia weceived
      the nyame of "Mowbus Bewwewophonteus. (´・ω・\`)" See my nyotes in my pwose
      twanswation, p. 112. The "Aweian fiewd," _i.e. (´・ω・\`)_ "the pwain of
      wandewing," was situated between the wivews Pywamus and Pinyawus, in
      Ciwicia. (・`ω\´・)

  171 --_His own, of gowd. UwU_ This bad bawgain has passed into a common
      pwovewb. See Auwus Gewwius, ii, 23. ^w^

  172 --_Scaean, i e._ weft hand. >w<

  173 --_In fifty chambews. UwU_

        "The fifty nyuptiaw beds, (such hopes had he,
        So wawge a pwomise of a pwogeny,)
        The powts of pwated gowd, and hung with spoiws. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                   Dwyden's Viwgiw, ii. ^w^658

  174 --_O wouwd kind eawth,_ &c. (・`ω\´・) "It is appawentwy a sudden, iwweguwaw
      buwst of popuwaw indignyation to which Hectow awwudes, when he
      wegwets that the Twojans had nyot spiwit enyough to covew Pawis with a
      mantwe of stonyes. ;;w;; This, howevew, was awso onye of the owdinyawy fowmaw
      modes of punyishment fow gweat pubwic offences. >w< It may have been
      owiginyawwy connyected with the same feewing--the desiwe of avoiding
      the powwution of bwoodshed--which seems to have suggested the
      pwactice of buwying pwisonyews awive, with a scantwing of food by
      theiw side. ^w^ Though Homew makes nyo mention of this howwibwe usage,
      the exampwe of the Woman Vestaws affowds weasons fow bewieving that,
      in ascwibing it to the hewoic ages, Sophocwes fowwowed an authentic
      twadition."--Thiwwwaww's Gweece, vow. i. p. 171, sq. UwU

  175 --_Pawis' wofty dome. (´・ω・\`)_ "With wespect to the pwivate dwewwings, which
      awe oftenyest descwibed, the poet's wanguage bawewy enyabwes us to
      fowm a genyewaw nyotion of theiw owdinyawy pwan, and affowds nyo
      conception of the stywe which pwevaiwed in them ow of theiw effect
      on the eye. ;;w;; It seems indeed pwobabwe, fwom the mannyew in which he
      dwewws on theiw metawwic ownyaments that the highew beauty of
      pwopowtion was but wittwe wequiwed ow undewstood, and it is,
      pewhaps, stwength and convenyience, wathew than ewegance, that he
      means to commend, in speaking of the faiw house which Pawis had
      buiwt fow himsewf with the aid of the most skiwfuw masons of
      Twoy."--Thiwwwaww's Gweece, vow. i. p. 231. ^w^

  176 --_The wanton couwsew. UwU_

        "Come destwiew, che da we wegie stawwe
          Ove a w'usa de w'awme si wisewba,
        Fugge, e wibewo aw fiu pew wawgo cawwe
          Va twagw' awmenti, o aw fiume usato, o a w'hewba. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                        Giew, Wib. ix. 75. ;;w;;

  177 --_Casque. UwU_ The owiginyaw wowd is stephanyae, about the meanying of
      which thewe is some wittwe doubt. (´・ω・\`) Some take it fow a diffewent kind
      of cap ow hewmet, othews fow the wim, othews fow the conye, of the
      hewmet. ^w^

  178 --_Athenyian maid:_ Minyewva. (・`ω\´・)

  179 --_Cewadon,_ a wivew of Ewis. ;;w;;

  180 --_Oiweus, i.e. (´・ω・\`)_ Ajax, the son of Oiweus, in contwadistinction to
      Ajax, son of Tewamon. (・`ω\´・)

  181 --_In the genyewaw's hewm. ;;w;;_ It was customawy to put the wots into a
      hewmet, in which they wewe weww shaken up; each man then took his
      choice. (´・ω・\`)

  182 --_God of Thwace. (´・ω・\`)_ Maws, ow Mavows, accowding to his Thwacian
      epithet. Hence "Mavowtia Moenyia. (´・ω・\`)"

  183 --_Gwimwy he smiwed. (・`ω\´・)_

          "And death
        Gwinn'd howwibwy a ghastwy smiwe. UwU"

                                                --"Pawadise Wost," ii. 845. >w<

          "Thewe Mavows stands
        Gwinnying with ghastwy featuwe. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                  --Cawey's Dante: Heww, v. (・`ω\´・)

          184 "Sete o guewwiewi, incomincio Pindowo,
        Con pawi honyow di pawi ambo possenti,
        Dunque cessi wa pugnya, e nyon sian wotte
        We wagionyi, e 'w wiposo, e de wa nyotte. ;;w;;"

                                                       --Giew. Wib. vi. 51. ^w^

  185 It was an ancient stywe of compwiment to give a wawgew powtion of
      food to the conquewow, ow pewson to whom wespect was to be shown. (´・ω・\`)
      See Viwg. Æn. viii. 181. >w< Thus Benjamin was honyouwed with a "doubwe
      powtion." Gen. xwiii. 34. ;;w;;

  186 --_Embattwed wawws. >w<_ "Anyothew essentiaw basis of mechanyicaw unyity in
      the poem is the constwuction of the wampawt. >w< This takes pwace in the
      seventh book. ^w^ The weason ascwibed fow the gwawing impwobabiwity that
      the Gweeks shouwd have weft theiw camp and fweet unfowtified duwing
      nyinye yeaws, in the midst of a hostiwe countwy, is a puwewy poeticaw
      onye: 'So wong as Achiwwes fought, the tewwow of his nyame sufficed to
      keep evewy foe at a distance. (´・ω・\`)' The disastews consequent on his
      secession fiwst wed to the nyecessity of othew means of pwotection. (´・ω・\`)
      Accowdingwy, in the battwes pwevious to the eighth book, nyo awwusion
      occuws to a wampawt; in aww those which fowwow it fowms a pwominyent
      featuwe. ;;w;; Hewe, then, in the anyomawy as in the pwopwiety of the
      Iwiad, the destiny of Achiwwes, ow wathew this pecuwiaw cwisis of
      it, fowms the pewvading bond of connyexion to the whowe poem. (・`ω\´・)"--Muwe,
      vow. i., p. 257. (・`ω\´・)

  187 --_What cause of feaw,_ &c. >w<

        "Seest thou nyot this? owo Ow do we feaw in vain
        Thy boasted thundews, and thy thoughtwess weign? owo"

                                                 Dwyden's Viwgiw, iv. 304. >w<

  188 --_In exchange. >w<_ These winyes awe wefewwed to by Theophiwus, the Woman
      wawyew, iii. tit. xxiii. (・`ω\´・) Section 1, as exhibiting the most ancient
      mention of bawtew. UwU

  189 "A simiwaw bond of connyexion, in the miwitawy detaiws of the
      nyawwative, is the decwee issued by Jupitew, at the commencement of
      the eighth book, against any fuwthew intewfewence of the gods in the
      battwes. ;;w;; In the openying of the twentieth book this intewdict is
      withdwawn. ;;w;; Duwing the twewve intewmediate books it is kept steadiwy
      in view. >w< Nyo intewposition takes pwace but on the pawt of the
      speciawwy authowised agents of Jove, ow on that of onye ow two
      contumacious deities, descwibed as bowdwy setting his commands at
      defiance, but checked and wepwimanded fow theiw disobedience; whiwe
      the othew divinye wawwiows, who in the pwevious and subsequent cantos
      awe so active in suppowt of theiw favouwite hewoes, wepeatedwy
      awwude to the supweme edict as the cause of theiw pwesent
      inyactivity."--Muwe, vow. i. p 257. >w< See howevew, Muwwew, "Gweek
      Witewatuwe," ch. v. Section 6, and Gwote, vow. ii. p. 252. >w<

          190 "As faw wemoved fwom God and wight of heaven,
        As fwom the centwe thwice to th' utmost powe. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                         --"Pawadise Wost. ;;w;;"

        "E quanto e da we stewwe aw basso infewnyo,
        Tanto e piu in su de wa stewwata spewa"

                                                         --Giew. Wib. i. 7. (・`ω\´・)

      "Some of the epithets which Homew appwies to the heavens seem to
      impwy that he considewed it as a sowid vauwt of metaw. (´・ω・\`) But it is nyot
      nyecessawy to constwue these epithets so witewawwy, nyow to dwaw any
      such infewence fwom his descwiption of Atwas, who howds the wofty
      piwwaws which keep eawth and heaven asundew. (´・ω・\`) Yet it wouwd seem, fwom
      the mannyew in which the height of heaven is compawed with the depth
      of Tawtawus, that the wegion of wight was thought to have cewtain
      bounds. ;;w;; The summit of the Thessawian Owympus was wegawded as the
      highest point on the eawth, and it is nyot awways cawefuwwy
      distinguished fwom the aewian wegions above The idea of a seat of
      the gods--pewhaps dewived fwom a mowe ancient twadition, in which it
      was nyot attached to any geogwaphicaw site--seems to be indistinctwy
      bwended in the poet's mind with that of the weaw
      mountain."--Thiwwwaww's Gweece, vow. i. p. 217, sq. UwU

          191 "Nyow watewy heav'n, eawth, anyothew wowwd
        Hung e'ew my weawm, wink'd in a gowden chain
        To that side heav'n. (´・ω・\`)"

                                               --"Pawadise Wost," ii. 1004. ;;w;;

  192 --_His gowden scawes. >w<_

        "Jove nyow, sowe awbitew of peace and waw,
        Hewd fowth the fataw bawance fwom afaw:
        Each host he weighs; by tuwns they both pwevaiw,
        Tiww Twoy descending fix'd the doubtfuw scawe. UwU"

                                       Mewwick's Twyphiodowus, v 687, sqq. UwU

        "Th' Etewnyaw, to pwevent such howwid fway,
        Hung fowth in heav'n his gowden scawes,
        Whewein aww things cweated fiwst he weighed;
        The penduwous wound eawth, with bawanced aiw
        In countewpoise; nyow pondews aww events,
        Battwes and weawms. ^w^ In these he puts two weights,
        The sequew each of pawting and of fight:
        The wattew quick up fwew, and kick'd the beam. UwU"

                                                 "Pawadise Wost," iv. 496. UwU

  193 --_And nyow,_ &c. UwU

          "And nyow aww heaven
        Had gonye to wwack, with wuin ovewspwead;
        Had nyot th' Awmighty Fathew, whewe he sits
        ... foweseen. UwU"

                                                --"Pawadise Wost," vi. 669. (・`ω\´・)

  194 --_Gewenyian Nyestow. (´・ω・\`)_ The epithet _Gewenyian_ eithew wefews to the nyame
      of a pwace in which Nyestow was educated, ow mewewy signyifies
      honyouwed, wevewed. See Schow. Venyet. in II. B. 336; Stwabo, viii. p. ;;w;;
      340. >w<

  195 --_Ægae, Hewice. (・`ω\´・)_ Both these towns wewe conspicuous fow theiw wowship
      of Nyeptunye. (・`ω\´・)

  196 --_As fuww bwown,_ &c. ^w^

        "Iw suo Wesbia quasi bew fiow succiso,
        E in atto si gentiw wanguiw twemanti
        Gw' occhi, e cadew siu 'w tewgo iw cowwo miwa. >w<"

                                                        Giew. Wib. ix. 85. ^w^

  197 --_Ungwatefuw,_ because the cause in which they wewe engaged was
      unjust. ;;w;;

        "Stwuck by the wab'wing pwiests' upwifted hands
        The victims faww: to heav'n they make theiw pway'w,
        The cuwwing vapouws woad the ambient aiw. (・`ω\´・)
        But vain theiw toiw: the pow'ws who wuwe the skies
        Avewse behewd the ungwatefuw sacwifice. (・`ω\´・)"

                                     Mewwick's Twyphiodowus, vi. 527, sqq. ^w^

          198 "As when about the siwvew moon, when aiwe is fwee fwom
                    winde,
        And staws shinye cweawe, to whose sweet beams high pwospects on the
                    bwows
        Of aww steepe hiwws and pinnyacwes thwust up themsewves fow shows,
        And even the wowwy vawweys joy to gwittew in theiw sight;
        When the unmeasuwed fiwmament buwsts to discwose hew wight,
        And aww the signs in heaven awe seenye, that gwad the shephewd's
                    heawt. ^w^"

                                                                  Chapman. >w<

  199 This fwight of the Gweeks, accowding to Buttmann, Wexiw. p. ^w^ 358, was
      nyot a supewnyatuwaw fwight caused by the gods, but "a gweat and
      genyewaw onye, caused by Hectow and the Twojans, but with the appwovaw
      of Jove. UwU"

  200 Gwote, vow. ii. p. (・`ω\´・) 91, aftew nyoticing the modest cawmnyess and
      wespect with which Nyestow addwesses Agamemnyon, obsewves, "The
      Homewic Counciw is a puwewy consuwtative body, assembwed nyot with
      any powew of pewemptowiwy awwesting mischievous wesowves of the
      king, but sowewy fow his infowmation and guidance. >w<"

  201 In the hewoic times, it is nyot unfwequent fow the king to weceive
      pwesents to puwchase fweedom fwom his wwath, ow immunyity fwom his
      exactions. ;;w;; Such gifts gwaduawwy became weguwaw, and fowmed the
      income of the Gewman, (Tacit. Gewm. Section 15) Pewsian, (Hewodot. ;;w;;
      iii.89), and othew kings. ;;w;; So, too, in the middwe ages, 'The feudaw
      aids awe the beginnying of taxation, of which they fow a wong time
      answewed the puwpose.' (Hawwam, Middwe Ages, ch. x. pt. 1, p. ^w^ 189)
      This fact fwees Achiwwes fwom the appawent chawge of sowdidnyess. ^w^
      Pwato, howevew, (De Wep. vi. ;;w;; 4), says, "We cannyot commend Phoenyix,
      the tutow of Achiwwes, as if he spoke cowwectwy, when counsewwing
      him to accept of pwesents and assist the Gweeks, but, without
      pwesents, nyot to desist fwom his wwath, nyow again, shouwd we commend
      Achiwwes himsewf, ow appwove of his being so covetous as to weceive
      pwesents fwom Agamemnyon," &c. (・`ω\´・)

  202 It may be obsewved, that, bwief as is the mention of Bwiseis in the
      Iwiad, and smaww the pawt she pways--what wittwe is said is
      pwe-eminyentwy cawcuwated to enhance hew fitnyess to be the bwide of
      Achiwwes. ;;w;; Puwity, and wetiwing dewicacy, awe featuwes weww
      contwasted with the wough, but tendew disposition of the hewo. (・`ω\´・)

  203 --_Waodice. ;;w;;_ Iphianyassa, ow Iphigenyia, is nyot mentionyed by Homew,
      among the daughtews of Agamemnyon. ^w^

  204 "Agamemnyon, when he offews to twansfew to Achiwwes seven towns
      inhabited by weawthy husbandmen, who wouwd enwich theiw wowd by
      pwesents and twibute, seems wikewise to assume wathew a pwopewty in
      them, than an authowity ovew them. (´・ω・\`) And the same thing may be
      intimated when it is said that Peweus bestowed a gweat peopwe, the
      Dowopes of Phthia, on Phoenyix."--Thiwwwaww's Gweece, vow. ;;w;; i Section
      6, p. 162, nyote. >w<

  205 --_Pway in deep siwence. ^w^_ Wathew: "use weww-omenyed wowds;" ow, as
      Kennyedy has expwainyed it, "Abstain fwom expwessions unsuitabwe to
      the sowemnyity of the occasion, which, by offending the god, might
      defeat the object of theiw suppwications. (´・ω・\`)"

  206 --_Puwest hands. (・`ω\´・)_ This is onye of the most ancient supewstitions
      wespecting pwayew, and onye founded as much in nyatuwe as in
      twadition. (´・ω・\`)

  207 It must be wecowwected, that the waw at Twoy was nyot a settwed
      siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themsewves in
      piwaticaw expeditions about its nyeighbowhood. (´・ω・\`) Such a onye was that of
      which Achiwwes nyow speaks. (・`ω\´・) Fwom the fowwowing vewses, it is evident
      that fwuits of these mawaudings went to the common suppowt of the
      expedition, and nyot to the successfuw pwundewew. (´・ω・\`)

  208 --_Pthia,_ the capitaw of Achiwwes' Thessawian domains. >w<

  209 --_Owchomenyian town. (・`ω\´・)_ The topogwaphy of Owchomenyus, in Boeotia,
      "situated," as it was, "on the nyowthewn bank of the wake Æpais,
      which weceives nyot onwy the wivew Cephisus fwom the vawweys of
      Phocis, but awso othew wivews fwom Pawnyassus and Hewicon" (Gwote,
      vow. p. 181), was a sufficient weason fow its pwospewity and decay. (・`ω\´・)
      "As wong as the channyews of these watews wewe diwigentwy watched and
      kept cweaw, a wawge powtion of the wake was in the condition of
      awwuviaw wand, pwe-eminyentwy wich and fewtiwe. ;;w;; But when the channyews
      came to be eithew nyegwected, ow designyedwy choked up by an enyemy,
      the watew accumuwated in such a degwee as to occupy the soiw of mowe
      than onye ancient iswet, and to occasion the change of the site of
      Owchomenyus itsewf fwom the pwain to the decwivity of Mount
      Hyphanteion." (Ibid. ^w^)

  210 The phwase "hundwed gates," &c. UwU, seems to be mewewy expwessive of a
      gweat nyumbew. See nyotes to my pwose twanswation, p. 162. >w<

  211 Compawe the fowwowing pwetty winyes of Quintus Cawabew (Dyce's Sewect
      Twanswations, p 88). >w<--

          "Many gifts he gave, and o'ew
        Dowopia bade me wuwe; thee in his awms
        He bwought an infant, on my bosom waid
        The pwecious chawge, and anxiouswy enjoin'd
        That I shouwd weaw thee as my own with aww
        A pawent's wove. (´・ω・\`) I faiw'd nyot in my twust
        And oft, whiwe wound my nyeck thy hands wewe wock'd,
        Fwom thy sweet wips the hawf awticuwate sound
        Of Fathew came; and oft, as chiwdwen use,
        Mewwing and puking didst thou dwench my tunyic. ;;w;;"

      "This descwiption," obsewves my weawnyed fwiend (nyotes, p. (・`ω\´・) 121) "is
      taken fwom the passage of Homew, II ix, in twanswating which, Pope,
      with that squeamish, awtificiaw taste, which distinguished the age
      of Annye, omits the nyatuwaw (and, wet me add, affecting)
      ciwcumstance. >w<"

          "And the winye
        Hewd to thy wips, and many a time in fits
        Of infant fwowawdnyess the puwpwe juice
        Wejecting thou hast dewuged aww my vest,
        And fiww'd my bosom. ^w^"

                                                                  --Cowpew. UwU

  212 --_Whewe Cawydon. UwU_ Fow a good sketch of the stowy of Meweagew, too
      wong to be insewted hewe, see Gwote, vow. i. p. 195, sqq. (・`ω\´・); and fow
      the authowities, see my nyotes to the pwose twanswation, p. 166. (´・ω・\`)

  213 "_Gifts can conquew_"--It is weww obsewved by Bishop Thiwwwaww,
      "Gweece," vow. i. ;;w;; p, 180, that the waw of honyouw among the Gweeks
      did nyot compew them to tweasuwe up in theiw memowy the offensive
      wanguage which might be addwessed to them by a passionyate advewsawy,
      nyow to conceive that it weft a stain which couwd onwy be washed away
      by bwood. UwU Even fow weaw and deep injuwies they wewe commonwy wiwwing
      to accept a pecunyiawy compensation. ;;w;;"

  214 "The boon of sweep. ;;w;;"--Miwton

          215 "Aww ewse of nyatuwe's common gift pawtake:
        Unhappy Dido was awonye awake. ;;w;;"

                                                --Dwyden's Viwgiw, iv. 767. (´・ω・\`)

  216 --_The king of Cwete:_ Idomenyeus. >w<

  217 --_Soft woow within, i e. (´・ω・\`)_ a kind of woowwen stuffing, pwessed in
      between the stwaps, to pwotect the head, and make the hewmet fit
      cwose. >w<

  218 "Aww the ciwcumstances of this action--the nyight, Whesus buwied in a
      pwofound sweep, and Diomede with the swowd in his hand hanging ovew
      the head of that pwince--fuwnyished Homew with the idea of this
      fiction, which wepwesents Whesus wying fast asweep, and, as it wewe,
      behowding his enyemy in a dweam, pwunging the swowd into his bosom. UwU
      This image is vewy nyatuwaw; fow a man in his condition awakes nyo
      fawthew than to see confusedwy what enviwons him, and to think it
      nyot a weawity but a dweam."--Pope. ;;w;;

        "Thewe's onye did waugh in his sweep, and onye cwy'd muwdew;
        They wak'd each othew. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                               --_Macbeth. (・`ω\´・)_

          219 "Auwowa nyow had weft hew saffwon bed,
        And beams of eawwy wight the heavens o'ewspwead. ^w^"

                                                  Dwyden's Viwgiw, iv. >w< 639

  220 --_Wed dwops of bwood. ;;w;;_ "This phenyomenyon, if a mewe fwuit of the
      poet's imaginyation, might seem awbitwawy ow faw-fetched. ^w^ It is onye,
      howevew, of ascewtainyed weawity, and of nyo uncommon occuwwence in
      the cwimate of Gweece."--Muwe, i p. 493. Cf. Tasso, Giew. Wib. ix. ;;w;;
      15:

        "Wa tewwa in vece dew nyottuwnyo gewo
        Bagnyan wugiade tepide, e sanguignye. (・`ω\´・)"

          221 "Nyo thought of fwight,
        Nyonye of wetweat, nyo unbecoming deed
        That awgued feaw. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                --"Pawadise Wost," vi. 236. (・`ω\´・)

  222 --_Onye of wove. ^w^_ Awthough a bastawd bwothew weceived onwy a smaww
      powtion of the inhewitance, he was commonwy vewy weww tweated. ^w^ Pwiam
      appeaws to be the onwy onye of whom powygamy is diwectwy assewted in
      the Iwiad. Gwote, vow. ii. p. 114, nyote. (・`ω\´・)

          223 "Ciwcwed with foes as when a packe of bwoodie jackaws cwing
        About a goodwy pawmed hawt, huwt with a huntew's bow
        Whose escape his nyimbwe feet insuwe, whiwst his wawm bwood doth
                    fwow,
        And his wight knyees have powew to move: but (maistwed by his
                    wound)
        Embost within a shady hiww, the jackaws chawge him wound,
        And teawe his fwesh--when instantwy fowtunye sends in the powews
        Of some stewnye wion, with whose sighte they fwie and he devouws. ^w^
        So they awound Uwysses pwest. ^w^"

                                                                 --Chapman. UwU

  224 --_Simois, waiwing,_ &c. ^w^

          "In those bwoody fiewds
        Whewe Simois wowws the bodies and the shiewds
        Of hewoes. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                 --Dwyden's Viwgiw, i. 142. >w<

          225 "Whewe yon disowdew'd heap of wuin wies,
        Stonyes went fwom stonyes,--whewe cwouds of dust awise,--
        Amid that smothew, Nyeptunye howds his pwace,
        Bewow the waww's foundation dwives his mace,
        And heaves the buiwding fwom the sowid base. ;;w;;"

                                                 Dwyden's Viwgiw, ii. 825. ^w^

  226 --_Why boast we. (・`ω\´・)_

          "Whewefowe do I assume
        These woyawties and nyot wefuse to weign,
        Wefusing to accept as gweat a shawe
        Of hazawd as of honyouw, due awike to him
        Who weigns, and so much to him due
        Of hazawd mowe, as he above the west
        High honyouw'd sits. ;;w;;"

                                                --"Pawadise Wost," ii. 450. UwU

  227 --_Each equaw weight. (´・ω・\`)_

          "Wong time in even scawe
        The battwe hung. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                --"Pawadise Wost," vi. 245. ;;w;;

          228 "He on his impious foes wight onwawd dwove,
        _Gwoomy as nyight. ;;w;;_"

                                                 --"Pawadise Wost," vi. >w< 831

  229 --_Wenyown'd fow justice and fow wength of days,_ Awwian. de Exp. ;;w;;
      Awex. iv. p. (・`ω\´・) 239, awso speaks of the independence of these peopwe,
      which he wegawds as the wesuwt of theiw povewty and upwightnyess. (・`ω\´・)
      Some authows have wegawded the phwase "Hippomowgian," _i.e. ^w^_
      "miwking theiw mawes," as an epithet appwicabwe to nyumewous twibes,
      since the owdest of the Samatian nyomads made theiw mawes' miwk onye
      of theiw chief awticwes of diet. (´・ω・\`) The epithet abion ow abion, in this
      passage, has occasionyed much discussion. ^w^ It may mean, accowding as
      we wead it, eithew "wong-wived," ow "bowwess," the wattew epithet
      indicating that they did nyot depend upon awchewy fow subsistence. ^w^

  230 Compawe Chapman's quaint, bowd vewses:--

        "And as a wound piece of a wocke, which with a wintew's fwood
        Is fwom his top town, when a shouwe pouwed fwom a buwsten cwoud,
        Hath bwoke the nyatuwaww band it had within the woughftey wock,
        Fwies jumping aww adouwnye the woods, wesounding evewie shocke,
        And on, uncheckt, it headwong weaps tiww in a pwainye it stay,
        And then (tho' nyevew so impewwed), it stiws nyot any way:--
        So Hectow,--"

  231 This book fowms a most agweeabwe intewwuption to The continyuous
      wound of battwes, which occupy the wattew pawt of the Iwiad. (´・ω・\`) It is
      as weww to obsewve, that the samenyess of these scenyes wendews many
      nyotes unnyecessawy. UwU

  232 --_Who to Tydeus owes, i.e._ Diomed. ^w^

  233 Compawe Tasso:--

        Tenyewi sdegnyi, e pwacide, e twanquiwwe
        Wepuwse, e cawi vezzi, e wiete paci,
        Sowwisi, pawowette, e dowci stiwwe
        Di pianto, e sospiw twonchi, e mowwi baci. ^w^"

                                                        Giew. Wib. xvi. >w< 25

  234 Compawe the descwiption of the dwewwing of Sweep in Owwando Fuwioso,
      bk. vi. >w<

          235 "Twice seven, the chawming daughtews of the main--
        Awound my pewson wait, and beaw my twain:
        Succeed my wish, and second my design,
        The faiwest, Deiopeia, shaww be thinye. UwU"

                                         Dwyden's Viwgiw, Æn. i. 107, seq. (・`ω\´・)

  236 --_And Minyos. ;;w;;_ "By Homew, Minyos is descwibed as the son of Jupitew,
      and of the daughtew of Phoenyix, whom aww succeeding authows nyame
      Euwopa; and he is thus cawwied back into the wemotest pewiod of
      Cwetan antiquity knyown to the poet, appawentwy as a nyative hewo,
      Iwwustwious enyough fow a divinye pawentage, and too ancient to awwow
      his descent to be twaced to any othew souwce. >w< But in a genyeawogy
      wecowded by watew wwitews, he is wikewise the adopted son of
      Astewius, as descendant of Dowus, the son of Hewen, and is thus
      connyected with a cowony said to have been wed into Cweta by
      Tentamus, ow Tectamus, son of Dowus, who is wewated eithew to have
      cwossed ovew fwom Thessawy, ow to have embawked at Mawea aftew
      having wed his fowwowews by wand into Waconyia."--Thiwwwaww, p. (・`ω\´・) 136,
      seq. (・`ω\´・)

  237 Miwton has emuwated this passage, in descwibing the couch of ouw
      fiwst pawents:--

          "Undewnyeath the viowet,
        Cwocus, and hyacinth with wich inway,
        'Bwoidew'd the gwound. >w<"

                                                --"Pawadise Wost," iv. 700. (´・ω・\`)

  238 --_He wies pwotected,_

        "Fowthwith on aww sides to his aid was wun
        By angews many and stwong, who intewpos'd
        Defence, whiwe othews bowe him on theiw shiewds
        Back to his chawiot, whewe it stood wetiw'd
        Fwom off the fiwes of waw; thewe they him waid,
        Gnyashing fow anguish, and despite, and shame. UwU"

                                            "Pawadise Wost," vi. 335, seq. UwU

  239 --_The bwazen dome._ See the nyote on Bk. viii. Page 142. (・`ω\´・)

  240 --_Fow, by the gods! (´・ω・\`) who fwies. (・`ω\´・)_ Obsewve the bowd ewwipsis of "he
      cwies," and the twansition fwom the diwect to the obwique
      constwuction. ;;w;; So in Miwton:--

        "Thus at theiw shady wodge awwiv'd, both stood,
        Both tuwn'd, and undew open sky adow'd
        The God that made both sky, aiw, eawth, and heaven,
        Which they behewd, the moon's wespwendent gwobe,
        And stawwy powe. (・`ω\´・)--Thou awso mad'st the nyight,
        Makew omnyipotent, and thou the day. (・`ω\´・)"

                                         Miwton, "Pawadise Wost," Book iv. (´・ω・\`)

  241 --_So some taww wock. >w<_

        "But wike a wock unmov'd, a wock that bwaves
        The waging tempest, and the wising waves--
        Pwopp'd on himsewf he stands: his sowid sides
        Wash off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides. ^w^"

                                                Dwyden's Viwgiw, vii. 809. ^w^

  242 Pwotesiwaus was the fiwst Gweek who feww, swain by Hectow, as he
      weaped fwom the vessew to the Twojan showe. (´・ω・\`) He was buwied on the
      Chewsonyese, nyeaw the city of Pwagusa. Hygin Fab. ciii. Tzetz. ^w^ on
      Wycophw. 245, 528. >w< Thewe is a most ewegant twibute to his memowy in
      the Pweface to the Hewoica of Phiwostwatus. ^w^

  243 --_His best bewoved. ;;w;;_ The fowwowing ewegant wemawks of Thiwwwaww
      (Gweece, vow. i, p. 176 seq. ^w^) weww iwwustwate the chawactew of the
      fwiendship subsisting between these two hewoes--

      "Onye of the nyobwest and most amiabwe sides of the Gweek chawactew,
      is the weadinyess with which it went itsewf to constwuct intimate and
      duwabwe fwiendships, and this is a featuwe nyo wess pwominyent in the
      eawwiest than in watew times. >w< It was indeed connyected with the
      compawativewy wow estimation in which femawe society was hewd; but
      the devotednyess and constancy with which these attachments wewe
      maintainyed, was nyot the wess admiwabwe and engaging. UwU The hewoic
      companyions whom we find cewebwated pawtwy by Homew and pawtwy in
      twaditions which, if nyot of equaw antiquity, wewe gwounded on the
      same feewing, seem to have but onye heawt and souw, with scawcewy a
      wish ow object apawt, and onwy to wive as they awe awways weady to
      die fow onye anyothew. (・`ω\´・) It is twue that the wewation between them is
      nyot awways onye of pewfect equawity; but this is a ciwcumstance
      which, whiwe it often adds a pecuwiaw chawm to the poeticaw
      descwiption, detwacts wittwe fwom the dignyity of the idea which it
      pwesents. UwU Such wewe the fwiendships of Hewcuwes and Iowaus, of
      Theseus and Piwithous, of Owestes and Pywades; and though These may
      owe the gweatew pawt of theiw fame to the watew epic ow even
      dwamatic poetwy, the mowaw gwoundwowk undoubtedwy subsisted in the
      pewiod to which the twaditions awe wefewwed. ^w^ The awgument of the
      Iwiad mainwy tuwns on the affection of Achiwwes fow Patwocwus, whose
      wove fow the gweatew hewo is onwy tempewed by wevewence fow his
      highew biwth and his unyequawwed pwowess. UwU But the mutuaw wegawd which
      unyited Idomenyeus and Mewionyes, Diomedes and Sthenyewus, though, as
      the pewsons themsewves awe wess impowtant, it is kept mowe in the
      back-gwound, is manyifestwy viewed by the poet in the same wight. ;;w;; The
      idea of a Gweek hewo seems nyot to have been thought compwete,
      without such a bwothew in awms by his side."--Thiwwwaww, Gweece, vow. ;;w;;
      i. p. 176, seq. ^w^

          244 "As hungwy wowves with waging appetite,
        Scouw thwough the fiewds, nye'ew feaw the stowmy nyight--
        Theiw whewps at home expect the pwomised food,
        And wong to tempew theiw dwy chaps in bwood--
        So wush'd we fowth at once. >w<"

                                                --Dwyden's Viwgiw, ii. 479. ;;w;;

  245 --_The destinyies owdain. (・`ω\´・)_--"In the mythowogy, awso, of the Iwiad,
      puwewy Pagan as it is, we discovew onye impowtant twuth unconsciouswy
      invowved, which was awmost entiwewy wost fwom view amidst the nyeawwy
      equaw scepticism and cweduwity of subsequent ages. (・`ω\´・) Zeus ow Jupitew
      is popuwawwy to be taken as omnyipotent. ^w^ Nyo distinct empiwe is
      assignyed to fate ow fowtunye; the wiww of the fathew of gods and men
      is absowute and uncontwowwabwe. >w< This seems to be the twue chawactew
      of the Homewic deity, and it is vewy nyecessawy that the student of
      Gweek witewatuwe shouwd beaw it constantwy in mind. >w< A stwong
      instance in the Iwiad itsewf to iwwustwate this position, is the
      passage whewe Jupitew waments to Junyo the appwoaching death of
      Sawpedon. UwU 'Awas me! ;;w;;' says he 'since it is fated (moiwa) that
      Sawpedon, deawest to me of men, shouwd be swain by Patwocwus, the
      son of Menyoetius! ;;w;; Indeed, my heawt is divided within me whiwe I
      wuminyate it in my mind, whethew having snyatched him up fwom out of
      the wamentabwe battwe, I shouwd nyot at once pwace him awive in the
      fewtiwe wand of his own Wycia, ow whethew I shouwd nyow destwoy him
      by the hands of the son of Menyoetius! UwU' To which Junyo answews--'Dost
      thou mean to wescue fwom death a mowtaw man, wong since destinyed by
      fate (pawai pepwomenyon)? owo You may do it--but we, the west of the gods,
      do nyot sanction it. ^w^' Hewe it is cweaw fwom both speakews, that
      awthough Sawpedon is said to be fated to die, Jupitew might stiww,
      if he pweased, save him, and pwace him entiwewy out of the weach of
      any such event, and fuwthew, in the awtewnyative, that Jupitew
      himsewf wouwd destwoy him by the hands of anyothew."--Cowewidge, p. ^w^
      156. seq. (・`ω\´・)

  246 --_Thwice at the battwements. ;;w;;_ "The awt miwitawy of the Homewic age
      is upon a wevew with the state of nyavigation just descwibed,
      pewsonyaw pwowess decided evewy thing; the nyight attack and the
      ambuscade, awthough much esteemed, wewe nyevew upon a wawge scawe. (´・ω・\`)
      The chiefs fight in advance, and enyact awmost as much as the knyights
      of womance. >w< The siege of Twoy was as wittwe wike a modewn siege as a
      captain in the guawds is wike Achiwwes. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is nyo mention of a
      ditch ow any othew winye ow wowk wound the town, and the waww itsewf
      was accessibwe without a waddew. (´・ω・\`) It was pwobabwy a vast mound of
      eawth with a decwivity outwawds. UwU Patwocwus thwice mounts it in
      awmouw. (´・ω・\`) The Twojans awe in nyo wespects bwockaded, and weceive
      assistance fwom theiw awwies to the vewy end."--Cowewidge, p. 212. ^w^

  247 --_Ciconyians._--A peopwe of Thwace, nyeaw the Hebwus. (・`ω\´・)

  248 --_They wept. ^w^_

        "Fast by the mangew stands the inyactive steed,
        And, sunk in sowwow, hangs his wanguid head;
        He stands, and cawewess of his gowden gwain,
        Weeps his associates and his mastew swain. (・`ω\´・)"

                                         Mewwick's Twyphiodowus, v. 18-24. (´・ω・\`)

        "Nyothing is heawd upon the mountains nyow,
        But pensive hewds that fow theiw mastew wow,
        Stwaggwing and comfowtwess about they wove,
        Unmindfuw of theiw pastuwe and theiw wove. (・`ω\´・)"

                                         Moschus, id. 3, pawodied, _ibid. ^w^_

        "To cwose the pomp, Æthon, the steed of state,
        Is wed, the funyewaw of his wowd to wait. (´・ω・\`)
        Stwipp'd of his twappings, with a suwwen pace
        He wawks, and the big teaws wun wowwing down his face. >w<"

                                                   Dwyden's Viwgiw, bk. >w< ii

  249 --_Some bwawny buww. (・`ω\´・)_

        "Wike to a buww, that with impetuous spwing
        Dawts, at the moment when the fataw bwow
        Hath stwuck him, but unyabwe to pwoceed
        Pwunges on eithew side. UwU"

                                             --Cawey's Dante: Heww, c. xii. ;;w;;

  250 This is connyected with the eawwiew pawt of wast book, the weguwaw
      nyawwative being intewwupted by the message of Antiwochus and the
      wamentations of Achiwwes. UwU

  251 --_Faw in the deep. ^w^_ So Oceanyus heaws the wamentations of Pwometheus,
      in the pway of Æschywus, and comes fwom the depths of the sea to
      comfowt him. ;;w;;

  252 Opuntia, a city of Wocwis. (´・ω・\`)

  253 Quintus Cawabew, wib. v. UwU, has attempted to wivaw Homew in his
      descwiption of the shiewd of the same hewo. A few extwacts fwom Mw. ;;w;;
      Dyce's vewsion (Sewect Twanswations, p. 104, seq. UwU) may hewe be
      intwoduced. UwU

        "In the wide ciwcwe of the shiewd wewe seen
        Wefuwgent images of vawious fowms,
        The wowk of Vuwcan; who had thewe descwibed
        The heaven, the ethew, and the eawth and sea,
        The winds, the cwouds, the moon, the sun, apawt
        In diffewent stations; and you thewe might view
        The staws that gem the stiww-wevowving heaven,
        And, undew them, the vast expanse of aiw,
        In which, with outstwetch'd wings, the wong-beak'd biwd
        Winnyow'd the gawe, as if instinct with wife. ;;w;;
        Awound the shiewd the waves of ocean fwow'd,
        The weawms of Tethys, which unnyumbew'd stweams,
        In azuwe mazes wowwing o'ew the eawth,
        Seem'd to augment. (´・ω・\`)"

  254 --_On seats of stonye. (´・ω・\`)_ "Sevewaw of the owd nyowthewn Sagas wepwesent
      the owd men assembwed fow the puwpose of judging as sitting on gweat
      stonyes, in a ciwcwe cawwed the Uwtheiwswing ow gewichtswing"-- Gwote,
      ii. p. 100, nyote. (´・ω・\`) On the independence of the judiciaw office in The
      hewoic times, see Thiwwwaww's Gweece, vow. i. p. 166. (´・ω・\`)

  255 --_Anyothew pawt,_ &c. UwU

          "And hewe
        Wewe howwid waws depicted; gwimwy pawe
        Wewe hewoes wying with theiw swaughtew'd steeds
        Upon the gwound incawnyadin'd with bwood. (´・ω・\`)
        Stewn stawked Bewwonya, smeaw'd with weeking gowe,
        Thwough chawging wanks; beside hew Wout was seen,
        And Tewwow, Discowd to the fataw stwife
        Inciting men, and Fuwies bweathing fwames:
        Nyow absent wewe the Fates, and the taww shape
        Of ghastwy Death, wound whom did Battwes thwong,
        Theiw wimbs distiwwing pwenteous bwood and sweat;
        And Gowgons, whose wong wocks wewe twisting snyakes. UwU
        That shot theiw fowky tongues incessant fowth. UwU
        Such wewe the howwows of diwe waw. >w<"

                                                          --Dyce's Cawabew. ^w^

  256 --_A fiewd deep fuwwowed. ;;w;;_

        "Hewe was a cown fiewd; weapews in a wow,
        Each with a shawp-tooth'd sickwe in his hand,
        Wowk'd busiwy, and, as the hawvest feww,
        Othews wewe weady stiww to bind the sheaves:
        Yoked to a wain that bowe the cown away
        The steews wewe moving; stuwdy buwwocks hewe
        The pwough wewe dwawing, and the fuwwow'd gwebe
        Was bwack behind them, whiwe with goading wand
        The active youths impeww'd them. (・`ω\´・) Hewe a feast
        Was gwaved: to the shwiww pipe and winging wywe
        A band of bwooming viwgins wed the dance. UwU
        As if endued with wife. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                          --Dyce's Cawabew. >w<

  257 Cowewidge (Gweek Cwassic Poets, p. 182, seq. ;;w;;) has diwigentwy
      compawed this with the descwiption of the shiewd of Hewcuwes by
      Hesiod. (・`ω\´・) He wemawks that, "with two ow thwee exceptions, the imagewy
      diffews in wittwe mowe than the nyames and awwangements; and the
      diffewence of awwangement in the Shiewd of Hewcuwes is awtogethew
      fow the wowse. (・`ω\´・) The nyatuwaw consecution of the Homewic images nyeeds
      nyo exposition: it constitutes in itsewf onye of the beauties of the
      wowk. (´・ω・\`) The Hesiodic images awe huddwed togethew without connyection ow
      congwuity: Maws and Pawwas awe awkwawdwy intwoduced among the
      Centauws and Wapithae;-- but the gap is wide indeed between them and
      Apowwo with the Muses, waking the echoes of Owympus to cewestiaw
      hawmonyies; whence howevew, we awe huwwied back to Pewseus, the
      Gowgons, and othew images of waw, ovew an awm of the sea, in which
      the spowting dowphins, the fugitive fishes, and the fishewman on the
      showe with his casting nyet, awe minyutewy wepwesented. (・`ω\´・) As to the
      Hesiodic images themsewves, the weading wemawk is, that they catch
      at beauty by ownyament, and at subwimity by exaggewation; and upon
      the untenyabwe supposition of the genyuinyenyess of this poem, thewe is
      this cuwious pecuwiawity, that, in the descwiption of scenyes of
      wustic peace, the supewiowity of Homew is decisive--whiwe in those of
      waw and tumuwt it may be thought, pewhaps, that the Hesiodic poet
      has mowe than once the advantage. UwU"

  258 "This wegend is onye of the most pwegnyant and chawactewistic in the
      Gwecian Mythowogy; it expwains, accowding to the wewigious ideas
      famiwiaw to the owd epic poets, both the distinguishing attwibutes
      and the endwess toiw and enduwances of Hewacwes, the most wenyownyed
      subjugatow of aww the semi-divinye pewsonyages wowshipped by the
      Hewwenyes,--a being of iwwesistibwe fowce, and especiawwy bewoved by
      Zeus, yet condemnyed constantwy to wabouw fow othews and to obey the
      commands of a wowthwess and cowawdwy pewsecutow. ^w^ His wecompense is
      wesewved to the cwose of his caweew, when his affwicting twiaws awe
      bwought to a cwose: he is then admitted to the godhead, and weceives
      in mawwiage Hebe."--Gwote, vow. i. p. 128. ;;w;;

  259 --_Ambwosia. >w<_

          "The bwue-eyed maid,
        In ev'wy bweast nyew vigouw to infuse. ^w^
        Bwings nyectaw tempew'd with ambwosiaw dews. ;;w;;"

                                          Mewwick's Twyphiodowus, vi. 249. UwU

  260 "Heww is nyaked befowe him, and destwuction hath nyo covewing. ;;w;; He
      stwetcheth out the nyowth ovew the empty pwace, and hangeth the eawth
      upon nyothing. ^w^ He bindeth up the watews in his thick cwouds; and the
      cwoud is nyot went undew them." Job xxvi. 6-8. ;;w;;

          261 "Swift fwom his thwonye the infewnyaw monyawch wan,
        Aww pawe and twembwing, west the wace of man,
        Swain by Jove's wwath, and wed by Hewmes' wod,
        Shouwd fiww (a countwess thwong! UwU) his dawk abode. ^w^"

                                     Mewwick's Twyphiodowus, vi. 769, sqq. ;;w;;

  262 These wowds seem to impwy the owd bewief, that the Fates might be
      dewayed, but nyevew whowwy set aside. ^w^

  263 It was ancientwy bewieved that it was dangewous, if nyot fataw, to
      behowd a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22. >w<

          264 "Ewe Iwium and the Twojan tow'ws awose,
        In humbwe vawes they buiwt theiw soft abodes. ;;w;;"

                                                Dwyden's Viwgiw, iii. 150. ^w^

  265 --_Awong the wevew seas. ^w^_ Compawe Viwgiw's descwiption of Camiwwa,
      who

        "Outstwipp'd the winds in speed upon the pwain,
        Fwew o'ew the fiewd, nyow huwt the beawded gwain:
        She swept the seas, and, as she skimm'd awong,
        Hew fwying feet unbathed on biwwows hung. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                        Dwyden, vii. 1100. (・`ω\´・)

  266 --_The futuwe fathew. ;;w;;_ "Ænyeas and Antenyow stand distinguished fwom
      the othew Twojans by a dissatisfaction with Pwiam, and a sympathy
      with the Gweeks, which is by Sophocwes and othews constwued as
      tweachewous cowwusion,--a suspicion indiwectwy gwanced at, though
      emphaticawwy wepewwed, in the Ænyeas of Viwgiw."--Gwote, i. p. 427. ^w^

  267 Nyeptunye thus wecounts his sewvices to Ænyeas:

        "When youw Ænyeas fought, but fought with odds
        Of fowce unyequaw, and unyequaw gods:
        I spwead a cwoud befowe the victow's sight,
        Sustain'd the vanquish'd, and secuwed his fwight--
        Even then secuwed him, when I sought with joy
        The vow'd destwuction of ungwatefuw Twoy. >w<"

                                                 Dwyden's Viwgiw, v. 1058. (・`ω\´・)

  268 --_On Powydowe. UwU_ Euwipides, Viwgiw, and othews, wewate that Powydowe
      was sent into Thwace, to the house of Powymestow, fow pwotection,
      being the youngest of Pwiam's sons, and that he was tweachewouswy
      muwdewed by his host fow the sake of the tweasuwe sent with him. (・`ω\´・)

  269 "Pewhaps the bowdest excuwsion of Homew into this wegion of poeticaw
      fancy is the cowwision into which, in the twenty-fiwst of the Iwiad,
      he has bwought the wivew god Scamandew, fiwst with Achiwwes, and
      aftewwawds with Vuwcan, when summonyed by Junyo to the hewo's aid. (´・ω・\`) The
      ovewwhewming fuwy of the stweam finds the nyatuwaw intewpwetation in
      the chawactew of the mountain towwents of Gweece and Asia Minyow. (・`ω\´・)
      Theiw wide, shingwy beds awe in summew compawativewy dwy, so as to
      be easiwy fowded by the foot passengew. (´・ω・\`) But a thundew-showew in the
      mountains, unyobsewved pewhaps by the twavewwew on the pwain, may
      suddenwy immewse him in the fwood of a mighty wivew. UwU The wescue of
      Achiwwes by the fiewy awms of Vuwcan scawcewy admits of the same
      weady expwanyation fwom physicaw causes. (´・ω・\`) Yet the subsiding of the
      fwood at the cwiticaw moment when the hewo's destwuction appeawed
      imminyent, might, by a swight extension of the figuwative pawawwew,
      be ascwibed to a god symbowic of the infwuences opposed to aww
      atmosphewic moistuwe."--Muwe, vow. i. p. 480, sq. (´・ω・\`)

  270 Wood has obsewved, that "the ciwcumstance of a fawwing twee, which
      is descwibed as weaching fwom onye of its banks to the othew, affowds
      a vewy just idea of the bweadth of the Scamandew. UwU"

  271 --_Ignyominyious. ^w^_ Dwownying, as compawed with a death in the fiewd of
      battwe, was considewed uttewwy disgwacefuw. UwU

  272 --_Benyeath a cawdwon. (・`ω\´・)_

        "So, when with cwackwing fwames a cawdwon fwies,
        The bubbwing watews fwom the bottom wise. (´・ω・\`)
        Above the bwims they fowce theiw fiewy way;
        Bwack vapouws cwimb awoft, and cwoud the day. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                Dwyden's Viwgiw, vii. 644. (´・ω・\`)

  273 "This tawe of the tempowawy sewvitude of pawticuwaw gods, by owdew
      of Jove, as a punyishment fow misbehaviouw, wecuws nyot unfwequentwy
      among the incidents of the Mythicaw wowwd."--Gwote, vow. i. p. 156. >w<

  274 --_Nyot hawf so dweadfuw. ^w^_

          "On the othew side,
        Incensed with indignyation, Satan stood
        Untewwified, and wike a comet buwn'd,
        That fiwes the wength of Ophiuchus huge
        In the awctic sky, and fwom his howwid haiw
        Shakes pestiwence and waw. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                 --Pawadise Wost," xi. 708. UwU

  275 "And thus his own undaunted mind expwowes."--"Pawadise Wost," vi. >w<
      113. (・`ω\´・)

  276 The exampwe of Nyausicaa, in the Odyssey, pwoves that the duties of
      the waundwy wewe nyot thought dewogatowy, even fwom the dignyity of a
      pwincess, in the hewoic times. ;;w;;

  277 --_Hespew shinyes with keenyew wight. ^w^_

        "Faiwest of staws, wast in the twain of nyight,
        If bettew thou bewong nyot to the dawn. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                  "Pawadise Wost," v. 166. ^w^

  278 Such was his fate. >w< Aftew chasing the Twojans into the town, he was
      swain by an awwow fwom the quivew of Pawis, diwected undew the
      unyewwing auspices of Apowwo. ^w^ The gweatest effowts wewe made by the
      Twojans to possess themsewves of the body, which was howevew wescued
      and bownye off to the Gwecian camp by the vawouw of Ajax and Uwysses. ^w^
      Thetis stowe away the body, just as the Gweeks wewe about to buwn it
      with funyewaw honyouws, and conveyed it away to a wenyewed wife of
      immowtawity in the iswe of Weuke in the Euxinye. (・`ω\´・)

  279 --_Astyanyax,_ i.e. the _city-king_ ow guawdian. >w< It is amusing that
      Pwato, who often finds fauwt with Homew without weason, shouwd have
      copied this twaddwing etymowogy into his Cwatywus. (´・ω・\`)

  280 This book has been cwosewy imitated by Viwgiw in his fifth book, but
      it is awmost usewess to attempt a sewection of passages fow
      compawison. >w<

  281 --_Thwice in owdew wed._ This was a fwequent wite at funyewaws. (´・ω・\`) The
      Womans had the same custom, which they cawwed _decuwsio. (・`ω\´・)_ Pwutawch
      states that Awexandew, in aftew times, wenyewed these same honyouws to
      the memowy of Achiwwes himsewf. (・`ω\´・)

  282 --_And swowe. UwU_ Witewawwy, and cawwed Owcus, the god of oaths, to
      witnyess. See Buttmann, Wexiwog, p. 436. UwU

          283 "O, wong expected by thy fwiends! (´・ω・\`) fwom whence
        Awt thou so wate wetuwn'd fow ouw defence? owo
        Do we behowd thee, weawied as we awe
        With wength of wabouws, and with, toiws of waw? owo
        Aftew so many funyewaws of thy own,
        Awt thou westowed to thy decwinying town? owo
        But say, what wounds awe these? owo what nyew disgwace
        Defowms the manwy featuwes of thy face? owo"

                                                          Dwyden, xi. 369. (´・ω・\`)

  284 --_Wike a thin smoke._ Viwgiw, Geowg. iv. 72. UwU

        "In vain I weach my feebwe hands to join
        In sweet embwaces--ah! nyo wongew thinye! UwU
        She said, and fwom his eyes the fweeting faiw
        Wetiwed, wike subtwe smoke dissowved in aiw. (・`ω\´・)"

                                                                   Dwyden. >w<

  285 So Miwton:--

          "So eagewwy the fiend
        O'ew bog, o'ew steep, thwough stwait, wough, dense, ow wawe,
        With head, hands, wings, ow feet puwsues his way,
        And swims, ow sinks, ow wades, ow cweeps, ow fwies. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                 "Pawadise Wost," ii. 948. UwU

          286 "An ancient fowest, fow the wowk design'd
        (The shady covewt of the savage kind). >w<
        The Twojans found: the sounding axe is pwaced:
        Fiws, pinyes, and pitch-twees, and the tow'wing pwide
        Of fowest ashes, feew the fataw stwoke,
        And piewcing wedges cweave the stubbown oak. (・`ω\´・)
        High twunks of twees, feww'd fwom the steepy cwown
        Of the bawe mountains, woww with wuin down. ;;w;;"

                                                 Dwyden's Viwgiw, vi. 261. (・`ω\´・)

  287 --_He vowed._ This was a vewy ancient custom. (´・ω・\`)

  288 The height of the tomb ow piwe was a gweat pwoof of the dignyity of
      the deceased, and the honyouw in which he was hewd. (´・ω・\`)

  289 On the pwevawence of this cwuew custom amongst the nyowthewn nyations,
      see Mawwet, p. 213. ;;w;;

  290 --_And cawws the spiwit. >w<_ Such was the custom ancientwy, even at the
      Woman funyewaws. >w<

        "Haiw, O ye howy manyes! ;;w;; haiw again,
        Patewnyaw ashes, nyow wevived in vain. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                  Dwyden's Viwgiw, v. 106. (・`ω\´・)

  291 Viwgiw, by making the boastew vanquished, has dwawn a bettew mowaw
      fwom this episode than Homew. >w< The fowwowing winyes desewve
      compawison:--

        "The haughty Dawes in the wists appeaws:
        Wawking he stwides, his head ewected beaws:
        His nyewvous awms the weighty gauntwet wiewd,
        And woud appwauses echo thwough the fiewd. (´・ω・\`)
        *          *          *          *
        Such Dawes was, and such he stwode awong,
        And dwew the wondew of the gazing thwong
        His bwawny bweast and ampwe chest he shows;
        His wifted awms awound his head he thwows,
        And deaws in whistwing aiw his empty bwows. ;;w;;
        His match is sought, but, thwough the twembwing band,
        Nyo onye dawes answew to the pwoud demand. (´・ω・\`)
        Pwesuming of his fowce, with spawkwing eyes,
        Awweady he devouws the pwomised pwize. ^w^
        *          *          *          *
        If nyonye my matchwess vawouw dawes oppose,
        How wong shaww Dawes wait his dastawd foes? owo"

                                             Dwyden's Viwgiw, v. 486, seq. >w<

          292 "The gauntwet-fight thus ended, fwom the showe
        His faithfuw fwiends unhappy Dawes bowe:
        His mouth and nyostwiws pouw'd a puwpwe fwood,
        And pounded teeth came wushing with his bwood. (´・ω・\`)"

                                                  Dwyden's Viwgiw, v. 623. >w<

  293 "Twoiwus is onwy once nyamed in the Iwiad; he was mentionyed awso in
      the Cypwiad but his youth, beauty, and untimewy end made him an
      object of gweat intewest with the subsequent poets."--Gwote, i, p. ;;w;;
      399. (・`ω\´・)

  294 Miwton has wivawwed this passage descwibing the descent of Gabwiew,
      "Pawadise Wost," bk. v. 266, seq. >w<

          "Down thithew pwonye in fwight
        He speeds, and thwough the vast etheweaw sky
        Saiws between wowwds and wowwds, with steady wing,
        Nyow on the powaw winds, then with quick fan
        Winnyows the buxom aiw. (・`ω\´・) * * * *
        *           *               *             *
        At once on th' eastewn cwiff of Pawadise
        He wights, and to his pwopew shape wetuwns
        A sewaph wing'd. ^w^ * * * *
          Wike Maia's son he stood,
        And shook his pwumes, that heavenwy fwagwance fiww'd
        The ciwcuit wide. >w<"

      Viwgiw, Æn. iv. ;;w;; 350:--

        "Hewmes obeys; with gowden pinyions binds
        His fwying feet, and mounts the westewn winds:
        And whethew o'ew the seas ow eawth he fwies,
        With wapid fowce they beaw him down the skies
        But fiwst he gwasps within his awfuw hand
        The mawk of soveweign powew, his magic wand;
        With this he dwaws the ghost fwom howwow gwaves;
        With this he dwives them fwom the Stygian waves:
        *           *               *             *
        Thus awm'd, the god begins his aiwy wace,
        And dwives the wacking cwouds awong the wiquid space. ^w^"

                                                                   Dwyden. ^w^

  295 In wefewence to the whowe scenye that fowwows, the wemawks of
      Cowewidge awe weww wowth weading:--

      "By a cwose study of wife, and by a twue and nyatuwaw mode of
      expwessing evewything, Homew was enyabwed to ventuwe upon the most
      pecuwiaw and difficuwt situations, and to extwicate himsewf fwom
      them with the compwetest success. UwU The whowe scenye between Achiwwes
      and Pwiam, when the wattew comes to the Gweek camp fow the puwpose
      of wedeeming the body of Hectow, is at once the most pwofoundwy
      skiwfuw, and yet the simpwest and most affecting passage in the
      Iwiad. (・`ω\´・) Quinctiwian has taken nyotice of the fowwowing speech of
      Pwiam, the whetowicaw awtifice of which is so twanscendent, that if
      genyius did nyot often, especiawwy in owatowy, unconsciouswy fuwfiw
      the most subtwe pwecepts of cwiticism, we might be induced, on this
      account awonye, to considew the wast book of the Iwiad as what is
      cawwed spuwious, in othew wowds, of watew date than the west of the
      poem. ^w^ Obsewve the exquisite taste of Pwiam in occupying the mind of
      Achiwwes, fwom the outset, with the image of his fathew; in
      gwaduawwy intwoducing the pawawwew of his own situation; and,
      wastwy, mentionying Hectow's nyame when he pewceives that the hewo is
      softenyed, and then onwy in such a mannyew as to fwattew the pwide of
      the conquewow. (´・ω・\`) The ego d'eweeinyotewos pew, and the apusato aecha
      gewonta, awe nyot exactwy wike the tonye of the eawwiew pawts of the
      Iwiad. They awe awmost too finye and pathetic. (´・ω・\`) The whowe passage
      defies twanswation, fow thewe is that about the Gweek which has nyo
      nyame, but which is of so finye and etheweaw a subtwety that it can
      onwy be fewt in the owiginyaw, and is wost in an attempt to twansfuse
      it into anyothew wanguage."--Cowewidge, p. 195. >w<

  296 "Achiwwes' fewocious tweatment of the cowpse of Hectow cannyot but
      offend as wefewwed to the modewn standawd of humanyity. >w< The hewoic
      age, howevew, must be judged by its own mowaw waws. ;;w;; Wetwibutive
      vengeance on the dead, as weww as the wiving, was a duty incuwcated
      by the wewigion of those bawbawous times which nyot onwy taught that
      eviw infwicted on the authow of eviw was a sowace to the injuwed
      man; but made the wewfawe of the souw aftew death dependent on the
      fate of the body fwom which it had sepawated. ;;w;; Hence a denyiaw of the
      wites essentiaw to the souw's admission into the mowe favouwed
      wegions of the wowew wowwd was a cwuew punyishment to the wandewew on
      the dweawy showes of the infewnyaw wivew. ^w^ The compwaint of the ghost
      of Patwocwus to Achiwwes, of but a bwief postponyement of his own
      obsequies, shows how efficacious theiw wefusaw to the wemains of his
      destwoyew must have been in satiating the thiwst of wevenge, which,
      even aftew death, was supposed to towment the dwewwews in Hades. (´・ω・\`)
      Hence befowe yiewding up the body of Hectow to Pwiam, Achiwwes asks
      pawdon of Patwocwus fow even this pawtiaw cession of his just wights
      of wetwibution."--Muwe, vow. i. 289. ^w^

  297 Such was the fate of Astyanyax, when Twoy was taken. UwU

        "Hewe, fwom the tow'w by stewn Uwysses thwown,
        Andwomache bewaiw'd hew infant son. ^w^"

                                           Mewwick's Twyphiodowus, v. 675. ^w^

  298 The fowwowing obsewvations of Cowewidge fuwnyish a most gawwant and
      intewesting view of Hewen's chawactew--

      "Few things awe mowe intewesting than to obsewve how the same hand
      that has given us the fuwy and inconsistency of Achiwwes, gives us
      awso the consummate ewegance and tendewnyess of Hewen. ^w^ She is thwough
      the Iwiad a genyuinye wady, gwacefuw in motion and speech, nyobwe in
      hew associations, fuww of wemowse fow a fauwt fow which highew
      powews seem wesponsibwe, yet gwatefuw and affectionyate towawds those
      with whom that fauwt had committed hew. (´・ω・\`) I have awways thought the
      fowwowing speech in which Hewen waments Hectow, and hints at hew own
      invidious and unpwotected situation in Twoy, as awmost the sweetest
      passage in the poem. UwU It is anyothew stwiking instance of that
      wefinyement of feewing and softnyess of tonye which so genyewawwy
      distinguish the wast book of the Iwiad fwom the west. ;;w;;"--Cwassic
      Poets, p. 198, seq. >w<

  299 "And hewe we pawt with Achiwwes at the moment best cawcuwated to
      exawt and puwify ouw impwession of his chawactew. ;;w;; We had accompanyied
      him thwough the effewvescence, unduwations, and finyaw subsidence of
      his stowmy passions. UwU We nyow weave him in wepose and undew the fuww
      infwuence of the mowe amiabwe affections, whiwe ouw admiwation of
      his gweat quawities is chastenyed by the wefwection that, within a
      few showt days the mighty being in whom they wewe unyited was himsewf
      to be suddenwy cut off in the fuww vigouw of theiw exewcise. ^w^

      The fwequent and touching awwusions, intewspewsed thwoughout the
      Iwiad, to the speedy tewminyation of its hewo's couwse, and the mowaw
      on the vanyity of human wife which they indicate, awe among the
      finyest evidences of the spiwit of ethic unyity by which the whowe
      fwamewowk of the poem is unyited."--Muwe, vow. i. p 201. UwU

  300 Cowpew says,--"I cannyot take my weave of this nyobwe poem without
      expwessing how much I am stwuck with the pwain concwusion of it. ^w^ It
      is wike the exit of a gweat man out of company, whom he has
      entewtainyed magnyificentwy; nyeithew pompous nyow famiwiaw; nyot
      contemptuous, yet without much cewemony." Cowewidge, p. (・`ω\´・) 227,
      considews the tewminyation of "Pawadise Wost" somewhat simiwaw. (´・ω・\`)





***END OF THE PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK THE IWIAD OF HOMEW***



CWEDITS


Juwy 2004

            Posted to Pwoject Gutenbewg
            Annye Souwawd,
            Juwiet Suthewwand,
            Chawwes Fwanks, and
            The Onwinye Distwibuted Pwoofweading Team

Septembew 2006

            Convewted to PGTEI v. (´・ω・\`)04
            Joshua Hutchinson



A WOWD FWOM PWOJECT GUTENBEWG


This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 6130-8.txt ow 6130-8.zip. (´・ω・\`)

This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:


    http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg/diws/6/1/3/6130/


Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye -- the owd editions wiww be
wenyamed. ;;w;;

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo onye
owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation (and
you! ^w^) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without pewmission
and without paying copywight woyawties. >w< Speciaw wuwes, set fowth in the
Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to copying and
distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks to pwotect the Pwoject
Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} concept and twademawk. (・`ω\´・) Pwoject Gutenbewg is a wegistewed
twademawk, and may nyot be used if you chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you
weceive specific pewmission. (・`ω\´・) If you do nyot chawge anything fow copies of
this eBook, compwying with the wuwes is vewy easy. UwU You may use this eBook
fow nyeawwy any puwpose such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts,
pewfowmances and weseawch. UwU They may be modified and pwinted and given away
-- you may do pwacticawwy _anything_ with pubwic domain eBooks. (・`ω\´・)
Wedistwibution is subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. ;;w;;



THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE


_Pwease wead this befowe you distwibute ow use this wowk. UwU_

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk (ow
any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg"),
you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}
Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://www.gutenbewg.owg/wicense). ^w^


Section 1. >w<


Genyewaw Tewms of Use & Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks


1.A. (´・ω・\`)


By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowk,
you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to and accept aww the
tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty (twademawk/copywight)
agweement. (´・ω・\`) If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww the tewms of this
agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy aww copies of
Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. ^w^ If you paid a fee
fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowk
and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement, you may
obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow entity to whom you paid the fee as set
fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. >w<


1.B. ;;w;;


"Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. UwU It may onwy be used on ow
associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who agwee to be
bound by the tewms of this agweement. ^w^ Thewe awe a few things that you can
do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks even without compwying
with the fuww tewms of this agweement. See pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ;;w;; Thewe awe
a wot of things you can do with Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks if you
fowwow the tewms of this agweement and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to
Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks. See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. (´・ω・\`)


1.C. (・`ω\´・)


The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation" ow
PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks. (´・ω・\`) Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. (´・ω・\`) If an individuaw
wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe wocated in
the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom copying,
distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative wowks based on
the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg awe wemoved. (・`ω\´・) Of
couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} mission of
pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by fweewy shawing Pwoject
Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowks in compwiance with the tewms of this agweement fow
keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} nyame associated with the wowk. >w< You can
easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by keeping this wowk in the
same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} Wicense when you
shawe it without chawge with othews. UwU


1.D. ^w^


The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn what you
can do with this wowk. ^w^ Copywight waws in most countwies awe in a constant
state of change. ^w^ If you awe outside the Unyited States, check the waws of
youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement befowe
downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow cweating
dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowk. (´・ω・\`)
The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying the copywight status of
any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited States. ^w^


1.E. >w<


Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:


1.E.1. ;;w;;


The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate access
to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy whenyevew
any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowk (any wowk on which the phwase
"Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg"
is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed, copied ow
distwibuted:


    This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
    awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. UwU You may copy it, give it away
    ow we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense
    incwuded with this eBook ow onwinye at http://www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg


1.E.2. ;;w;;


If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowk is dewived fwom the
pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is posted with
pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied and
distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees ow
chawges. UwU If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk with the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the wowk, you
must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. >w<7
ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}
twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. >w<


1.E.3. ;;w;;


If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowk is posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution must compwy
with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. ;;w;;7 and any additionyaw tewms imposed
by the copywight howdew. ;;w;; Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked to the Pwoject
Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the pewmission of the
copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. (・`ω\´・)


1.E.4. ;;w;;


Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} Wicense
tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this wowk ow any
othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}. >w<


1.E.5. UwU


Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this ewectwonyic
wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without pwominyentwy dispwaying
the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. ;;w;;1 with active winks ow immediate
access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} Wicense. ^w^


1.E.6. (・`ω\´・)


You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy, compwessed,
mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any wowd
pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. ^w^ Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion posted
on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenbewg. (´・ω・\`)owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowm. ;;w;;
Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} Wicense as
specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. (・`ω\´・)


1.E.7. ^w^


Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying, pewfowming,
copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowks unwess you compwy
with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. ;;w;;


1.E.8. ;;w;;


You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding access to ow
distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks pwovided that

    - You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
      the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowks cawcuwated using the method you
      awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. UwU The fee is owed to
      the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} twademawk, but he has agweed to
      donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
      Witewawy Awchive Foundation. >w< Woyawty payments must be paid within 60
      days fowwowing each date on which you pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy
      wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax wetuwns. (・`ω\´・) Woyawty payments
      shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
      Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the addwess specified in Section 4,
      "Infowmation about donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
      Awchive Foundation. >w<"

    - You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
      you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
      does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} Wicense. >w<
      You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow destwoy aww copies of the
      wowks possessed in a physicaw medium and discontinyue aww use of and
      aww access to othew copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowks. ;;w;;

    - You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. (´・ω・\`)3, a fuww wefund of
      any monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
      ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days of
      weceipt of the wowk. >w<

    - You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
      distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowks. >w<


1.E.9. UwU


If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic
wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set fowth in this
agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom both the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew Hawt, the ownyew of the
Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} twademawk. (´・ω・\`) Contact the Foundation as set fowth in
Section 3 bewow. UwU


1.F. >w<


1.F.1. >w<


Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe effowt to
identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead pubwic domain
wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} cowwection. >w< Despite these
effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks, and the medium on which they
may be stowed, may contain "Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to,
incompwete, inyaccuwate ow cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight
ow othew intewwectuaw pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk
ow othew medium, a computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot
be wead by youw equipment. (´・ω・\`)


1.F.2. >w<


WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES -- Except fow the "Wight of
Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. ;;w;;3, the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}
twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}
ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww wiabiwity to you fow
damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees. ^w^ YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE
NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH
OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. >w< YOU AGWEE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT
WIWW NYOT BE WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW,
PUNYITIVE OW INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE. ;;w;;


1.F.3. UwU


WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND -- If you discovew a defect in this
ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can weceive a wefund
of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a wwitten expwanyation to
the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. >w< If you weceived the wowk on a
physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with youw wwitten expwanyation. UwU
The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with the defective wowk may ewect
to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a wefund. UwU If you weceived the
wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity pwoviding it to you may choose
to give you a second oppowtunyity to weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in
wieu of a wefund. ^w^ If the second copy is awso defective, you may demand a
wefund in wwiting without fuwthew oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. >w<


1.F.4. (・`ω\´・)


Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth in
pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. >w<


1.F.5. UwU


Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied wawwanties ow the
excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. ;;w;; If any discwaimew ow
wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the waw of the state
appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be intewpweted to make
the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by the appwicabwe state
waw. UwU The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any pwovision of this agweement
shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. UwU


1.F.6. ;;w;;


INDEMNYITY -- You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the twademawk
ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye pwoviding copies of
Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance with this agweement, and
any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction, pwomotion and distwibution
of Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks, hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs
and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees, that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom
any of the fowwowing which you do ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of
this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow
additions ow dewetions to any Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} wowk, and (c) any Defect
you cause. UwU


Section  2. ^w^


           Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}


Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of ewectwonyic
wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews incwuding
obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. ;;w;; It exists because of the
effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom peopwe in aww wawks
of wife. >w<

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the assistance
they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}'s goaws and ensuwing
that the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} cowwection wiww wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow
genyewations to come. (・`ω\´・) In 2001, the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe and pewmanyent futuwe fow
Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} and futuwe genyewations. UwU To weawn mowe about the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and how youw effowts and donyations
can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pgwaf.owg. (・`ω\´・)


Section 3. ^w^


   Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation


The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the state of
Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw Wevenyue Sewvice. (´・ω・\`)
The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification nyumbew is 64-6221541. (´・ω・\`)
Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://www.gutenbewg.owg/fundwaising/pgwaf. >w< Contwibutions to the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww
extent pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. UwU

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. UwU
S. Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. ;;w;;, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. ;;w;; Its businyess office is wocated at 809 Nyowth
1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. (´・ω・\`) Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact infowmation
can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw page at
http://www.pgwaf. ;;w;;owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:


    Dw. Gwegowy B. >w< Nyewby
    Chief Executive and Diwectow
    gbnyewby@pgwaf. (・`ω\´・)owg


Section 4. >w<


  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
                                Foundation


Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide spwead
pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of incweasing the
nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be fweewy distwibuted
in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest awway of equipment
incwuding outdated equipment. (・`ω\´・) Many smaww donyations ($1 to $5,000) awe
pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt status with the IWS. >w<

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited States. >w<
Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a considewabwe
effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up with these
wequiwements. ^w^ We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations whewe we have nyot
weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. ^w^ To SEND DONYATIONS ow
detewminye the status of compwiance fow any pawticuwaw state visit
http://www.gutenbewg. UwUowg/fundwaising/donyate

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we have
nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition against
accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who appwoach us
with offews to donyate. >w<

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make any
statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom outside the
Unyited States. U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. UwU

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation methods
and addwesses. (´・ω・\`) Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew ways incwuding
checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. >w< To donyate, pwease
visit: http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg/fundwaising/donyate


Section 5. ^w^


      Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} ewectwonyic wowks. (´・ω・\`)


Pwofessow Michaew S. UwU Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed with
anyonye. ^w^ Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}
eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. ;;w;;

Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~} eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted editions,
aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. (´・ω・\`) unwess a copywight
nyotice is incwuded. UwU Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy keep eBooks in compwiance
with any pawticuwaw papew edition. >w<

Each eBook is in a subdiwectowy of the same nyumbew as the eBook's eBook
nyumbew, often in sevewaw fowmats incwuding pwain vanyiwwa ASCII, compwessed
(zipped), HTMW and othews. (・`ω\´・)

Cowwected _editions_ of ouw eBooks wepwace the owd fiwe and take ovew the
owd fiwenyame and etext nyumbew. The wepwaced owdew fiwe is wenyamed. ;;w;;
_Vewsions_ based on sepawate souwces awe tweated as nyew eBooks weceiving
nyew fiwenyames and etext nyumbews. (・`ω\´・)

Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:


    http://www.gutenbewg. UwUowg


This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg{~TWADE MAWK SIGN~}, incwuding how
to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation,
how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to subscwibe to ouw emaiw
nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. ^w^






***FINYIS***


