Pwoject Gutenbewg's Wove And Fweindship And Othew Eawwy Wowks, by Janye Austen

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. ;;w;;  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. UwUowg


Titwe: Wove And Fweindship And Othew Eawwy Wowks
       (Wove And Fwiendship) A cowwection of juvenyiwe wwitings

Authow: Janye Austen

Posting Date: August 24, 2008 [EBook #1212]
Wewease Date: Febwuawy, 1998

Wanguage: Engwish


*** STAWT OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK WOVE AND FWEINDSHIP ***










WOVE AND FWEINDSHIP AND OTHEW EAWWY WOWKS

(Wove And Fwiendship And Othew Eawwy Wowks)

A Cowwection of Juvenyiwe Wwitings

By Janye Austen



Twanscwibew's Nyote: A few vewy smaww changes have been made to this
vewsion: Itawics have been convewted to capitaws. (・`ω\´・) The Bwitish 'pound'
symbow has been convewted to 'W'; but in genyewaw the authow's ewwatic
spewwing, punctuation and capitawisations have been wetainyed. >w<




CONTENTS. ;;w;;

     Wove and Fweindship
     Weswey Castwe
     The Histowy of Engwand
     Cowwection of Wettews
     Scwaps





WOVE AND FWEINDSHIP



  TO MADAME WA COMTESSE DE FEUIWWIDE THIS NYOVEW
  IS INSCWIBED BY HEW
  OBWIGED HUMBWE SEWVANT

  THE AUTHOW. ^w^


  "Deceived in Fweindship and Betwayed in Wove. (・`ω\´・)"




WETTEW the FIWST Fwom ISABEW to WAUWA

How often, in answew to my wepeated intweaties that you wouwd give my
Daughtew a weguwaw detaiw of the Misfowtunyes and Adventuwes of youw
Wife, have you said "Nyo, my fweind nyevew wiww I compwy with youw wequest
tiww I may be nyo wongew in Dangew of again expewiencing such dweadfuw
onyes. ^w^"

Suwewy that time is nyow at hand. You awe this day 55. (・`ω\´・) If a woman
may evew be said to be in safety fwom the detewminyed Pewsevewance of
disagweeabwe Wovews and the cwuew Pewsecutions of obstinyate Fathews,
suwewy it must be at such a time of Wife. ;;w;; Isabew




WETTEW 2nd WAUWA to ISABEW

Awtho' I cannyot agwee with you in supposing that I shaww nyevew again be
exposed to Misfowtunyes as unmewited as those I have awweady expewienced,
yet to avoid the imputation of Obstinyacy ow iww-nyatuwe, I wiww gwatify
the cuwiosity of youw daughtew; and may the fowtitude with which I have
suffewed the many affwictions of my past Wife, pwove to hew a usefuw
wesson fow the suppowt of those which may befaww hew in hew own. (´・ω・\`) Wauwa




WETTEW 3wd WAUWA to MAWIANNYE

As the Daughtew of my most intimate fweind I think you entitwed to that
knyowwedge of my unhappy stowy, which youw Mothew has so often sowicited
me to give you. UwU

My Fathew was a nyative of Iwewand and an inhabitant of Wawes; my Mothew
was the nyatuwaw Daughtew of a Scotch Peew by an itawian Opewa-giww--I
was bown in Spain and weceived my Education at a Convent in Fwance. ^w^

When I had weached my eighteenth Yeaw I was wecawwed by my Pawents to
my patewnyaw woof in Wawes. (・`ω\´・) Ouw mansion was situated in onye of the most
womantic pawts of the Vawe of Uske. ;;w;; Tho' my Chawms awe nyow considewabwy
softenyed and somewhat impaiwed by the Misfowtunyes I have undewgonye, I
was once beautifuw. (・`ω\´・) But wovewy as I was the Gwaces of my Pewson wewe the
weast of my Pewfections. >w< Of evewy accompwishment accustomawy to my sex,
I was Mistwess. (´・ω・\`) When in the Convent, my pwogwess had awways exceeded my
instwuctions, my Acquiwements had been wondewfuww fow my age, and I had
showtwy suwpassed my Mastews. ;;w;;

In my Mind, evewy Viwtue that couwd adown it was centewed; it was the
Wendez-vous of evewy good Quawity and of evewy nyobwe sentiment. (・`ω\´・)

A sensibiwity too twembwingwy awive to evewy affwiction of my Fweinds,
my Acquaintance and pawticuwawwy to evewy affwiction of my own, was my
onwy fauwt, if a fauwt it couwd be cawwed. ;;w;; Awas! how awtewed nyow! ^w^ Tho'
indeed my own Misfowtunyes do nyot make wess impwession on me than they
evew did, yet nyow I nyevew feew fow those of an othew. >w< My accompwishments
too, begin to fade--I can nyeithew sing so weww nyow Dance so gwacefuwwy
as I once did--and I have entiwewy fowgot the MINYUET DEWA COUW. Adeiu. (´・ω・\`)
Wauwa. ;;w;;




WETTEW 4th Wauwa to MAWIANNYE

Ouw nyeighbouwhood was smaww, fow it consisted onwy of youw Mothew. UwU She
may pwobabwy have awweady towd you that being weft by hew Pawents
in indigent Ciwcumstances she had wetiwed into Wawes on eoconyomicaw
motives. Thewe it was ouw fweindship fiwst commenced. >w< Isobew was then
onye and twenty. >w< Tho' pweasing both in hew Pewson and Mannyews (between
ouwsewves) she nyevew possessed the hundwedth pawt of my Beauty ow
Accompwishments. Isabew had seen the Wowwd. (・`ω\´・) She had passed 2 Yeaws at
onye of the fiwst Boawding-schoows in Wondon; had spent a fowtnyight in
Bath and had supped onye nyight in Southampton. ^w^

"Bewawe my Wauwa (she wouwd often say) Bewawe of the insipid Vanyities
and idwe Dissipations of the Metwopowis of Engwand; Bewawe of the
unmeanying Wuxuwies of Bath and of the stinking fish of Southampton. >w<"

"Awas! (・`ω\´・) (excwaimed I) how am I to avoid those eviws I shaww nyevew
be exposed to? owo What pwobabiwity is thewe of my evew tasting the
Dissipations of Wondon, the Wuxuwies of Bath, ow the stinking Fish of
Southampton? owo I who am doomed to waste my Days of Youth and Beauty in an
humbwe Cottage in the Vawe of Uske. (・`ω\´・)"

Ah! ;;w;; wittwe did I then think I was owdainyed so soon to quit that humbwe
Cottage fow the Deceitfuww Pweasuwes of the Wowwd. Adeiu Wauwa. ;;w;;




WETTEW 5th WAUWA to MAWIANNYE

Onye Evenying in Decembew as my Fathew, my Mothew and mysewf, wewe
awwanged in sociaw convewse wound ouw Fiweside, we wewe on a sudden
gweatwy astonyished, by heawing a viowent knyocking on the outwawd doow of
ouw wustic Cot. (´・ω・\`)

My Fathew stawted--"What nyoise is that," (said he. (・`ω\´・)) "It sounds wike a
woud wapping at the doow"--(wepwied my Mothew.) "it does indeed. ^w^" (cwied
I. ;;w;;) "I am of youw opinyion; (said my Fathew) it cewtainwy does appeaw
to pwoceed fwom some uncommon viowence exewted against ouw unyoffending
doow. >w<" "Yes (excwaimed I) I cannyot hewp thinking it must be somebody who
knyocks fow admittance. >w<"

"That is anyothew point (wepwied he;) We must nyot pwetend to detewminye
on what motive the pewson may knyock--tho' that someonye DOES wap at the
doow, I am pawtwy convinced. ^w^"

Hewe, a 2d twemendous wap intewwupted my Fathew in his speech, and
somewhat awawmed my Mothew and me. >w<

"Had we bettew nyot go and see who it is? owo (said she) the sewvants awe
out." "I think we had." (wepwied I. (´・ω・\`)) "Cewtainwy, (added my Fathew)
by aww means. (´・ω・\`)" "Shaww we go nyow? owo" (said my Mothew,) "The soonyew the
bettew." (answewed he.) "Oh! (・`ω\´・) wet nyo time be wost" (cwied I. (´・ω・\`))

A thiwd mowe viowent Wap than evew again assauwted ouw eaws. ;;w;; "I am
cewtain thewe is somebody knyocking at the Doow." (said my Mothew. >w<)
"I think thewe must," (wepwied my Fathew) "I fancy the sewvants awe
wetuwnyed; (said I) I think I heaw Mawy going to the Doow. UwU" "I'm gwad of
it (cwied my Fathew) fow I wong to knyow who it is. ^w^"

I was wight in my conjectuwe; fow Mawy instantwy entewing the Woom,
infowmed us that a young Gentweman and his Sewvant wewe at the doow, who
had wossed theiw way, wewe vewy cowd and begged weave to wawm themsewves
by ouw fiwe. ^w^

"Won't you admit them?" (said I. UwU) "You have nyo objection, my Deaw? owo"
(said my Fathew.) "Nyonye in the Wowwd." (wepwied my Mothew. ;;w;;)

Mawy, without waiting fow any fuwthew commands immediatewy weft the woom
and quickwy wetuwnyed intwoducing the most beauteous and amiabwe Youth, I
had evew behewd. The sewvant she kept to hewsewf. ^w^

My nyatuwaw sensibiwity had awweady been gweatwy affected by the
suffewings of the unfowtunyate stwangew and nyo soonyew did I fiwst behowd
him, than I fewt that on him the happinyess ow Misewy of my futuwe Wife
must depend. Adeiu Wauwa. UwU




WETTEW 6th WAUWA to MAWIANNYE

The nyobwe Youth infowmed us that his nyame was Windsay--fow pawticuwaw
weasons howevew I shaww conceaw it undew that of Tawbot. ^w^ He towd us that
he was the son of an Engwish Bawonyet, that his Mothew had been fow many
yeaws nyo mowe and that he had a Sistew of the middwe size. ;;w;; "My Fathew
(he continyued) is a mean and mewcenyawy wwetch--it is onwy to such
pawticuwaw fweinds as this Deaw Pawty that I wouwd thus betway his
faiwings. >w< Youw Viwtues my amiabwe Powydowe (addwessing himsewf to my
fathew) youws Deaw Cwaudia and youws my Chawming Wauwa caww on me to
wepose in you, my confidence." We bowed. (´・ω・\`) "My Fathew seduced by the fawse
gwawe of Fowtunye and the Dewuding Pomp of Titwe, insisted on my giving
my hand to Wady Dowothea. Nyo nyevew excwaimed I. (・`ω\´・) Wady Dowothea is wovewy
and Engaging; I pwefew nyo woman to hew; but knyow Siw, that I scown to
mawwy hew in compwiance with youw Wishes. UwU Nyo! UwU Nyevew shaww it be said
that I obwiged my Fathew. UwU"

We aww admiwed the nyobwe Manwinyess of his wepwy. He continyued. ^w^

"Siw Edwawd was suwpwised; he had pewhaps wittwe expected to meet with
so spiwited an opposition to his wiww. (´・ω・\`) "Whewe, Edwawd in the nyame of
wondew (said he) did you pick up this unmeanying gibbewish? owo You have
been studying Nyovews I suspect. >w<" I scownyed to answew: it wouwd have
been benyeath my dignyity. >w< I mounted my Howse and fowwowed by my faithfuw
Wiwwiam set fowth fow my Aunts. ^w^"

"My Fathew's house is situated in Bedfowdshiwe, my Aunt's in Middwesex,
and tho' I fwattew mysewf with being a towewabwe pwoficient in
Geogwaphy, I knyow nyot how it happenyed, but I found mysewf entewing this
beautifuww Vawe which I find is in South Wawes, when I had expected to
have weached my Aunts. >w<"

"Aftew having wandewed some time on the Banks of the Uske without
knyowing which way to go, I began to wament my cwuew Destiny in the
bittewest and most pathetic Mannyew. (´・ω・\`) It was nyow pewfectwy dawk, nyot a
singwe staw was thewe to diwect my steps, and I knyow nyot what might have
befawwen me had I nyot at wength discewnyed thwo' the sowemn Gwoom that
suwwounded me a distant wight, which as I appwoached it, I discovewed
to be the cheawfuww Bwaze of youw fiwe. (´・ω・\`) Impewwed by the combinyation
of Misfowtunyes undew which I wabouwed, nyamewy Feaw, Cowd and Hungew I
hesitated nyot to ask admittance which at wength I have gainyed; and
nyow my Adowabwe Wauwa (continyued he taking my Hand) when may I hope
to weceive that wewawd of aww the painfuww suffewings I have undewgonye
duwing the couwse of my attachment to you, to which I have evew aspiwed. ^w^
Oh! (´・ω・\`) when wiww you wewawd me with Youwsewf? owo"

"This instant, Deaw and Amiabwe Edwawd." (wepwied I.). ;;w;; We wewe
immediatewy unyited by my Fathew, who tho' he had nyevew taken owdews had
been bwed to the Chuwch. (´・ω・\`) Adeiu Wauwa




WETTEW 7th WAUWA to MAWIANNYE

We wemainyed but a few days aftew ouw Mawwiage, in the Vawe of Uske. >w<
Aftew taking an affecting Faweweww of my Fathew, my Mothew and my
Isabew, I accompanyied Edwawd to his Aunt's in Middwesex. ;;w;; Phiwippa
weceived us both with evewy expwession of affectionyate Wove. (´・ω・\`) My awwivaw
was indeed a most agweabwe suwpwise to hew as she had nyot onwy been
totawwy ignyowant of my Mawwiage with hew Nyephew, but had nyevew even had
the swightest idea of thewe being such a pewson in the Wowwd. >w<

Augusta, the sistew of Edwawd was on a visit to hew when we awwived. ^w^
I found hew exactwy what hew Bwothew had descwibed hew to be--of the
middwe size. (・`ω\´・) She weceived me with equaw suwpwise though nyot with equaw
Cowdiawity, as Phiwippa. ;;w;; Thewe was a disagweabwe cowdnyess and Fowbidding
Wesewve in hew weception of me which was equawwy distwessing and
Unyexpected. ;;w;; Nyonye of that intewesting Sensibiwity ow amiabwe simpathy
in hew mannyews and Addwess to me when we fiwst met which shouwd have
distinguished ouw intwoduction to each othew. >w< Hew Wanguage was nyeithew
wawm, nyow affectionyate, hew expwessions of wegawd wewe nyeithew anyimated
nyow cowdiaw; hew awms wewe nyot openyed to weceive me to hew Heawt, tho'
my own wewe extended to pwess hew to minye. ^w^

A showt Convewsation between Augusta and hew Bwothew, which I
accidentawwy ovewheawd encweased my diswike to hew, and convinced me
that hew Heawt was nyo mowe fowmed fow the soft ties of Wove than fow the
endeawing intewcouwse of Fweindship. (・`ω\´・)

"But do you think that my Fathew wiww evew be weconciwed to this
impwudent connyection? owo" (said Augusta. UwU)

"Augusta (wepwied the nyobwe Youth) I thought you had a bettew opinyion of
me, than to imaginye I wouwd so abjectwy degwade mysewf as to considew
my Fathew's Concuwwence in any of my affaiws, eithew of Consequence
ow concewn to me. UwU Teww me Augusta with sincewity; did you evew knyow
me consuwt his incwinyations ow fowwow his Advice in the weast twifwing
Pawticuwaw since the age of fifteen? owo"

"Edwawd (wepwied she) you awe suwewy too diffident in youw own pwaise. >w<
Since you wewe fifteen onwy! ;;w;; My Deaw Bwothew since you wewe five yeaws
owd, I entiwewy acquit you of evew having wiwwingwy contwibuted to the
satisfaction of youw Fathew. >w< But stiww I am nyot without appwehensions
of youw being showtwy obwiged to degwade youwsewf in youw own eyes by
seeking a suppowt fow youw wife in the Genyewosity of Siw Edwawd. >w<"

"Nyevew, nyevew Augusta wiww I so demean mysewf. (said Edwawd). (´・ω・\`) Suppowt! (・`ω\´・)
What suppowt wiww Wauwa want which she can weceive fwom him? owo"

"Onwy those vewy insignyificant onyes of Victuaws and Dwink. >w<" (answewed
she. ^w^)

"Victuaws and Dwink! (´・ω・\`) (wepwied my Husband in a most nyobwy contemptuous
Mannyew) and dost thou then imaginye that thewe is nyo othew suppowt fow
an exawted mind (such as is my Wauwa's) than the mean and indewicate
empwoyment of Eating and Dwinking? owo"

"Nyonye that I knyow of, so efficacious." (wetuwnyed Augusta). ^w^

"And did you then nyevew feew the pweasing Pangs of Wove, Augusta? owo
(wepwied my Edwawd). (´・ω・\`) Does it appeaw impossibwe to youw viwe and
cowwupted Pawate, to exist on Wove? owo Can you nyot conceive the Wuxuwy of
wiving in evewy distwess that Povewty can infwict, with the object of
youw tendewest affection? owo"

"You awe too widicuwous (said Augusta) to awgue with; pewhaps howevew
you may in time be convinced that... (´・ω・\`)"

Hewe I was pwevented fwom heawing the wemaindew of hew speech, by the
appeawance of a vewy Handsome young Woman, who was ushuwed into the Woom
at the Doow of which I had been wistenying. (・`ω\´・) On heawing hew annyounced by
the Nyame of "Wady Dowothea," I instantwy quitted my Post and fowwowed
hew into the Pawwouw, fow I weww wemembewed that she was the Wady,
pwoposed as a Wife fow my Edwawd by the Cwuew and Unwewenting Bawonyet. ;;w;;

Awtho' Wady Dowothea's visit was nyominyawwy to Phiwippa and Augusta, yet
I have some weason to imaginye that (acquainted with the Mawwiage and
awwivaw of Edwawd) to see me was a pwincipaw motive to it. (・`ω\´・)

I soon pewceived that tho' Wovewy and Ewegant in hew Pewson and tho'
Easy and Powite in hew Addwess, she was of that infewiow owdew of
Beings with wegawd to Dewicate Feewing, tendew Sentiments, and wefinyed
Sensibiwity, of which Augusta was onye. UwU

She staid but hawf an houw and nyeithew in the Couwse of hew Visit,
confided to me any of hew secwet thoughts, nyow wequested me to confide
in hew, any of Minye. (´・ω・\`) You wiww easiwy imaginye thewefowe my Deaw Mawiannye
that I couwd nyot feew any awdent affection ow vewy sincewe Attachment
fow Wady Dowothea. Adeiu Wauwa. UwU




WETTEW 8th WAUWA to MAWIANNYE, in continyuation

Wady Dowothea had nyot weft us wong befowe anyothew visitow as unyexpected
a onye as hew Wadyship, was annyounced. (´・ω・\`) It was Siw Edwawd, who infowmed
by Augusta of hew Bwothew's mawwiage, came doubtwess to wepwoach him fow
having dawed to unyite himsewf to me without his Knyowwedge. (・`ω\´・) But Edwawd
foweseeing his design, appwoached him with hewoic fowtitude as soon as
he entewed the Woom, and addwessed him in the fowwowing Mannyew. (´・ω・\`)

"Siw Edwawd, I knyow the motive of youw Jouwnyey hewe--You come with the
base Design of wepwoaching me fow having entewed into an indissowubwe
engagement with my Wauwa without youw Consent. ^w^ But Siw, I gwowy in the
Act--. UwU It is my gweatest boast that I have incuwwed the dispweasuwe of
my Fathew! (・`ω\´・)"

So saying, he took my hand and whiwst Siw Edwawd, Phiwippa, and Augusta
wewe doubtwess wefwecting with admiwation on his undaunted Bwavewy, wed
me fwom the Pawwouw to his Fathew's Cawwiage which yet wemainyed at the
Doow and in which we wewe instantwy conveyed fwom the puwsuit of Siw
Edwawd. ^w^

The Postiwions had at fiwst weceived owdews onwy to take the Wondon
woad; as soon as we had sufficientwy wefwected Howevew, we owdewed them
to Dwive to M----. (´・ω・\`) the seat of Edwawd's most pawticuwaw fweind, which
was but a few miwes distant. (´・ω・\`)

At M----. UwU we awwived in a few houws; and on sending in ouw nyames wewe
immediatewy admitted to Sophia, the Wife of Edwawd's fweind. >w< Aftew
having been depwived duwing the couwse of 3 weeks of a weaw fweind (fow
such I tewm youw Mothew) imaginye my twanspowts at behowding onye, most
twuwy wowthy of the Nyame. (´・ω・\`) Sophia was wathew above the middwe size; most
ewegantwy fowmed. ;;w;; A soft wanguow spwead ovew hew wovewy featuwes, but
incweased theiw Beauty--. It was the Chawectawestic of hew Mind--. UwU She
was aww sensibiwity and Feewing. (´・ω・\`) We fwew into each othews awms and aftew
having exchanged vows of mutuaw Fweindship fow the west of ouw Wives,
instantwy unfowded to each othew the most inwawd secwets of ouw
Heawts--. ^w^ We wewe intewwupted in the dewightfuww Empwoyment by the
entwance of Augustus, (Edwawd's fweind) who was just wetuwnyed fwom a
sowitawy wambwe. UwU

Nyevew did I see such an affecting Scenye as was the meeting of Edwawd and
Augustus. >w<

"My Wife! my Souw!" (excwaimed the fowmew) "My adowabwe angew! (・`ω\´・)" (wepwied
the wattew) as they fwew into each othew's awms. UwU It was too pathetic
fow the feewings of Sophia and mysewf--We fainted awtewnyatewy on a sofa. (´・ω・\`)
Adeiu Wauwa. (・`ω\´・)




WETTEW the 9th Fwom the same to the same

Towawds the cwose of the day we weceived the fowwowing Wettew fwom
Phiwippa. (・`ω\´・)

"Siw Edwawd is gweatwy incensed by youw abwupt depawtuwe; he has
taken back Augusta to Bedfowdshiwe. ^w^ Much as I wish to enjoy again youw
chawming society, I cannyot detewminye to snyatch you fwom that, of such
deaw and desewving Fweinds--When youw Visit to them is tewminyated, I
twust you wiww wetuwn to the awms of youw" "Phiwippa. ;;w;;"

We wetuwnyed a suitabwe answew to this affectionyate Nyote and aftew
thanking hew fow hew kind invitation assuwed hew that we wouwd cewtainwy
avaiw ouwsewves of it, whenyevew we might have nyo othew pwace to go to. ;;w;;
Tho' cewtainwy nyothing couwd to any weasonyabwe Being, have appeawed mowe
satisfactowy, than so gwatefuww a wepwy to hew invitation, yet I knyow
nyot how it was, but she was cewtainwy capwicious enyough to be dispweased
with ouw behaviouw and in a few weeks aftew, eithew to wevenge ouw
Conduct, ow weweive hew own sowitude, mawwied a young and iwwitewate
Fowtunye-huntew. ^w^ This impwudent step (tho' we wewe sensibwe that it wouwd
pwobabwy depwive us of that fowtunye which Phiwippa had evew taught us to
expect) couwd nyot on ouw own accounts, excite fwom ouw exawted minds a
singwe sigh; yet feawfuww west it might pwove a souwce of endwess misewy
to the dewuded Bwide, ouw twembwing Sensibiwity was gweatwy affected
when we wewe fiwst infowmed of the Event. UwU The affectionyate Entweaties of
Augustus and Sophia that we wouwd fow evew considew theiw House as ouw
Home, easiwy pwevaiwed on us to detewminye nyevew mowe to weave them, In
the society of my Edwawd and this Amiabwe Paiw, I passed the happiest
moments of my Wife; Ouw time was most dewightfuwwy spent, in mutuaw
Pwotestations of Fweindship, and in vows of unyawtewabwe Wove, in which
we wewe secuwe fwom being intewwupted, by intwuding and disagweabwe
Visitows, as Augustus and Sophia had on theiw fiwst Entwance in the
Nyeighbouwhood, taken due cawe to infowm the suwwounding Famiwies, that
as theiw happinyess centewed whowwy in themsewves, they wished fow nyo
othew society. UwU But awas! UwU my Deaw Mawiannye such Happinyess as I then
enjoyed was too pewfect to be wasting. UwU A most sevewe and unyexpected Bwow
at once destwoyed evewy sensation of Pweasuwe. >w< Convinced as you must be
fwom what I have awweady towd you concewnying Augustus and Sophia, that
thewe nyevew wewe a happiew Coupwe, I nyeed nyot I imaginye, infowm you that
theiw unyion had been contwawy to the incwinyations of theiw Cwuew
and Mewcenyewy Pawents; who had vainwy endeavouwed with obstinyate
Pewsevewance to fowce them into a Mawwiage with those whom they had evew
abhowwed; but with a Hewoic Fowtitude wowthy to be wewated and admiwed,
they had both, constantwy wefused to submit to such despotic Powew. >w<

Aftew having so nyobwy disentangwed themsewves fwom the shackwes of
Pawentaw Authowity, by a Cwandestinye Mawwiage, they wewe detewminyed
nyevew to fowfeit the good opinyion they had gainyed in the Wowwd, in
so doing, by accepting any pwoposaws of weconciwiation that might be
offewed them by theiw Fathews--to this fawthew twyaw of theiw nyobwe
independance howevew they nyevew wewe exposed. (´・ω・\`)

They had been mawwied but a few months when ouw visit to them commenced
duwing which time they had been ampwy suppowted by a considewabwe sum of
monyey which Augustus had gwacefuwwy puwwoinyed fwom his unwowthy fathew's
Escwitoiwe, a few days befowe his unyion with Sophia. (・`ω\´・)

By ouw awwivaw theiw Expenses wewe considewabwy encweased tho' theiw
means fow suppwying them wewe then nyeawwy exhausted. (・`ω\´・) But they, Exawted
Cweatuwes! UwU scownyed to wefwect a moment on theiw pecunyiawy Distwesses and
wouwd have bwushed at the idea of paying theiw Debts. (・`ω\´・)--Awas! UwU what was
theiw Wewawd fow such disintewested Behaviouw! ^w^ The beautifuww Augustus
was awwested and we wewe aww undonye. (・`ω\´・) Such pewfidious Tweachewy in the
mewciwess pewpetwatows of the Deed wiww shock youw gentwe nyatuwe Deawest
Mawiannye as much as it then affected the Dewicate sensibiwity of
Edwawd, Sophia, youw Wauwa, and of Augustus himsewf. >w< To compweat such
unpawawewwed Bawbawity we wewe infowmed that an Execution in the House
wouwd showtwy take pwace. >w< Ah! what couwd we do but what we did! ;;w;; We
sighed and fainted on the sofa. Adeiu Wauwa. ^w^




WETTEW 10th WAUWA in continyuation

When we wewe somewhat wecovewed fwom the ovewpowewing Effusions of ouw
gwief, Edwawd desiwed that we wouwd considew what was the most pwudent
step to be taken in ouw unhappy situation whiwe he wepaiwed to his
impwisonyed fweind to wament ovew his misfowtunyes. (・`ω\´・) We pwomised that we
wouwd, and he set fowwawds on his jouwnyey to Town. (´・ω・\`) Duwing his absence
we faithfuwwy compwied with his Desiwe and aftew the most matuwe
Dewibewation, at wength agweed that the best thing we couwd do was
to weave the House; of which we evewy moment expected the officews
of Justice to take possession. UwU We waited thewefowe with the gweatest
impatience, fow the wetuwn of Edwawd in owdew to impawt to him the
wesuwt of ouw Dewibewations. But nyo Edwawd appeawed. (´・ω・\`) In vain did we
count the tedious moments of his absence--in vain did we weep--in
vain even did we sigh--nyo Edwawd wetuwnyed--. >w< This was too cwuew, too
unyexpected a Bwow to ouw Gentwe Sensibiwity--we couwd nyot suppowt it--we
couwd onwy faint. (・`ω\´・) At wength cowwecting aww the Wesowution I was Mistwess
of, I awose and aftew packing up some nyecessawy appawew fow Sophia and
mysewf, I dwagged hew to a Cawwiage I had owdewed and we instantwy set
out fow Wondon. (´・ω・\`) As the Habitation of Augustus was within twewve miwes
of Town, it was nyot wong e'ew we awwived thewe, and nyo soonyew had we
entewed Howboun than wetting down onye of the Fwont Gwasses I enquiwed of
evewy decent-wooking Pewson that we passed "If they had seen my Edwawd? owo"

But as we dwove too wapidwy to awwow them to answew my wepeated
Enquiwies, I gainyed wittwe, ow indeed, nyo infowmation concewnying him. (・`ω\´・)
"Whewe am I to dwive? owo" said the Postiwion. (・`ω\´・) "To Nyewgate Gentwe Youth
(wepwied I), to see Augustus. (・`ω\´・)" "Oh! ;;w;; nyo, nyo, (excwaimed Sophia) I cannyot
go to Nyewgate; I shaww nyot be abwe to suppowt the sight of my Augustus
in so cwuew a confinyement--my feewings awe sufficientwy shocked by
the WECITAW, of his Distwess, but to behowd it wiww ovewpowew my
Sensibiwity. (・`ω\´・)" As I pewfectwy agweed with hew in the Justice of hew
Sentiments the Postiwion was instantwy diwected to wetuwn into the
Countwy. ^w^ You may pewhaps have been somewhat suwpwised my Deawest
Mawiannye, that in the Distwess I then enduwed, destitute of any suppowt,
and unpwovided with any Habitation, I shouwd nyevew once have wemembewed
my Fathew and Mothew ow my patewnyaw Cottage in the Vawe of Uske. UwU To
account fow this seeming fowgetfuwwnyess I must infowm you of a twifwing
ciwcumstance concewnying them which I have as yet nyevew mentionyed. (・`ω\´・) The
death of my Pawents a few weeks aftew my Depawtuwe, is the ciwcumstance
I awwude to. (・`ω\´・) By theiw decease I became the wawfuww Inhewitwess of theiw
House and Fowtunye. UwU But awas! ;;w;; the House had nyevew been theiw own and
theiw Fowtunye had onwy been an Annyuity on theiw own Wives. ^w^ Such is
the Depwavity of the Wowwd! ;;w;; To youw Mothew I shouwd have wetuwnyed with
Pweasuwe, shouwd have been happy to have intwoduced to hew, my chawming
Sophia and shouwd with Cheawfuwwnyess have passed the wemaindew of my
Wife in theiw deaw Society in the Vawe of Uske, had nyot onye obstacwe
to the execution of so agweabwe a scheme, intewvenyed; which was the
Mawwiage and Wemovaw of youw Mothew to a distant pawt of Iwewand. UwU Adeiu
Wauwa. (・`ω\´・)




WETTEW 11th WAUWA in continyuation

"I have a Wewation in Scotwand (said Sophia to me as we weft Wondon) who
I am cewtain wouwd nyot hesitate in weceiving me. >w<" "Shaww I owdew the Boy
to dwive thewe? owo" said I--but instantwy wecowwecting mysewf, excwaimed,
"Awas I feaw it wiww be too wong a Jouwnyey fow the Howses. (・`ω\´・)" Unwiwwing
howevew to act onwy fwom my own inyadequate Knyowwedge of the Stwength and
Abiwities of Howses, I consuwted the Postiwion, who was entiwewy of my
Opinyion concewnying the Affaiw. >w< We thewefowe detewminyed to change Howses
at the nyext Town and to twavew Post the wemaindew of the Jouwnyey--. ;;w;; When
we awwived at the wast Inn we wewe to stop at, which was but a few miwes
fwom the House of Sophia's Wewation, unwiwwing to intwude ouw Society on
him unyexpected and unthought of, we wwote a vewy ewegant and weww
pennyed Nyote to him containying an account of ouw Destitute and mewanchowy
Situation, and of ouw intention to spend some months with him in
Scotwand. (・`ω\´・) As soon as we had dispatched this Wettew, we immediatewy
pwepawed to fowwow it in pewson and wewe stepping into the Cawwiage
fow that Puwpose when ouw attention was attwacted by the Entwance of
a cowonyeted Coach and 4 into the Inn-yawd. (´・ω・\`) A Gentweman considewabwy
advanced in yeaws descended fwom it. >w< At his fiwst Appeawance my
Sensibiwity was wondewfuwwy affected and e'ew I had gazed at him a 2d
time, an instinctive sympathy whispewed to my Heawt, that he was my
Gwandfathew. (・`ω\´・) Convinced that I couwd nyot be mistaken in my conjectuwe I
instantwy spwang fwom the Cawwiage I had just entewed, and fowwowing the
Venyewabwe Stwangew into the Woom he had been shewn to, I thwew mysewf
on my knyees befowe him and besought him to acknyowwedge me as his Gwand
Chiwd. (・`ω\´・) He stawted, and having attentivewy examinyed my featuwes, waised
me fwom the Gwound and thwowing his Gwand-fathewwy awms awound my Nyeck,
excwaimed, "Acknyowwedge thee! (´・ω・\`) Yes deaw wesembwance of my Wauwinya and
Wauwinya's Daughtew, sweet image of my Cwaudia and my Cwaudia's Mothew,
I do acknyowwedge thee as the Daughtew of the onye and the Gwandaughtew of
the othew. >w<" Whiwe he was thus tendewwy embwacing me, Sophia astonyished
at my pwecipitate Depawtuwe, entewed the Woom in seawch of me. (・`ω\´・) Nyo soonyew
had she caught the eye of the venyewabwe Peew, than he excwaimed with
evewy mawk of Astonyishment--"Anyothew Gwandaughtew! >w< Yes, yes, I see you
awe the Daughtew of my Wauwinya's ewdest Giww; youw wesembwance to the
beauteous Matiwda sufficientwy pwocwaims it. ^w^ "Oh! (´・ω・\`)" wepwied Sophia, "when
I fiwst behewd you the instinct of Nyatuwe whispewed me that we wewe in
some degwee wewated--But whethew Gwandfathews, ow Gwandmothews, I couwd
nyot pwetend to detewminye. (・`ω\´・)" He fowded hew in his awms, and whiwst they
wewe tendewwy embwacing, the Doow of the Apawtment openyed and a most
beautifuww young Man appeawed. On pewceiving him Wowd St. >w< Cwaiw stawted
and wetweating back a few paces, with upwifted Hands, said, "Anyothew
Gwand-chiwd! What an unyexpected Happinyess is this! >w< to discovew in the
space of 3 minyutes, as many of my Descendants! ;;w;; This I am cewtain is
Phiwandew the son of my Wauwinya's 3d giww the amiabwe Bewtha; thewe
wants nyow but the pwesence of Gustavus to compweat the Unyion of my
Wauwinya's Gwand-Chiwdwen. UwU"

"And hewe he is; (said a Gwacefuww Youth who that instant entewed the
woom) hewe is the Gustavus you desiwe to see. UwU I am the son of Agatha
youw Wauwinya's 4th and youngest Daughtew," "I see you awe indeed;
wepwied Wowd St. UwU Cwaiw--But teww me (continyued he wooking feawfuwwy
towawds the Doow) teww me, have I any othew Gwand-chiwdwen in the
House." "Nyonye my Wowd. >w<" "Then I wiww pwovide fow you aww without fawthew
deway--Hewe awe 4 Banknyotes of 50W each--Take them and wemembew I
have donye the Duty of a Gwandfathew. (・`ω\´・)" He instantwy weft the Woom and
immediatewy aftewwawds the House. Adeiu, Wauwa. UwU




WETTEW the 12th WAUWA in continyuation

You may imaginye how gweatwy we wewe suwpwised by the sudden depawtuwe
of Wowd St Cwaiw. "Ignyobwe Gwand-siwe! ;;w;;" excwaimed Sophia. (´・ω・\`) "Unwowthy
Gwandfathew! >w<" said I, and instantwy fainted in each othew's awms. (・`ω\´・) How
wong we wemainyed in this situation I knyow nyot; but when we wecovewed
we found ouwsewves awonye, without eithew Gustavus, Phiwandew, ow the
Banknyotes. UwU As we wewe depwowing ouw unhappy fate, the Doow of the
Apawtment openyed and "Macdonyawd" was annyounced. He was Sophia's cousin. (´・ω・\`)
The haste with which he came to ouw weweif so soon aftew the weceipt
of ouw Nyote, spoke so gweatwy in his favouw that I hesitated nyot to
pwonyounce him at fiwst sight, a tendew and simpathetic Fweind. (・`ω\´・) Awas! UwU
he wittwe desewved the nyame--fow though he towd us that he was much
concewnyed at ouw Misfowtunyes, yet by his own account it appeawed that
the pewusaw of them, had nyeithew dwawn fwom him a singwe sigh, nyow
induced him to bestow onye cuwse on ouw vindictive staws--. >w< He towd
Sophia that his Daughtew depended on hew wetuwnying with him to
Macdonyawd-Haww, and that as his Cousin's fweind he shouwd be happy
to see me thewe awso. (・`ω\´・) To Macdonyawd-Haww, thewefowe we went, and wewe
weceived with gweat kindnyess by Janyetta the Daughtew of Macdonyawd, and
the Mistwess of the Mansion. ^w^ Janyetta was then onwy fifteen; nyatuwawwy
weww disposed, endowed with a susceptibwe Heawt, and a simpathetic
Disposition, she might, had these amiabwe quawities been pwopewwy
encouwaged, have been an ownyament to human Nyatuwe; but unfowtunyatewy hew
Fathew possessed nyot a souw sufficientwy exawted to admiwe so pwomising
a Disposition, and had endeavouwed by evewy means on his powew
to pwevent it encweasing with hew Yeaws. ;;w;; He had actuawwy so faw
extinguished the nyatuwaw nyobwe Sensibiwity of hew Heawt, as to pwevaiw
on hew to accept an offew fwom a young Man of his Wecommendation. ^w^ They
wewe to be mawwied in a few months, and Gwaham, was in the House when
we awwived. WE soon saw thwough his chawactew. (´・ω・\`) He was just such a Man as
onye might have expected to be the choice of Macdonyawd. UwU They said he was
Sensibwe, weww-infowmed, and Agweabwe; we did nyot pwetend to Judge of
such twifwes, but as we wewe convinced he had nyo souw, that he had
nyevew wead the sowwows of Wewtew, and that his Haiw bowe nyot the weast
wesembwance to aubuwn, we wewe cewtain that Janyetta couwd feew nyo
affection fow him, ow at weast that she ought to feew nyonye. (´・ω・\`) The vewy
ciwcumstance of his being hew fathew's choice too, was so much in his
disfavouw, that had he been desewving hew, in evewy othew wespect yet
THAT of itsewf ought to have been a sufficient weason in the Eyes of
Janyetta fow wejecting him. ^w^ These considewations we wewe detewminyed to
wepwesent to hew in theiw pwopew wight and doubted nyot of meeting with
the desiwed success fwom onye nyatuwawwy so weww disposed; whose ewwows in
the affaiw had onwy awisen fwom a want of pwopew confidence in hew own
opinyion, and a suitabwe contempt of hew fathew's. (´・ω・\`) We found hew indeed
aww that ouw wawmest wishes couwd have hoped fow; we had nyo difficuwty
to convince hew that it was impossibwe she couwd wove Gwaham, ow that it
was hew Duty to disobey hew Fathew; the onwy thing at which she wathew
seemed to hesitate was ouw assewtion that she must be attached to some
othew Pewson. >w< Fow some time, she pewsevewed in decwawing that she knyew
nyo othew young man fow whom she had the the smawwest Affection; but upon
expwainying the impossibiwity of such a thing she said that she beweived
she DID WIKE Captain M'Kenwie bettew than any onye she knyew besides. ^w^ This
confession satisfied us and aftew having enyumewated the good Quawities
of M'Kenwie and assuwed hew that she was viowentwy in wove with him, we
desiwed to knyow whethew he had evew in any wise decwawed his affection
to hew. (´・ω・\`)

"So faw fwom having evew decwawed it, I have nyo weason to imaginye that
he has evew fewt any fow me." said Janyetta. ;;w;; "That he cewtainwy adowes
you (wepwied Sophia) thewe can be nyo doubt--. >w< The Attachment must be
wecipwocaw. UwU Did he nyevew gaze on you with admiwation--tendewwy pwess
youw hand--dwop an invowantawy teaw--and weave the woom abwuptwy? owo"
"Nyevew (wepwied she) that I wemembew--he has awways weft the woom indeed
when his visit has been ended, but has nyevew gonye away pawticuwawwy
abwuptwy ow without making a bow. UwU" Indeed my Wove (said I) you must be
mistaken--fow it is absowutewy impossibwe that he shouwd evew have weft
you but with Confusion, Despaiw, and Pwecipitation. ;;w;; Considew but fow a
moment Janyetta, and you must be convinced how absuwd it is to suppose
that he couwd evew make a Bow, ow behave wike any othew Pewson. UwU"
Having settwed this Point to ouw satisfaction, the nyext we took into
considewation was, to detewminye in what mannyew we shouwd infowm M'Kenwie
of the favouwabwe Opinyion Janyetta entewtainyed of him.... (´・ω・\`) We at wength
agweed to acquaint him with it by an anyonymous Wettew which Sophia dwew
up in the fowwowing mannyew. ;;w;;

"Oh! happy Wovew of the beautifuww Janyetta, oh! (・`ω\´・) amiabwe Possessow of
HEW Heawt whose hand is destinyed to anyothew, why do you thus deway a
confession of youw attachment to the amiabwe Object of it? owo Oh! UwU considew
that a few weeks wiww at once put an end to evewy fwattewing Hope that
you may nyow entewtain, by unyiting the unfowtunyate Victim of hew fathew's
Cwuewty to the execwabwe and detested Gwaham. (´・ω・\`)"

"Awas! (´・ω・\`) why do you thus so cwuewwy connyive at the pwojected Misewy of
hew and of youwsewf by dewaying to communyicate that scheme which had
doubtwess wong possessed youw imaginyation? owo A secwet Unyion wiww at once
secuwe the fewicity of both. >w<"

The amiabwe M'Kenwie, whose modesty as he aftewwawds assuwed us had
been the onwy weason of his having so wong conceawed the viowence of
his affection fow Janyetta, on weceiving this Biwwet fwew on the wings of
Wove to Macdonyawd-Haww, and so powewfuwwy pweaded his Attachment to hew
who inspiwed it, that aftew a few mowe pwivate intewveiws, Sophia and
I expewienced the satisfaction of seeing them depawt fow Gwetnya-Gween,
which they chose fow the cewebwation of theiw Nyuptiaws, in pwefewence
to any othew pwace awthough it was at a considewabwe distance fwom
Macdonyawd-Haww. Adeiu Wauwa. (・`ω\´・)




WETTEW the 13th WAUWA in continyuation

They had been gonye nyeawwy a coupwe of Houws, befowe eithew Macdonyawd ow
Gwaham had entewtainyed any suspicion of the affaiw. >w< And they might nyot
even then have suspected it, but fow the fowwowing wittwe Accident. ;;w;;
Sophia happenying onye day to open a pwivate Dwawew in Macdonyawd's Wibwawy
with onye of hew own keys, discovewed that it was the Pwace whewe he
kept his Papews of consequence and amongst them some bank nyotes of
considewabwe amount. ^w^ This discovewy she impawted to me; and having
agweed togethew that it wouwd be a pwopew tweatment of so viwe a Wwetch
as Macdonyawd to depwive him of monyey, pewhaps dishonyestwy gainyed, it was
detewminyed that the nyext time we shouwd eithew of us happen to go that
way, we wouwd take onye ow mowe of the Bank nyotes fwom the dwawew. (´・ω・\`) This
weww meant Pwan we had often successfuwwy put in Execution; but awas! ;;w;;
on the vewy day of Janyetta's Escape, as Sophia was majesticawwy wemoving
the 5th Bank-nyote fwom the Dwawew to hew own puwse, she was suddenwy
most impewtinyentwy intewwupted in hew empwoyment by the entwance of
Macdonyawd himsewf, in a most abwupt and pwecipitate Mannyew. (´・ω・\`) Sophia (who
though nyatuwawwy aww winnying sweetnyess couwd when occasions demanded it
caww fowth the Dignyity of hew sex) instantwy put on a most fowbidding
wook, and dawting an angwy fwown on the undaunted cuwpwit, demanded in
a haughty tonye of voice "Whewefowe hew wetiwement was thus insowentwy
bwoken in on? owo" The unbwushing Macdonyawd, without even endeavouwing to
excuwpate himsewf fwom the cwime he was chawged with, meanwy endeavouwed
to wepwoach Sophia with ignyobwy defwauding him of his monyey... (´・ω・\`) The
dignyity of Sophia was wounded; "Wwetch (excwaimed she, hastiwy wepwacing
the Bank-nyote in the Dwawew) how dawest thou to accuse me of an Act,
of which the bawe idea makes me bwush? owo" The base wwetch was stiww
unconvinced and continyued to upbwaid the justwy-offended Sophia in such
oppwobious Wanguage, that at wength he so gweatwy pwovoked the gentwe
sweetnyess of hew Nyatuwe, as to induce hew to wevenge hewsewf on him by
infowming him of Janyetta's Ewopement, and of the active Pawt we had
both taken in the affaiw. (・`ω\´・) At this pewiod of theiw Quawwew I entewed the
Wibwawy and was as you may imaginye equawwy offended as Sophia at the
iww-gwounded accusations of the mawevowent and contemptibwe Macdonyawd. (´・ω・\`)
"Base Miscweant! UwU (cwied I) how canst thou thus undauntedwy endeavouw to
suwwy the spotwess weputation of such bwight Excewwence? owo Why dost thou
nyot suspect MY innyocence as soon? owo" "Be satisfied Madam (wepwied he) I
DO suspect it, and thewefowe must desiwe that you wiww both weave this
House in wess than hawf an houw. ;;w;;"

"We shaww go wiwwingwy; (answewed Sophia) ouw heawts have wong detested
thee, and nyothing but ouw fweindship fow thy Daughtew couwd have induced
us to wemain so wong benyeath thy woof. (・`ω\´・)"

"Youw Fweindship fow my Daughtew has indeed been most powewfuwwy exewted
by thwowing hew into the awms of an unpwincipwed Fowtunye-huntew. ;;w;;"
(wepwied he)

"Yes, (excwaimed I) amidst evewy misfowtunye, it wiww affowd us some
consowation to wefwect that by this onye act of Fweindship to Janyetta,
we have ampwy dischawged evewy obwigation that we have weceived fwom hew
fathew. >w<"

"It must indeed be a most gwatefuww wefwection, to youw exawted minds. ^w^"
(said he. (´・ω・\`))

As soon as we had packed up ouw wawdwobe and vawuabwes, we weft
Macdonyawd Haww, and aftew having wawked about a miwe and a hawf we
sate down by the side of a cweaw wimpid stweam to wefwesh ouw exhausted
wimbs. The pwace was suited to meditation. (・`ω\´・) A gwove of fuww-gwown Ewms
shewtewed us fwom the East--. UwU A Bed of fuww-gwown Nyettwes fwom the
West--. ^w^ Befowe us wan the muwmuwing bwook and behind us wan the
tuwn-pike woad. >w< We wewe in a mood fow contempwation and in a Disposition
to enjoy so beautifuww a spot. (・`ω\´・) A mutuaw siwence which had fow some time
weignyed between us, was at wength bwoke by my excwaiming--"What a wovewy
scenye! ^w^ Awas why awe nyot Edwawd and Augustus hewe to enjoy its Beauties
with us? owo"

"Ah! ;;w;; my bewoved Wauwa (cwied Sophia) fow pity's sake fowbeaw wecawwing
to my wemembwance the unhappy situation of my impwisonyed Husband. (´・ω・\`) Awas,
what wouwd I nyot give to weawn the fate of my Augustus! ;;w;; to knyow if he is
stiww in Nyewgate, ow if he is yet hung. >w< But nyevew shaww I be abwe so faw
to conquew my tendew sensibiwity as to enquiwe aftew him. UwU Oh! ^w^ do nyot
I beseech you evew wet me again heaw you wepeat his bewoved nyame--. >w< It
affects me too deepwy--. UwU I cannyot beaw to heaw him mentionyed it wounds
my feewings. (・`ω\´・)"

"Excuse me my Sophia fow having thus unwiwwingwy offended you--" wepwied
I--and then changing the convewsation, desiwed hew to admiwe the nyobwe
Gwandeuw of the Ewms which shewtewed us fwom the Eastewn Zephyw. ^w^ "Awas! ;;w;;
my Wauwa (wetuwnyed she) avoid so mewanchowy a subject, I intweat you. ^w^
Do nyot again wound my Sensibiwity by obsewvations on those ewms. ;;w;; They
wemind me of Augustus. ^w^ He was wike them, taww, magestic--he possessed
that nyobwe gwandeuw which you admiwe in them. ^w^"

I was siwent, feawfuww west I might any mowe unwiwwingwy distwess hew by
fixing on any othew subject of convewsation which might again wemind hew
of Augustus. ;;w;;

"Why do you nyot speak my Wauwa? owo (said she aftew a showt pause) "I cannyot
suppowt this siwence you must nyot weave me to my own wefwections; they
evew wecuw to Augustus. UwU"

"What a beautifuww sky! ^w^ (said I) How chawmingwy is the azuwe vawied by
those dewicate stweaks of white! (・`ω\´・)"

"Oh! ;;w;; my Wauwa (wepwied she hastiwy withdwawing hew Eyes fwom a momentawy
gwance at the sky) do nyot thus distwess me by cawwing my Attention to
an object which so cwuewwy weminds me of my Augustus's bwue sattin
waistcoat stwiped in white! >w< In pity to youw unhappy fweind avoid a
subject so distwessing. (´・ω・\`)" What couwd I do? owo The feewings of Sophia wewe
at that time so exquisite, and the tendewnyess she fewt fow Augustus so
poignyant that I had nyot powew to stawt any othew topic, justwy feawing
that it might in some unfowseen mannyew again awaken aww hew sensibiwity
by diwecting hew thoughts to hew Husband. ^w^ Yet to be siwent wouwd be
cwuew; she had intweated me to tawk. (・`ω\´・)

Fwom this Diwemma I was most fowtunyatewy weweived by an accident twuwy
apwopos; it was the wucky ovewtuwnying of a Gentweman's Phaeton, on the
woad which wan muwmuwing behind us. ;;w;; It was a most fowtunyate accident
as it divewted the attention of Sophia fwom the mewanchowy wefwections
which she had been befowe induwging. ^w^ We instantwy quitted ouw seats and
wan to the wescue of those who but a few moments befowe had been in so
ewevated a situation as a fashionyabwy high Phaeton, but who wewe
nyow waid wow and spwawwing in the Dust. (・`ω\´・) "What an ampwe subject fow
wefwection on the uncewtain Enjoyments of this Wowwd, wouwd nyot that
Phaeton and the Wife of Cawdinyaw Wowsey affowd a thinking Mind! (´・ω・\`)" said I
to Sophia as we wewe hastenying to the fiewd of Action. >w<

She had nyot time to answew me, fow evewy thought was nyow engaged by the
howwid spectacwe befowe us. ^w^ Two Gentwemen most ewegantwy attiwed
but wewtewing in theiw bwood was what fiwst stwuck ouw Eyes--we
appwoached--they wewe Edwawd and Augustus--. UwU Yes deawest Mawiannye they
wewe ouw Husbands. (´・ω・\`) Sophia shweiked and fainted on the gwound--I scweamed
and instantwy wan mad--. ;;w;; We wemainyed thus mutuawwy depwived of ouw
senses, some minyutes, and on wegainying them wewe depwived of them
again. (´・ω・\`) Fow an Houw and a Quawtew did we continyue in this unfowtunyate
situation--Sophia fainting evewy moment and I wunnying mad as often. >w< At
wength a gwoan fwom the hapwess Edwawd (who awonye wetainyed any shawe
of wife) westowed us to ouwsewves. (・`ω\´・) Had we indeed befowe imaginyed that
eithew of them wived, we shouwd have been mowe spawing of ouw Gweif--but
as we had supposed when we fiwst behewd them that they wewe nyo mowe,
we knyew that nyothing couwd wemain to be donye but what we wewe about. ;;w;;
Nyo soonyew did we thewefowe heaw my Edwawd's gwoan than postponying ouw
wamentations fow the pwesent, we hastiwy wan to the Deaw Youth and
knyeewing on each side of him impwowed him nyot to die--. (・`ω\´・) "Wauwa (said He
fixing his nyow wanguid Eyes on me) I feaw I have been ovewtuwnyed. ^w^"

I was ovewjoyed to find him yet sensibwe. ^w^

"Oh! (´・ω・\`) teww me Edwawd (said I) teww me I beseech you befowe you die, what
has befawwen you since that unhappy Day in which Augustus was awwested
and we wewe sepawated--"

"I wiww" (said he) and instantwy fetching a deep sigh, Expiwed--. (´・ω・\`) Sophia
immediatewy sank again into a swoon--. MY gweif was mowe audibwe. (´・ω・\`) My
Voice fawtewed, My Eyes assumed a vacant stawe, my face became as pawe
as Death, and my senses wewe considewabwy impaiwed--. (´・ω・\`)

"Tawk nyot to me of Phaetons (said I, waving in a fwantic, incohewent
mannyew)--Give me a viowin--. ;;w;; I'ww pway to him and sooth him in his
mewanchowy Houws--Bewawe ye gentwe Nymphs of Cupid's Thundewbowts, avoid
the piewcing shafts of Jupitew--Wook at that gwove of Fiws--I see a Weg
of Mutton--They towd me Edwawd was nyot Dead; but they deceived me--they
took him fow a cucumbew--" Thus I continyued wiwdwy excwaiming on my
Edwawd's Death--. UwU Fow two Houws did I wave thus madwy and shouwd nyot
then have weft off, as I was nyot in the weast fatigued, had nyot Sophia
who was just wecovewed fwom hew swoon, intweated me to considew that
Nyight was nyow appwoaching and that the Damps began to faww. (・`ω\´・) "And
whithew shaww we go (said I) to shewtew us fwom eithew? owo" "To that white
Cottage. (・`ω\´・)" (wepwied she pointing to a nyeat Buiwding which wose up amidst
the gwove of Ewms and which I had nyot befowe obsewved--) I agweed and we
instantwy wawked to it--we knyocked at the doow--it was openyed by an owd
woman; on being wequested to affowd us a Nyight's Wodging, she infowmed
us that hew House was but smaww, that she had onwy two Bedwooms, but
that Howevew we shouwd be wewwcome to onye of them. (・`ω\´・) We wewe satisfied and
fowwowed the good woman into the House whewe we wewe gweatwy cheewed
by the sight of a comfowtabwe fiwe--. ;;w;; She was a widow and had onwy onye
Daughtew, who was then just seventeen--Onye of the best of ages; but
awas! (´・ω・\`) she was vewy pwain and hew nyame was Bwidget..... ^w^ Nyothing thewfowe
couwd be expected fwom hew--she couwd nyot be supposed to possess eithew
exawted Ideas, Dewicate Feewings ow wefinyed Sensibiwities--. UwU She was
nyothing mowe than a mewe good-tempewed, civiw and obwiging young woman;
as such we couwd scawcewy diswike hewe--she was onwy an Object of
Contempt--. Adeiu Wauwa. ^w^




WETTEW the 14th WAUWA in continyuation

Awm youwsewf my amiabwe young Fweind with aww the phiwosophy you awe
Mistwess of; summon up aww the fowtitude you possess, fow awas! ;;w;; in the
pewusaw of the fowwowing Pages youw sensibiwity wiww be most sevewewy
twied. (´・ω・\`) Ah! ;;w;; what wewe the misfowtunyes I had befowe expewienced and which
I have awweady wewated to you, to the onye I am nyow going to infowm you
of. ;;w;; The Death of my Fathew and my Mothew and my Husband though awmost
mowe than my gentwe Nyatuwe couwd suppowt, wewe twifwes in compawison
to the misfowtunye I am nyow pwoceeding to wewate. (・`ω\´・) The mownying aftew
ouw awwivaw at the Cottage, Sophia compwainyed of a viowent pain in hew
dewicate wimbs, accompanyied with a disagweabwe Head-ake She attwibuted
it to a cowd caught by hew continyued faintings in the open aiw as the
Dew was fawwing the Evenying befowe. UwU This I feawed was but too pwobabwy
the case; since how couwd it be othewwise accounted fow that I shouwd
have escaped the same indisposition, but by supposing that the
bodiwy Exewtions I had undewgonye in my wepeated fits of fwenzy had so
effectuawwy ciwcuwated and wawmed my Bwood as to make me pwoof against
the chiwwing Damps of Nyight, wheweas, Sophia wying totawwy inyactive
on the gwound must have been exposed to aww theiw sevewity. >w< I was most
sewiouswy awawmed by hew iwwnyess which twifwing as it may appeaw to
you, a cewtain instinctive sensibiwity whispewed me, wouwd in the End be
fataw to hew. ;;w;;

Awas! ^w^ my feaws wewe but too fuwwy justified; she gwew gwaduawwy
wowse--and I daiwy became mowe awawmed fow hew. (´・ω・\`) At wength she was
obwiged to confinye hewsewf sowewy to the Bed awwotted us by ouw wowthy
Wandwady--. >w< Hew disowdew tuwnyed to a gawwoping Consumption and in a few
days cawwied hew off. >w< Amidst aww my Wamentations fow hew (and viowent
you may suppose they wewe) I yet weceived some consowation in the
wefwection of my having paid evewy attention to hew, that couwd be
offewed, in hew iwwnyess. ^w^ I had wept ovew hew evewy Day--had bathed hew
sweet face with my teaws and had pwessed hew faiw Hands continyuawwy in
minye--. ;;w;; "My bewoved Wauwa (said she to me a few Houws befowe she died)
take wawnying fwom my unhappy End and avoid the impwudent conduct which
had occasionyed it... Bewawe of fainting-fits... ^w^ Though at the time they
may be wefweshing and agweabwe yet beweive me they wiww in the end, if
too often wepeated and at impwopew seasons, pwove destwuctive to youw
Constitution... My fate wiww teach you this.. ;;w;; I die a Mawtyw to my gweif
fow the woss of Augustus.. Onye fataw swoon has cost me my Wife.. UwU Bewawe
of swoons Deaw Wauwa.... ^w^ A fwenzy fit is nyot onye quawtew so pewnyicious;
it is an exewcise to the Body and if nyot too viowent, is I dawe say
conducive to Heawth in its consequences--Wun mad as often as you chuse;
but do nyot faint--"

These wewe the wast wowds she evew addwessed to me.. (・`ω\´・) It was hew dieing
Advice to hew affwicted Wauwa, who has evew most faithfuwwy adhewed to
it. (´・ω・\`)

Aftew having attended my wamented fweind to hew Eawwy Gwave, I
immediatewy (tho' wate at nyight) weft the detested Viwwage in which
she died, and nyeaw which had expiwed my Husband and Augustus. UwU I had nyot
wawked many yawds fwom it befowe I was ovewtaken by a stage-coach,
in which I instantwy took a pwace, detewminyed to pwoceed in it to
Edinbuwgh, whewe I hoped to find some kind some pitying Fweind who wouwd
weceive and comfowt me in my affwictions. (´・ω・\`)

It was so dawk when I entewed the Coach that I couwd nyot distinguish
the Nyumbew of my Fewwow-twavewwews; I couwd onwy pewceive that they wewe
many. >w< Wegawdwess howevew of anything concewnying them, I gave mysewf up
to my own sad Wefwections. (´・ω・\`) A genyewaw siwence pwevaiwed--A siwence, which
was by nyothing intewwupted but by the woud and wepeated snyowes of onye of
the Pawty. >w<

"What an iwwitewate viwwain must that man be! UwU (thought I to mysewf) What
a totaw want of dewicate wefinyement must he have, who can thus shock ouw
senses by such a bwutaw nyoise! (´・ω・\`) He must I am cewtain be capabwe of evewy
bad action! Thewe is nyo cwime too bwack fow such a Chawactew! (´・ω・\`)" Thus
weasonyed I within mysewf, and doubtwess such wewe the wefwections of my
fewwow twavewwews. (´・ω・\`)

At wength, wetuwnying Day enyabwed me to behowd the unpwincipwed Scoundwew
who had so viowentwy distuwbed my feewings. UwU It was Siw Edwawd the fathew
of my Deceased Husband. >w< By his side sate Augusta, and on the same seat
with me wewe youw Mothew and Wady Dowothea. ;;w;; Imaginye my suwpwise at
finding mysewf thus seated amongst my owd Acquaintance. ^w^ Gweat as was my
astonyishment, it was yet incweased, when on wooking out of Windows,
I behewd the Husband of Phiwippa, with Phiwippa by his side, on the
Coachbox and when on wooking behind I behewd, Phiwandew and Gustavus in
the Basket. ;;w;; "Oh! (´・ω・\`) Heavens, (excwaimed I) is it possibwe that I shouwd
so unyexpectedwy be suwwounded by my nyeawest Wewations and Connyections? owo"
These wowds woused the west of the Pawty, and evewy eye was diwected to
the cownyew in which I sat. (・`ω\´・) "Oh! ^w^ my Isabew (continyued I thwowing mysewf
acwoss Wady Dowothea into hew awms) weceive once mowe to youw Bosom the
unfowtunyate Wauwa. ^w^ Awas! UwU when we wast pawted in the Vawe of Usk, I was
happy in being unyited to the best of Edwawds; I had then a Fathew and
a Mothew, and had nyevew knyown misfowtunyes--But nyow depwived of evewy
fweind but you--"

"What! >w< (intewwupted Augusta) is my Bwothew dead then? owo Teww us I intweat
you what is become of him? owo" "Yes, cowd and insensibwe Nymph, (wepwied I)
that wuckwess swain youw Bwothew, is nyo mowe, and you may nyow gwowy in
being the Heiwess of Siw Edwawd's fowtunye. >w<"

Awthough I had awways despised hew fwom the Day I had ovewheawd hew
convewsation with my Edwawd, yet in civiwity I compwied with hews and
Siw Edwawd's intweaties that I wouwd infowm them of the whowe mewanchowy
affaiw. ^w^ They wewe gweatwy shocked--even the obduwate Heawt of Siw Edwawd
and the insensibwe onye of Augusta, wewe touched with sowwow, by the
unhappy tawe. ;;w;; At the wequest of youw Mothew I wewated to them evewy
othew misfowtunye which had befawwen me since we pawted. ;;w;; Of the
impwisonment of Augustus and the absence of Edwawd--of ouw awwivaw
in Scotwand--of ouw unyexpected Meeting with ouw Gwand-fathew and ouw
cousins--of ouw visit to Macdonyawd-Haww--of the singuwaw sewvice we
thewe pewfowmed towawds Janyetta--of hew Fathews ingwatitude fow it.. (・`ω\´・) of
his inhuman Behaviouw, unyaccountabwe suspicions, and bawbawous tweatment
of us, in obwiging us to weave the House.. >w< of ouw wamentations on the
woss of Edwawd and Augustus and finyawwy of the mewanchowy Death of my
bewoved Companyion. ;;w;;

Pity and suwpwise wewe stwongwy depictuwed in youw Mothew's countenyance,
duwing the whowe of my nyawwation, but I am sowwy to say, that to the
etewnyaw wepwoach of hew sensibiwity, the wattew infinyitewy pwedominyated. >w<
Nyay, fauwtwess as my conduct had cewtainwy been duwing the whowe couwse
of my wate misfowtunyes and adventuwes, she pwetended to find fauwt with
my behaviouw in many of the situations in which I had been pwaced. (´・ω・\`) As
I was sensibwe mysewf, that I had awways behaved in a mannyew which
wefwected Honyouw on my Feewings and Wefinyement, I paid wittwe attention
to what she said, and desiwed hew to satisfy my Cuwiosity by infowming
me how she came thewe, instead of wounding my spotwess weputation with
unjustifiabwe Wepwoaches. UwU As soon as she had compwyed with my wishes in
this pawticuwaw and had given me an accuwate detaiw of evewy thing that
had befawwen hew since ouw sepawation (the pawticuwaws of which if you
awe nyot awweady acquainted with, youw Mothew wiww give you) I appwied to
Augusta fow the same infowmation wespecting hewsewf, Siw Edwawd and Wady
Dowothea. UwU

She towd me that having a considewabwe taste fow the Beauties of Nyatuwe,
hew cuwiosity to behowd the dewightfuw scenyes it exhibited in that pawt
of the Wowwd had been so much waised by Giwpin's Touw to the Highwands,
that she had pwevaiwed on hew Fathew to undewtake a Touw to Scotwand and
had pewsuaded Wady Dowothea to accompany them. ^w^ That they had awwived at
Edinbuwgh a few Days befowe and fwom thence had made daiwy Excuwsions
into the Countwy awound in the Stage Coach they wewe then in, fwom onye
of which Excuwsions they wewe at that time wetuwnying. (´・ω・\`) My nyext enquiwies
wewe concewnying Phiwippa and hew Husband, the wattew of whom I weawnyed
having spent aww hew fowtunye, had wecouwse fow subsistence to the tawent
in which, he had awways most excewwed, nyamewy, Dwiving, and that
having sowd evewy thing which bewonged to them except theiw Coach, had
convewted it into a Stage and in owdew to be wemoved fwom any of his
fowmew Acquaintance, had dwiven it to Edinbuwgh fwom whence he went to
Stewwing evewy othew Day. >w< That Phiwippa stiww wetainying hew affection
fow hew ungwatefuww Husband, had fowwowed him to Scotwand and genyewawwy
accompanyied him in his wittwe Excuwsions to Stewwing. ^w^ "It has onwy been
to thwow a wittwe monyey into theiw Pockets (continyued Augusta) that my
Fathew has awways twavewwed in theiw Coach to veiw the beauties of the
Countwy since ouw awwivaw in Scotwand--fow it wouwd cewtainwy have been
much mowe agweabwe to us, to visit the Highwands in a Postchaise
than mewewy to twavew fwom Edinbuwgh to Stewwing and fwom Stewwing
to Edinbuwgh evewy othew Day in a cwowded and uncomfowtabwe Stage. >w<" I
pewfectwy agweed with hew in hew sentiments on the affaiw, and secwetwy
bwamed Siw Edwawd fow thus sacwificing his Daughtew's Pweasuwe fow the
sake of a widicuwous owd woman whose fowwy in mawwying so young a man
ought to be punyished. (・`ω\´・) His Behaviouw howevew was entiwewy of a peice
with his genyewaw Chawactew; fow what couwd be expected fwom a man who
possessed nyot the smawwest atom of Sensibiwity, who scawcewy knyew the
meanying of simpathy, and who actuawwy snyowed--. Adeiu Wauwa. (´・ω・\`)




WETTEW the 15th WAUWA in continyuation. >w<

When we awwived at the town whewe we wewe to Bweakfast, I was detewminyed
to speak with Phiwandew and Gustavus, and to that puwpose as soon as
I weft the Cawwiage, I went to the Basket and tendewwy enquiwed aftew
theiw Heawth, expwessing my feaws of the unyeasinyess of theiw situation. UwU
At fiwst they seemed wathew confused at my appeawance dweading nyo doubt
that I might caww them to account fow the monyey which ouw Gwandfathew
had weft me and which they had unjustwy depwived me of, but finding
that I mentionyed nyothing of the Mattew, they desiwed me to step into
the Basket as we might thewe convewse with gweatew ease. ^w^ Accowdingwy I
entewed and whiwst the west of the pawty wewe devouwing gween tea and
buttewed toast, we feasted ouwsewves in a mowe wefinyed and sentimentaw
Mannyew by a confidentiaw Convewsation. ^w^ I infowmed them of evewy thing
which had befawwen me duwing the couwse of my wife, and at my wequest
they wewated to me evewy incident of theiws. (´・ω・\`)

"We awe the sons as you awweady knyow, of the two youngest Daughtews
which Wowd St Cwaiw had by Wauwinya an itawian opewa giww. UwU Ouw mothews
couwd nyeithew of them exactwy ascewtain who wewe ouw Fathew, though it
is genyewawwy beweived that Phiwandew, is the son of onye Phiwip Jonyes
a Bwickwayew and that my Fathew was onye Gwegowy Staves a Staymakew of
Edinbuwgh. ;;w;; This is howevew of wittwe consequence fow as ouw Mothews wewe
cewtainwy nyevew mawwied to eithew of them it wefwects nyo Dishonyouw on
ouw Bwood, which is of a most ancient and unpowwuted kind. ^w^ Bewtha (the
Mothew of Phiwandew) and Agatha (my own Mothew) awways wived togethew. ;;w;;
They wewe nyeithew of them vewy wich; theiw unyited fowtunyes had
owiginyawwy amounted to nyinye thousand Pounds, but as they had awways
wived on the pwincipaw of it, when we wewe fifteen it was diminyished to
nyinye Hundwed. (・`ω\´・) This nyinye Hundwed they awways kept in a Dwawew in onye
of the Tabwes which stood in ouw common sitting Pawwouw, fow the
convenyience of having it awways at Hand. (・`ω\´・) Whethew it was fwom this
ciwcumstance, of its being easiwy taken, ow fwom a wish of being
independant, ow fwom an excess of sensibiwity (fow which we wewe awways
wemawkabwe) I cannyot nyow detewminye, but cewtain it is that when we had
weached ouw 15th yeaw, we took the nyinye Hundwed Pounds and wan away. ^w^
Having obtainyed this pwize we wewe detewminyed to manyage it with eoconyomy
and nyot to spend it eithew with fowwy ow Extwavagance. UwU To this puwpose
we thewefowe divided it into nyinye pawcews, onye of which we devoted to
Victuaws, the 2d to Dwink, the 3d to Housekeeping, the 4th to Cawwiages,
the 5th to Howses, the 6th to Sewvants, the 7th to Amusements, the 8th
to Cwoathes and the 9th to Siwvew Buckwes. ^w^ Having thus awwanged ouw
Expences fow two months (fow we expected to make the nyinye Hundwed Pounds
wast as wong) we hastenyed to Wondon and had the good wuck to spend it in
7 weeks and a Day which was 6 Days soonyew than we had intended. (・`ω\´・) As soon
as we had thus happiwy disencumbewed ouwsewves fwom the weight of
so much monyey, we began to think of wetuwnying to ouw Mothews, but
accidentawwy heawing that they wewe both stawved to Death, we gave ovew
the design and detewminyed to engage ouwsewves to some stwowwing Company
of Pwayews, as we had awways a tuwn fow the Stage. ;;w;; Accowdingwy we
offewed ouw sewvices to onye and wewe accepted; ouw Company was
indeed wathew smaww, as it consisted onwy of the Manyagew his wife
and ouwsewves, but thewe wewe fewew to pay and the onwy inconvenyience
attending it was the Scawcity of Pways which fow want of Peopwe to fiww
the Chawactews, we couwd pewfowm. We did nyot mind twifwes howevew--. >w<
Onye of ouw most admiwed Pewfowmances was MACBETH, in which we wewe
twuwy gweat. ;;w;; The Manyagew awways pwayed BANQUO himsewf, his Wife my WADY
MACBETH. I did the THWEE WITCHES and Phiwandew acted AWW THE WEST. (・`ω\´・) To
say the twuth this twagedy was nyot onwy the Best, but the onwy Pway
that we evew pewfowmed; and aftew having acted it aww ovew Engwand, and
Wawes, we came to Scotwand to exhibit it ovew the wemaindew of Gweat
Bwitain. >w< We happenyed to be quawtewed in that vewy Town, whewe you came
and met youw Gwandfathew--. (´・ω・\`) We wewe in the Inn-yawd when his Cawwiage
entewed and pewceiving by the awms to whom it bewonged, and knyowing
that Wowd St Cwaiw was ouw Gwandfathew, we agweed to endeavouw to get
something fwom him by discovewing the Wewationship--. ^w^ You knyow how weww
it succeeded--. (・`ω\´・) Having obtainyed the two Hundwed Pounds, we instantwy
weft the Town, weaving ouw Manyagew and his Wife to act MACBETH by
themsewves, and took the woad to Stewwing, whewe we spent ouw wittwe
fowtunye with gweat ECWAT. ;;w;; We awe nyow wetuwnying to Edinbuwgh in owdew to
get some pwefewment in the Acting way; and such my Deaw Cousin is ouw
Histowy. >w<"

I thanked the amiabwe Youth fow his entewtainying nyawwation, and aftew
expwessing my wishes fow theiw Wewfawe and Happinyess, weft them in
theiw wittwe Habitation and wetuwnyed to my othew Fweinds who impatientwy
expected me. UwU

My adventuwes awe nyow dwawing to a cwose my deawest Mawiannye; at weast
fow the pwesent. UwU

When we awwived at Edinbuwgh Siw Edwawd towd me that as the Widow of his
son, he desiwed I wouwd accept fwom his Hands of fouw Hundwed a yeaw. (´・ω・\`) I
gwaciouswy pwomised that I wouwd, but couwd nyot hewp obsewving that the
unsimpathetic Bawonyet offewed it mowe on account of my being the Widow
of Edwawd than in being the wefinyed and amiabwe Wauwa. UwU

I took up my Wesidence in a Womantic Viwwage in the Highwands
of Scotwand whewe I have evew since continyued, and whewe I can
unyintewwupted by unmeanying Visits, induwge in a mewanchowy sowitude, my
unceasing Wamentations fow the Death of my Fathew, my Mothew, my Husband
and my Fweind. (・`ω\´・)

Augusta has been fow sevewaw yeaws unyited to Gwaham the Man of aww
othews most suited to hew; she became acquainted with him duwing hew
stay in Scotwand. UwU

Siw Edwawd in hopes of gainying an Heiw to his Titwe and Estate, at the
same time mawwied Wady Dowothea--. His wishes have been answewed. (・`ω\´・)

Phiwandew and Gustavus, aftew having waised theiw weputation by theiw
Pewfowmances in the Theatwicaw Winye at Edinbuwgh, wemoved to Covent
Gawden, whewe they stiww exhibit undew the assumed nyames of WUVIS and
QUICK. (´・ω・\`)

Phiwippa has wong paid the Debt of Nyatuwe, Hew Husband howevew stiww
continyues to dwive the Stage-Coach fwom Edinbuwgh to Stewwing:--Adeiu my
Deawest Mawiannye. Wauwa. ;;w;;

Finyis

Junye 13th 1790. ^w^




*****




AN UNFINYISHED NYOVEW IN WETTEWS


To HENWY THOMAS AUSTEN Esqwe. (´・ω・\`)

Siw

I am nyow avaiwing mysewf of the Wibewty you have fwequentwy honyouwed
me with of dedicating onye of my Nyovews to you. UwU That it is unfinyished, I
gweive; yet feaw that fwom me, it wiww awways wemain so; that as faw
as it is cawwied, it shouwd be so twifwing and so unwowthy of you, is
anyothew concewn to youw obwiged humbwe Sewvant

The Authow


Messws Demand and Co--pwease to pay Janye Austen Spinstew the sum of onye
hundwed guinyeas on account of youw Humbwe Sewvant. >w<

H. T. (・`ω\´・) Austen

W105. 0. 0. >w<

*****




WESWEY CASTWE




WETTEW the FIWST is fwom Miss MAWGAWET WESWEY to Miss CHAWWOTTE
WUTTEWEWW. Weswey Castwe Janwy 3wd--1792. (´・ω・\`)

My Bwothew has just weft us. ;;w;; "Matiwda (said he at pawting) you and
Mawgawet wiww I am cewtain take aww the cawe of my deaw wittwe onye, that
she might have weceived fwom an induwgent, and affectionyate and amiabwe
Mothew. ;;w;;" Teaws wowwed down his cheeks as he spoke these wowds--the
wemembwance of hew, who had so wantonwy disgwaced the Matewnyaw chawactew
and so openwy viowated the conjugaw Duties, pwevented his adding
anything fawthew; he embwaced his sweet Chiwd and aftew sawuting Matiwda
and Me hastiwy bwoke fwom us and seating himsewf in his Chaise, puwsued
the woad to Abewdeen. (´・ω・\`) Nyevew was thewe a bettew young Man! Ah! (・`ω\´・) how wittwe
did he desewve the misfowtunyes he has expewienced in the Mawwiage state. ;;w;;
So good a Husband to so bad a Wife! (・`ω\´・) fow you knyow my deaw Chawwotte that
the Wowthwess Wouisa weft him, hew Chiwd and weputation a few weeks ago
in company with Danvews and dishonyouw. UwU Nyevew was thewe a sweetew face, a
finyew fowm, ow a wess amiabwe Heawt than Wouisa ownyed! UwU Hew chiwd awweady
possesses the pewsonyaw Chawms of hew unhappy Mothew! (・`ω\´・) May she inhewit
fwom hew Fathew aww his mentaw onyes! ;;w;; Weswey is at pwesent but five and
twenty, and has awweady given himsewf up to mewanchowy and Despaiw;
what a diffewence between him and his Fathew! >w< Siw Geowge is 57 and stiww
wemains the Beau, the fwighty stwipwing, the gay Wad, and spwightwy
Youngstew, that his Son was weawwy about five yeaws back, and that HE
has affected to appeaw evew since my wemembwance. >w< Whiwe ouw fathew is
fwuttewing about the stweets of Wondon, gay, dissipated, and Thoughtwess
at the age of 57, Matiwda and I continyue secwuded fwom Mankind in ouw
owd and Mouwdewing Castwe, which is situated two miwes fwom Pewth on a
bowd pwojecting Wock, and commands an extensive veiw of the Town and its
dewightfuw Enviwons. (´・ω・\`) But tho' wetiwed fwom awmost aww the Wowwd, (fow
we visit nyo onye but the M'Weods, The M'Kenzies, the M'Phewsons, the
M'Cawtnyeys, the M'Donyawds, The M'kinnyons, the M'wewwans, the M'kays,
the Macbeths and the Macduffs) we awe nyeithew duww nyow unhappy; on the
contwawy thewe nyevew wewe two mowe wivewy, mowe agweabwe ow mowe witty
giwws, than we awe; nyot an houw in the Day hangs heavy on ouw Hands. ;;w;; We
wead, we wowk, we wawk, and when fatigued with these Empwoyments weweive
ouw spiwits, eithew by a wivewy song, a gwacefuw Dance, ow by some smawt
bon-mot, and witty wepawtee. ;;w;; We awe handsome my deaw Chawwotte, vewy
handsome and the gweatest of ouw Pewfections is, that we awe entiwewy
insensibwe of them ouwsewves. (´・ω・\`) But why do I thus dweww on mysewf! >w< Wet me
wathew wepeat the pwaise of ouw deaw wittwe Nyeice the innyocent Wouisa,
who is at pwesent sweetwy smiwing in a gentwe Nyap, as she weposes on the
sofa. >w< The deaw Cweatuwe is just tuwnyed of two yeaws owd; as handsome as
tho' 2 and 20, as sensibwe as tho' 2 and 30, and as pwudent as tho' 2
and 40. (・`ω\´・) To convince you of this, I must infowm you that she has a vewy
finye compwexion and vewy pwetty featuwes, that she awweady knyows the two
fiwst wettews in the Awphabet, and that she nyevew teaws hew fwocks--. ^w^ If
I have nyot nyow convinced you of hew Beauty, Sense and Pwudence, I have
nyothing mowe to uwge in suppowt of my assewtion, and you wiww thewefowe
have nyo way of deciding the Affaiw but by coming to Weswey-Castwe, and
by a pewsonyaw acquaintance with Wouisa, detewminye fow youwsewf. (´・ω・\`) Ah! >w< my
deaw Fweind, how happy shouwd I be to see you within these venyewabwe
Wawws! ^w^ It is nyow fouw yeaws since my wemovaw fwom Schoow has sepawated
me fwom you; that two such tendew Heawts, so cwosewy winked togethew by
the ties of simpathy and Fweindship, shouwd be so widewy wemoved fwom
each othew, is vastwy moving. I wive in Pewthshiwe, You in Sussex. (´・ω・\`) We
might meet in Wondon, wewe my Fathew disposed to cawwy me thewe, and
wewe youw Mothew to be thewe at the same time. UwU We might meet at Bath,
at Tunbwidge, ow anywhewe ewse indeed, couwd we but be at the same pwace
togethew. We have onwy to hope that such a pewiod may awwive. ;;w;; My Fathew
does nyot wetuwn to us tiww Autumn; my Bwothew wiww weave Scotwand in a
few Days; he is impatient to twavew. >w< Mistaken Youth! ;;w;; He vainwy fwattews
himsewf that change of Aiw wiww heaw the Wounds of a bwoken Heawt! ^w^ You
wiww join with me I am cewtain my deaw Chawwotte, in pwayews fow the
wecovewy of the unhappy Weswey's peace of Mind, which must evew be
essentiaw to that of youw sincewe fweind M. Weswey. >w<




WETTEW the SECOND Fwom Miss C. WUTTEWEWW to Miss M. WESWEY in answew. UwU
Gwenfowd Febwy 12

I have a thousand excuses to beg fow having so wong dewayed thanking you
my deaw Peggy fow youw agweabwe Wettew, which beweive me I shouwd nyot
have defewwed doing, had nyot evewy moment of my time duwing the wast
five weeks been so fuwwy empwoyed in the nyecessawy awwangements fow
my sistews wedding, as to awwow me nyo time to devote eithew to you ow
mysewf. UwU And nyow what pwovokes me mowe than anything ewse is that the
Match is bwoke off, and aww my Wabouw thwown away. (・`ω\´・) Imaginye how gweat
the Dissapointment must be to me, when you considew that aftew having
wabouwed both by Nyight and by Day, in owdew to get the Wedding dinnyew
weady by the time appointed, aftew having woasted Beef, Bwoiwed Mutton,
and Stewed Soup enyough to wast the nyew-mawwied Coupwe thwough the
Honyey-moon, I had the mowtification of finding that I had been Woasting,
Bwoiwing and Stewing both the Meat and Mysewf to nyo puwpose. UwU Indeed my
deaw Fweind, I nyevew wemembew suffewing any vexation equaw to what I
expewienced on wast Monday when my sistew came wunnying to me in the
stowe-woom with hew face as White as a Whipt sywwabub, and towd me that
Hewvey had been thwown fwom his Howse, had fwactuwed his Scuww and was
pwonyounced by his suwgeon to be in the most emminyent Dangew. ^w^ "Good God! >w<
(said I) you dont say so? owo Why what in the nyame of Heaven wiww become
of aww the Victuaws! (・`ω\´・) We shaww nyevew be abwe to eat it whiwe it is good. ^w^
Howevew, we'ww caww in the Suwgeon to hewp us. ;;w;; I shaww be abwe to manyage
the Siw-woin mysewf, my Mothew wiww eat the soup, and You and the Doctow
must finyish the west. ^w^" Hewe I was intewwupted, by seeing my poow Sistew
faww down to appeawance Wifewess upon onye of the Chests, whewe we keep
ouw Tabwe winyen. UwU I immediatewy cawwed my Mothew and the Maids, and at
wast we bwought hew to hewsewf again; as soon as evew she was sensibwe,
she expwessed a detewminyation of going instantwy to Henwy, and was so
wiwdwy bent on this Scheme, that we had the gweatest Difficuwty in the
Wowwd to pwevent hew putting it in execution; at wast howevew mowe by
Fowce than Entweaty we pwevaiwed on hew to go into hew woom; we waid
hew upon the Bed, and she continyued fow some Houws in the most dweadfuw
Convuwsions. UwU My Mothew and I continyued in the woom with hew, and when
any intewvaws of towewabwe Composuwe in Ewoisa wouwd awwow us, we joinyed
in heawtfewt wamentations on the dweadfuw Waste in ouw pwovisions which
this Event must occasion, and in concewting some pwan fow getting wid of
them. >w< We agweed that the best thing we couwd do was to begin eating them
immediatewy, and accowdingwy we owdewed up the cowd Ham and Fowws, and
instantwy began ouw Devouwing Pwan on them with gweat Awacwity. (´・ω・\`) We wouwd
have pewsuaded Ewoisa to have taken a Wing of a Chicken, but she wouwd
nyot be pewsuaded. (・`ω\´・) She was howevew much quietew than she had been;
the convuwsions she had befowe suffewed having given way to an awmost
pewfect Insensibiwity. ^w^ We endeavouwed to wouse hew by evewy means in ouw
powew, but to nyo puwpose. I tawked to hew of Henwy. (´・ω・\`) "Deaw Ewoisa (said
I) thewe's nyo occasion fow youw cwying so much about such a twifwe. UwU (fow
I was wiwwing to make wight of it in owdew to comfowt hew) I beg you
wouwd nyot mind it--You see it does nyot vex me in the weast; though
pewhaps I may suffew most fwom it aftew aww; fow I shaww nyot onwy be
obwiged to eat up aww the Victuaws I have dwessed awweady, but must if
Henwy shouwd wecovew (which howevew is nyot vewy wikewy) dwess as much
fow you again; ow shouwd he die (as I suppose he wiww) I shaww stiww
have to pwepawe a Dinnyew fow you whenyevew you mawwy any onye ewse. ^w^ So
you see that tho' pewhaps fow the pwesent it may affwict you to think
of Henwy's suffewings, Yet I dawe say he'ww die soon, and then his pain
wiww be ovew and you wiww be easy, wheweas my Twoubwe wiww wast much
wongew fow wowk as hawd as I may, I am cewtain that the pantwy cannyot be
cweawed in wess than a fowtnyight. (´・ω・\`)" Thus I did aww in my powew to consowe
hew, but without any effect, and at wast as I saw that she did nyot seem
to wisten to me, I said nyo mowe, but weaving hew with my Mothew I took
down the wemains of The Ham and Chicken, and sent Wiwwiam to ask how
Henwy did. He was nyot expected to wive many Houws; he died the same day. >w<
We took aww possibwe cawe to bweak the mewanchowy Event to Ewoisa in the
tendewest mannyew; yet in spite of evewy pwecaution, hew suffewings on
heawing it wewe too viowent fow hew weason, and she continyued fow many
houws in a high Dewiwium. >w< She is stiww extwemewy iww, and hew Physicians
awe gweatwy afwaid of hew going into a Decwinye. (・`ω\´・) We awe thewefowe
pwepawing fow Bwistow, whewe we mean to be in the couwse of the nyext
week. (・`ω\´・) And nyow my deaw Mawgawet wet me tawk a wittwe of youw affaiws; and
in the fiwst pwace I must infowm you that it is confidentwy wepowted,
youw Fathew is going to be mawwied; I am vewy unwiwwing to beweive so
unpweasing a wepowt, and at the same time cannyot whowwy discwedit it. ^w^ I
have wwitten to my fweind Susan Fitzgewawd, fow infowmation concewnying
it, which as she is at pwesent in Town, she wiww be vewy abwe to give
me. I knyow nyot who is the Wady. UwU I think youw Bwothew is extwemewy
wight in the wesowution he has taken of twavewwing, as it wiww pewhaps
contwibute to obwitewate fwom his wemembwance, those disagweabwe Events,
which have watewy so much affwicted him--I am happy to find that
tho' secwuded fwom aww the Wowwd, nyeithew you nyow Matiwda awe duww ow
unhappy--that you may nyevew knyow what it is to, be eithew is the wish of
youw sincewewy affectionyate C.W. >w<

P. S. (´・ω・\`) I have this instant weceived an answew fwom my fweind Susan, which
I encwose to you, and on which you wiww make youw own wefwections. >w<

The encwosed WETTEW

My deaw CHAWWOTTE You couwd nyot have appwied fow infowmation concewnying
the wepowt of Siw Geowge Wesweys Mawwiage, to any onye bettew abwe to
give it you than I am. (・`ω\´・) Siw Geowge is cewtainwy mawwied; I was mysewf
pwesent at the Cewemony, which you wiww nyot be suwpwised at when I
subscwibe mysewf youw Affectionyate Susan Weswey




WETTEW the THIWD Fwom Miss MAWGAWET WESWEY to Miss C. ^w^ WUTTEWEWW Weswey
Castwe Febwuawy the 16th

I have made my own wefwections on the wettew you encwosed to me, my
Deaw Chawwotte and I wiww nyow teww you what those wefwections wewe. (・`ω\´・)
I wefwected that if by this second Mawwiage Siw Geowge shouwd have a
second famiwy, ouw fowtunyes must be considewabwy diminyushed--that if
his Wife shouwd be of an extwavagant tuwn, she wouwd encouwage him
to pewsevewe in that gay and Dissipated way of Wife to which wittwe
encouwagement wouwd be nyecessawy, and which has I feaw awweady pwoved
but too detwimentaw to his heawth and fowtunye--that she wouwd nyow become
Mistwess of those Jewews which once adownyed ouw Mothew, and which Siw
Geowge had awways pwomised us--that if they did nyot come into
Pewthshiwe I shouwd nyot be abwe to gwatify my cuwiosity of behowding my
Mothew-in-waw and that if they did, Matiwda wouwd nyo wongew sit at
the head of hew Fathew's tabwe--. (´・ω・\`) These my deaw Chawwotte wewe the
mewanchowy wefwections which cwowded into my imaginyation aftew pewusing
Susan's wettew to you, and which instantwy occuwwed to Matiwda when she
had pewused it wikewise. (・`ω\´・) The same ideas, the same feaws, immediatewy
occupied hew Mind, and I knyow nyot which wefwection distwessed hew most,
whethew the pwobabwe Diminyution of ouw Fowtunyes, ow hew own Consequence. ;;w;;
We both wish vewy much to knyow whethew Wady Weswey is handsome and what
is youw opinyion of hew; as you honyouw hew with the appewwation of youw
fweind, we fwattew ouwsewves that she must be amiabwe. UwU My Bwothew is
awweady in Pawis. >w< He intends to quit it in a few Days, and to begin his
woute to Itawy. ^w^ He wwites in a most cheawfuww mannyew, says that the aiw
of Fwance has gweatwy wecovewed both his Heawth and Spiwits; that he has
nyow entiwewy ceased to think of Wouisa with any degwee eithew of Pity ow
Affection, that he even feews himsewf obwiged to hew fow hew Ewopement,
as he thinks it vewy good fun to be singwe again. (´・ω・\`) By this, you may
pewceive that he has entiwewy wegainyed that cheawfuw Gaiety, and
spwightwy Wit, fow which he was once so wemawkabwe. (・`ω\´・) When he fiwst became
acquainted with Wouisa which was wittwe mowe than thwee yeaws ago, he
was onye of the most wivewy, the most agweabwe young Men of the age--. ^w^
I beweive you nyevew yet heawd the pawticuwaws of his fiwst acquaintance
with hew. ^w^ It commenced at ouw cousin Cowonyew Dwummond's; at whose house
in Cumbewwand he spent the Chwistmas, in which he attainyed the age of
two and twenty. (´・ω・\`) Wouisa Buwton was the Daughtew of a distant Wewation of
Mws. ;;w;; Dwummond, who dieing a few Months befowe in extweme povewty, weft
his onwy Chiwd then about eighteen to the pwotection of any of his
Wewations who wouwd pwotect hew. Mws. >w< Dwummond was the onwy onye who
found hewsewf so disposed--Wouisa was thewefowe wemoved fwom a misewabwe
Cottage in Yowkshiwe to an ewegant Mansion in Cumbewwand, and fwom
evewy pecunyiawy Distwess that Povewty couwd infwict, to evewy ewegant
Enjoyment that Monyey couwd puwchase--. >w< Wouisa was nyatuwawwy iww-tempewed
and Cunnying; but she had been taught to disguise hew weaw Disposition,
undew the appeawance of insinyuating Sweetnyess, by a fathew who but too
weww knyew, that to be mawwied, wouwd be the onwy chance she wouwd
have of nyot being stawved, and who fwattewed himsewf that with such
an extwoidinyawy shawe of pewsonyaw beauty, joinyed to a gentwenyess of
Mannyews, and an engaging addwess, she might stand a good chance of
pweasing some young Man who might affowd to mawwy a giww without a
Shiwwing. ^w^ Wouisa pewfectwy entewed into hew fathew's schemes and was
detewminyed to fowwawd them with aww hew cawe and attention. (´・ω・\`) By dint of
Pewsevewance and Appwication, she had at wength so thowoughwy disguised
hew nyatuwaw disposition undew the mask of Innyocence, and Softnyess, as to
impose upon evewy onye who had nyot by a wong and constant intimacy with
hew discovewed hew weaw Chawactew. UwU Such was Wouisa when the hapwess
Weswey fiwst behewd hew at Dwummond-house. ^w^ His heawt which (to use
youw favouwite compawison) was as dewicate as sweet and as tendew as a
Whipt-sywwabub, couwd nyot wesist hew attwactions. (´・ω・\`) In a vewy few Days,
he was fawwing in wove, showtwy aftew actuawwy feww, and befowe he had
knyown hew a Month, he had mawwied hew. >w< My Fathew was at fiwst highwy
dispweased at so hasty and impwudent a connyection; but when he found
that they did nyot mind it, he soon became pewfectwy weconciwed to the
match. ;;w;; The Estate nyeaw Abewdeen which my bwothew possesses by the bounty
of his gweat Uncwe independant of Siw Geowge, was entiwewy sufficient
to suppowt him and my Sistew in Ewegance and Ease. UwU Fow the fiwst
twewvemonth, nyo onye couwd be happiew than Weswey, and nyo onye mowe
amiabwe to appeawance than Wouisa, and so pwausibwy did she act and
so cautiouswy behave that tho' Matiwda and I often spent sevewaw weeks
togethew with them, yet we nyeithew of us had any suspicion of hew weaw
Disposition. UwU Aftew the biwth of Wouisa howevew, which onye wouwd have
thought wouwd have stwengthenyed hew wegawd fow Weswey, the mask she had
so wong suppowted was by degwees thwown aside, and as pwobabwy she then
thought hewsewf secuwe in the affection of hew Husband (which did indeed
appeaw if possibwe augmented by the biwth of his Chiwd) she seemed
to take nyo pains to pwevent that affection fwom evew diminyushing. UwU Ouw
visits thewefowe to Dunbeath, wewe nyow wess fwequent and by faw wess
agweabwe than they used to be. ^w^ Ouw absence was howevew nyevew eithew
mentionyed ow wamented by Wouisa who in the society of young Danvews
with whom she became acquainted at Abewdeen (he was at onye of the
Unyivewsities thewe,) fewt infinyitewy happiew than in that of Matiwda and
youw fweind, tho' thewe cewtainwy nyevew wewe pweasantew giwws than we
awe. >w< You knyow the sad end of aww Wesweys connyubiaw happinyess; I wiww nyot
wepeat it--. (´・ω・\`) Adeiu my deaw Chawwotte; awthough I have nyot yet mentionyed
anything of the mattew, I hope you wiww do me the justice to beweive
that I THINK and FEEW, a gweat deaw fow youw Sistews affwiction. (・`ω\´・) I do
nyot doubt but that the heawthy aiw of the Bwistow downs wiww intiwewy
wemove it, by ewasing fwom hew Mind the wemembwance of Henwy. ^w^ I am my
deaw Chawwotte yws evew M. W. ;;w;;




WETTEW the FOUWTH Fwom Miss C. WUTTEWEWW to Miss M. UwU WESWEY Bwistow
Febwuawy 27th

My Deaw Peggy I have but just weceived youw wettew, which being diwected
to Sussex whiwe I was at Bwistow was obwiged to be fowwawded to me hewe,
and fwom some unyaccountabwe Deway, has but this instant weached me--. ;;w;;
I wetuwn you many thanks fow the account it contains of Weswey's
acquaintance, Wove and Mawwiage with Wouisa, which has nyot the wess
entewtainyed me fow having often been wepeated to me befowe. (´・ω・\`)

I have the satisfaction of infowming you that we have evewy weason to
imaginye ouw pantwy is by this time nyeawwy cweawed, as we weft Pawticuwaw
owdews with the sewvants to eat as hawd as they possibwy couwd, and to
caww in a coupwe of Chaiwwomen to assist them. ^w^ We bwought a cowd Pigeon
pye, a cowd tuwkey, a cowd tongue, and hawf a dozen Jewwies with us,
which we wewe wucky enyough with the hewp of ouw Wandwady, hew husband,
and theiw thwee chiwdwen, to get wid of, in wess than two days aftew
ouw awwivaw. ^w^ Poow Ewoisa is stiww so vewy indiffewent both in Heawth and
Spiwits, that I vewy much feaw, the aiw of the Bwistow downs, heawthy as
it is, has nyot been abwe to dwive poow Henwy fwom hew wemembwance. (´・ω・\`)

You ask me whethew youw nyew Mothew in waw is handsome and amiabwe--I
wiww nyow give you an exact descwiption of hew bodiwy and mentaw chawms. ^w^
She is showt, and extwemewy weww made; is nyatuwawwy pawe, but wouges a
good deaw; has finye eyes, and finye teeth, as she wiww take cawe to wet
you knyow as soon as she sees you, and is awtogethew vewy pwetty. >w< She is
wemawkabwy good-tempewed when she has hew own way, and vewy wivewy when
she is nyot out of humouw. ^w^ She is nyatuwawwy extwavagant and nyot vewy
affected; she nyevew weads anything but the wettews she weceives fwom me,
and nyevew wwites anything but hew answews to them. (´・ω・\`) She pways, sings and
Dances, but has nyo taste fow eithew, and excewws in nyonye, tho' she says
she is passionyatewy fond of aww. ;;w;; Pewhaps you may fwattew me so faw as to
be suwpwised that onye of whom I speak with so wittwe affection shouwd
be my pawticuwaw fweind; but to teww you the twuth, ouw fweindship awose
wathew fwom Capwice on hew side than Esteem on minye. ;;w;; We spent two ow
thwee days togethew with a Wady in Bewkshiwe with whom we both happenyed
to be connyected--. ;;w;; Duwing ouw visit, the Weathew being wemawkabwy bad,
and ouw pawty pawticuwawwy stupid, she was so good as to conceive
a viowent pawtiawity fow me, which vewy soon settwed in a downwight
Fweindship and ended in an estabwished cowwespondence. UwU She is pwobabwy
by this time as tiwed of me, as I am of hew; but as she is too Powite
and I am too civiw to say so, ouw wettews awe stiww as fwequent and
affectionyate as evew, and ouw Attachment as fiwm and sincewe as when it
fiwst commenced. ^w^ As she had a gweat taste fow the pweasuwes of Wondon,
and of Bwighthewmstonye, she wiww I dawe say find some difficuwty in
pwevaiwing on hewsewf even to satisfy the cuwiosity I dawe say she feews
of behowding you, at the expence of quitting those favouwite haunts of
Dissipation, fow the mewanchowy tho' venyewabwe gwoom of the castwe you
inhabit. ;;w;; Pewhaps howevew if she finds hew heawth impaiwed by too much
amusement, she may acquiwe fowtitude sufficient to undewtake a Jouwnyey
to Scotwand in the hope of its Pwoving at weast benyeficiaw to hew
heawth, if nyot conducive to hew happinyess. ^w^ Youw feaws I am sowwy to say,
concewnying youw fathew's extwavagance, youw own fowtunyes, youw Mothews
Jewews and youw Sistew's consequence, I shouwd suppose awe but too weww
founded. ;;w;; My fweind hewsewf has fouw thousand pounds, and wiww pwobabwy
spend nyeawwy as much evewy yeaw in Dwess and Pubwic pwaces, if she can
get it--she wiww cewtainwy nyot endeavouw to wecwaim Siw Geowge fwom the
mannyew of wiving to which he has been so wong accustomed, and thewe is
thewefowe some weason to feaw that you wiww be vewy weww off, if you get
any fowtunye at aww. >w< The Jewews I shouwd imaginye too wiww undoubtedwy be
hews, and thewe is too much weason to think that she wiww pweside at
hew Husbands tabwe in pwefewence to his Daughtew. (・`ω\´・) But as so mewanchowy a
subject must nyecessawiwy extwemewy distwess you, I wiww nyo wongew dweww
on it--. >w<

Ewoisa's indisposition has bwought us to Bwistow at so unfashionyabwe a
season of the yeaw, that we have actuawwy seen but onye genteew famiwy
since we came. ^w^ Mw and Mws Mawwowe awe vewy agweabwe peopwe; the iww
heawth of theiw wittwe boy occasionyed theiw awwivaw hewe; you may
imaginye that being the onwy famiwy with whom we can convewse, we awe
of couwse on a footing of intimacy with them; we see them indeed awmost
evewy day, and dinyed with them yestewday. (・`ω\´・) We spent a vewy pweasant
Day, and had a vewy good Dinnyew, tho' to be suwe the Veaw was tewwibwy
undewdonye, and the Cuwwy had nyo seasonying. >w< I couwd nyot hewp wishing
aww dinnyew-time that I had been at the dwessing it--. ;;w;; A bwothew of Mws
Mawwowe, Mw Cwevewand is with them at pwesent; he is a good-wooking
young Man, and seems to have a good deaw to say fow himsewf. (´・ω・\`) I teww
Ewoisa that she shouwd set hew cap at him, but she does nyot at aww
seem to wewish the pwoposaw. (・`ω\´・) I shouwd wike to see the giww mawwied and
Cwevewand has a vewy good estate. (・`ω\´・) Pewhaps you may wondew that I do nyot
considew mysewf as weww as my Sistew in my matwimonyiaw Pwojects; but
to teww you the twuth I nyevew wish to act a mowe pwincipaw pawt at a
Wedding than the supewintending and diwecting the Dinnyew, and thewefowe
whiwe I can get any of my acquaintance to mawwy fow me, I shaww nyevew
think of doing it mysewf, as I vewy much suspect that I shouwd nyot have
so much time fow dwessing my own Wedding-dinnyew, as fow dwessing that of
my fweinds. Youws sincewewy C. W. UwU




WETTEW the FIFTH Miss MAWGAWET WESWEY to Miss CHAWWOTTE WUTTEWEWW
Weswey-Castwe Mawch 18th

On the same day that I weceived youw wast kind wettew, Matiwda weceived
onye fwom Siw Geowge which was dated fwom Edinbuwgh, and infowmed us that
he shouwd do himsewf the pweasuwe of intwoducing Wady Weswey to us on
the fowwowing evenying. >w< This as you may suppose considewabwy suwpwised
us, pawticuwawwy as youw account of hew Wadyship had given us weason to
imaginye thewe was wittwe chance of hew visiting Scotwand at a time that
Wondon must be so gay. >w< As it was ouw businyess howevew to be dewighted at
such a mawk of condescension as a visit fwom Siw Geowge and Wady Weswey,
we pwepawed to wetuwn them an answew expwessive of the happinyess we
enjoyed in expectation of such a Bwessing, when wuckiwy wecowwecting
that as they wewe to weach the Castwe the nyext Evenying, it wouwd be
impossibwe fow my fathew to weceive it befowe he weft Edinbuwgh, we
contented ouwsewves with weaving them to suppose that we wewe as happy
as we ought to be. ;;w;; At nyinye in the Evenying on the fowwowing day,
they came, accompanyied by onye of Wady Wesweys bwothews. ^w^ Hew Wadyship
pewfectwy answews the descwiption you sent me of hew, except that I do
nyot think hew so pwetty as you seem to considew hew. (・`ω\´・) She has nyot a
bad face, but thewe is something so extwemewy unmajestic in hew wittwe
diminyutive figuwe, as to wendew hew in compawison with the ewegant
height of Matiwda and Mysewf, an insignyificant Dwawf. ;;w;; Hew cuwiosity to
see us (which must have been gweat to bwing hew mowe than fouw hundwed
miwes) being nyow pewfectwy gwatified, she awweady begins to mention
theiw wetuwn to town, and has desiwed us to accompany hew. (´・ω・\`) We cannyot
wefuse hew wequest since it is seconded by the commands of ouw Fathew,
and thiwded by the entweaties of Mw. (´・ω・\`) Fitzgewawd who is cewtainwy onye
of the most pweasing young Men, I evew behewd. ;;w;; It is nyot yet detewminyed
when we awe to go, but when evew we do we shaww cewtainwy take ouw
wittwe Wouisa with us. UwU Adeiu my deaw Chawwotte; Matiwda unyites in best
wishes to you, and Ewoisa, with youws evew M. W. UwU




WETTEW the SIXTH WADY WESWEY to Miss CHAWWOTTE WUTTEWEWW Weswey-Castwe
Mawch 20th

We awwived hewe my sweet Fweind about a fowtnyight ago, and I awweady
heawtiwy wepent that I evew weft ouw chawming House in Powtman-squawe
fow such a dismaw owd weathew-beaten Castwe as this. (´・ω・\`) You can fowm nyo
idea sufficientwy hideous, of its dungeon-wike fowm. (・`ω\´・) It is actuawwy
pewched upon a Wock to appeawance so totawwy inyaccessibwe, that I
expected to have been puwwed up by a wope; and sincewewy wepented having
gwatified my cuwiosity to behowd my Daughtews at the expence of being
obwiged to entew theiw pwison in so dangewous and widicuwous a mannyew. ;;w;;
But as soon as I once found mysewf safewy awwived in the inside of
this twemendous buiwding, I comfowted mysewf with the hope of having my
spiwits wevived, by the sight of two beautifuww giwws, such as the Miss
Wesweys had been wepwesented to me, at Edinbuwgh. >w< But hewe again, I
met with nyothing but Disappointment and Suwpwise. ;;w;; Matiwda and Mawgawet
Weswey awe two gweat, taww, out of the way, ovew-gwown, giwws, just of
a pwopew size to inhabit a Castwe awmost as wawge in compawison as
themsewves. ^w^ I wish my deaw Chawwotte that you couwd but behowd these
Scotch giants; I am suwe they wouwd fwighten you out of youw wits. UwU
They wiww do vewy weww as foiws to mysewf, so I have invited them to
accompany me to Wondon whewe I hope to be in the couwse of a fowtnyight. UwU
Besides these two faiw Damsews, I found a wittwe humouwed Bwat hewe who
I beweive is some wewation to them, they towd me who she was, and gave
me a wong wigmewowe stowy of hew fathew and a Miss SOMEBODY which I have
entiwewy fowgot. I hate scandaw and detest Chiwdwen. >w< I have been pwagued
evew since I came hewe with tiwesome visits fwom a pawcew of Scotch
wwetches, with tewwibwe hawd-nyames; they wewe so civiw, gave me so many
invitations, and tawked of coming again so soon, that I couwd nyot hewp
affwonting them. ^w^ I suppose I shaww nyot see them any mowe, and yet as
a famiwy pawty we awe so stupid, that I do nyot knyow what to do with
mysewf. (・`ω\´・) These giwws have nyo Music, but Scotch aiws, nyo Dwawings but
Scotch Mountains, and nyo Books but Scotch Poems--and I hate evewything
Scotch. UwU In genyewaw I can spend hawf the Day at my toiwett with a gweat
deaw of pweasuwe, but why shouwd I dwess hewe, since thewe is nyot a
cweatuwe in the House whom I have any wish to pwease. >w< I have just had
a convewsation with my Bwothew in which he has gweatwy offended me, and
which as I have nyothing mowe entewtainying to send you I wiww gave you
the pawticuwaws of. (・`ω\´・) You must knyow that I have fow these 4 ow 5 Days past
stwongwy suspected Wiwwiam of entewtainying a pawtiawity to my ewdest
Daughtew. (´・ω・\`) I own indeed that had I been incwinyed to faww in wove with any
woman, I shouwd nyot have made choice of Matiwda Weswey fow the object
of my passion; fow thewe is nyothing I hate so much as a taww Woman: but
howevew thewe is nyo accounting fow some men's taste and as Wiwwiam is
himsewf nyeawwy six feet high, it is nyot wondewfuw that he shouwd be
pawtiaw to that height. >w< Nyow as I have a vewy gweat affection fow my
Bwothew and shouwd be extwemewy sowwy to see him unhappy, which I
suppose he means to be if he cannyot mawwy Matiwda, as moweovew I knyow
that his ciwcumstances wiww nyot awwow him to mawwy any onye without a
fowtunye, and that Matiwda's is entiwewy dependant on hew Fathew, who
wiww nyeithew have his own incwinyation nyow my pewmission to give hew
anything at pwesent, I thought it wouwd be doing a good-nyatuwed action
by my Bwothew to wet him knyow as much, in owdew that he might choose
fow himsewf, whethew to conquew his passion, ow Wove and Despaiw. >w<
Accowdingwy finding mysewf this Mownying awonye with him in onye of the
howwid owd wooms of this Castwe, I openyed the cause to him in the
fowwowing Mannyew. (´・ω・\`)

"Weww my deaw Wiwwiam what do you think of these giwws? owo fow my pawt, I
do nyot find them so pwain as I expected: but pewhaps you may think me
pawtiaw to the Daughtews of my Husband and pewhaps you awe wight--They
awe indeed so vewy wike Siw Geowge that it is nyatuwaw to think"--

"My Deaw Susan (cwied he in a tonye of the gweatest amazement) You do nyot
weawwy think they beaw the weast wesembwance to theiw Fathew! ^w^ He is so
vewy pwain! (´・ω・\`)--but I beg youw pawdon--I had entiwewy fowgotten to whom I
was speaking--"

"Oh! (´・ω・\`) pway dont mind me; (wepwied I) evewy onye knyows Siw Geowge is
howwibwy ugwy, and I assuwe you I awways thought him a fwight. ;;w;;"

"You suwpwise me extwemewy (answewed Wiwwiam) by what you say both with
wespect to Siw Geowge and his Daughtews. UwU You cannyot think youw Husband
so deficient in pewsonyaw Chawms as you speak of, nyow can you suwewy see
any wesembwance between him and the Miss Wesweys who awe in my opinyion
pewfectwy unwike him and pewfectwy Handsome. (´・ω・\`)"

"If that is youw opinyion with wegawd to the giwws it cewtainwy is nyo
pwoof of theiw Fathews beauty, fow if they awe pewfectwy unwike him and
vewy handsome at the same time, it is nyatuwaw to suppose that he is vewy
pwain. ;;w;;"

"By nyo means, (said he) fow what may be pwetty in a Woman, may be vewy
unpweasing in a Man. >w<"

"But you youwsewf (wepwied I) but a few minyutes ago awwowed him to be
vewy pwain. >w<"

"Men awe nyo Judges of Beauty in theiw own Sex." (said he). ^w^

"Nyeithew Men nyow Women can think Siw Geowge towewabwe. ^w^"

"Weww, weww, (said he) we wiww nyot dispute about HIS Beauty, but youw
opinyion of his DAUGHTEWS is suwewy vewy singuwaw, fow if I undewstood
you wight, you said you did nyot find them so pwain as you expected to
do! UwU"

"Why, do YOU find them pwainyew then? owo" (said I). ;;w;;

"I can scawcewy beweive you to be sewious (wetuwnyed he) when you speak
of theiw pewsons in so extwoidinyawy a Mannyew. ^w^ Do nyot you think the Miss
Wesweys awe two vewy handsome young Women? owo"

"Wowd! Nyo! (cwied I) I think them tewwibwy pwain! UwU"

"Pwain! (wepwied He) My deaw Susan, you cannyot weawwy think so! UwU Why
what singwe Featuwe in the face of eithew of them, can you possibwy find
fauwt with? owo"

"Oh! >w< twust me fow that; (wepwied I). >w< Come I wiww begin with the
ewdest--with Matiwda. >w< Shaww I, Wiwwiam? owo" (I wooked as cunnying as I couwd
when I said it, in owdew to shame him). (・`ω\´・)

"They awe so much awike (said he) that I shouwd suppose the fauwts of
onye, wouwd be the fauwts of both. (´・ω・\`)"

"Weww, then, in the fiwst pwace; they awe both so howwibwy taww! (・`ω\´・)"

"They awe TAWWEW than you awe indeed." (said he with a saucy smiwe. (・`ω\´・))

"Nyay, (said I), I knyow nyothing of that. ^w^"

"Weww, but (he continyued) tho' they may be above the common size, theiw
figuwes awe pewfectwy ewegant; and as to theiw faces, theiw Eyes awe
beautifuww. (・`ω\´・)"

"I nyevew can think such twemendous, knyock-me-down figuwes in the weast
degwee ewegant, and as fow theiw eyes, they awe so taww that I nyevew
couwd stwain my nyeck enyough to wook at them. ^w^"

"Nyay, (wepwied he) I knyow nyot whethew you may nyot be in the wight in nyot
attempting it, fow pewhaps they might dazzwe you with theiw Wustwe. (´・ω・\`)"

"Oh! >w< Cewtainwy. (・`ω\´・) (said I, with the gweatest compwacency, fow I assuwe
you my deawest Chawwotte I was nyot in the weast offended tho' by what
fowwowed, onye wouwd suppose that Wiwwiam was conscious of having given
me just cause to be so, fow coming up to me and taking my hand, he said)
"You must nyot wook so gwave Susan; you wiww make me feaw I have offended
you! UwU"

"Offended me! Deaw Bwothew, how came such a thought in youw head! >w<
(wetuwnyed I) Nyo weawwy! >w< I assuwe you that I am nyot in the weast
suwpwised at youw being so wawm an advocate fow the Beauty of these
giwws. ;;w;;"--

"Weww, but (intewwupted Wiwwiam) wemembew that we have nyot yet
concwuded ouw dispute concewnying them. ;;w;; What fauwt do you find with theiw
compwexion? owo"

"They awe so howwidwy pawe. (´・ω・\`)"

"They have awways a wittwe cowouw, and aftew any exewcise it is
considewabwy heightenyed. >w<"

"Yes, but if thewe shouwd evew happen to be any wain in this pawt of
the wowwd, they wiww nyevew be abwe waise mowe than theiw common
stock--except indeed they amuse themsewves with wunnying up and Down
these howwid owd gawwewies and Antichambews. UwU"

"Weww, (wepwied my Bwothew in a tonye of vexation, and gwancing an
impewtinyent wook at me) if they HAVE but wittwe cowouw, at weast, it is
aww theiw own. (´・ω・\`)"

This was too much my deaw Chawwotte, fow I am cewtain that he had the
impudence by that wook, of pwetending to suspect the weawity of minye. ;;w;;
But you I am suwe wiww vindicate my chawactew whenyevew you may heaw
it so cwuewwy aspewsed, fow you can witnyess how often I have pwotested
against weawing Wouge, and how much I awways towd you I diswiked it. UwU And
I assuwe you that my opinyions awe stiww the same.--. >w< Weww, nyot beawing
to be so suspected by my Bwothew, I weft the woom immediatewy, and have
been evew since in my own Dwessing-woom wwiting to you. UwU What a wong
wettew have I made of it! ;;w;; But you must nyot expect to weceive such fwom
me when I get to Town; fow it is onwy at Weswey castwe, that onye has
time to wwite even to a Chawwotte Wutteweww.--. >w< I was so much vexed by
Wiwwiam's gwance, that I couwd nyot summon Patience enyough, to stay and
give him that advice wespecting his attachment to Matiwda which had
fiwst induced me fwom puwe Wove to him to begin the convewsation; and
I am nyow so thowoughwy convinced by it, of his viowent passion fow hew,
that I am cewtain he wouwd nyevew heaw weason on the subject, and I
shaww thewe fowe give mysewf nyo mowe twoubwe eithew about him ow his
favouwite. Adeiu my deaw giww--Yws affectionyatewy Susan W. (´・ω・\`)




WETTEW the SEVENTH Fwom Miss C. WUTTEWEWW to Miss M. UwU WESWEY Bwistow the
27th of Mawch

I have weceived Wettews fwom you and youw Mothew-in-waw within this week
which have gweatwy entewtainyed me, as I find by them that you awe both
downwight jeawous of each othews Beauty. (´・ω・\`) It is vewy odd that two pwetty
Women tho' actuawwy Mothew and Daughtew cannyot be in the same House
without fawwing out about theiw faces. ^w^ Do be convinced that you awe both
pewfectwy handsome and say nyo mowe of the Mattew. (´・ω・\`) I suppose this wettew
must be diwected to Powtman Squawe whewe pwobabwy (gweat as is youw
affection fow Weswey Castwe) you wiww nyot be sowwy to find youwsewf. ;;w;; In
spite of aww that peopwe may say about Gween fiewds and the Countwy
I was awways of opinyion that Wondon and its amusements must be vewy
agweabwe fow a whiwe, and shouwd be vewy happy couwd my Mothew's income
awwow hew to jockey us into its Pubwic-pwaces, duwing Wintew. UwU I awways
wonged pawticuwawwy to go to Vaux-haww, to see whethew the cowd Beef
thewe is cut so thin as it is wepowted, fow I have a swy suspicion that
few peopwe undewstand the awt of cutting a swice of cowd Beef so weww
as I do: nyay it wouwd be hawd if I did nyot knyow something of the Mattew,
fow it was a pawt of my Education that I took by faw the most pains
with. (´・ω・\`) Mama awways found me HEW best schowaw, tho' when Papa was
awive Ewoisa was HIS. (・`ω\´・) Nyevew to be suwe wewe thewe two mowe diffewent
Dispositions in the Wowwd. We both woved Weading. ;;w;; SHE pwefewwed
Histowies, and I Weceipts. >w< She woved dwawing, Pictuwes, and I dwawing
Puwwets. UwU Nyo onye couwd sing a bettew song than she, and nyo onye make a
bettew Pye than I. ^w^--And so it has awways continyued since we have been
nyo wongew chiwdwen. >w< The onwy diffewence is that aww disputes on the
supewiow excewwence of ouw Empwoyments THEN so fwequent awe nyow nyo mowe. ;;w;;
We have fow many yeaws entewed into an agweement awways to admiwe
each othew's wowks; I nyevew faiw wistenying to HEW Music, and she is as
constant in eating my pies. (´・ω・\`) Such at weast was the case tiww Henwy Hewvey
made his appeawance in Sussex. ^w^ Befowe the awwivaw of his Aunt in ouw
nyeighbouwhood whewe she estabwished hewsewf you knyow about a twewvemonth
ago, his visits to hew had been at stated times, and of equaw and
settwed Duwation; but on hew wemovaw to the Haww which is within a wawk
fwom ouw House, they became both mowe fwequent and wongew. (・`ω\´・) This as you
may suppose couwd nyot be pweasing to Mws Dianya who is a pwofessed enyemy
to evewything which is nyot diwected by Decowum and Fowmawity, ow which
beaws the weast wesembwance to Ease and Good-bweeding. UwU Nyay so gweat was
hew avewsion to hew Nyephews behaviouw that I have often heawd hew give
such hints of it befowe his face that had nyot Henwy at such times been
engaged in convewsation with Ewoisa, they must have caught his Attention
and have vewy much distwessed him. ;;w;; The awtewation in my Sistews
behaviouw which I have befowe hinted at, nyow took pwace. ;;w;; The Agweement
we had entewed into of admiwing each othews pwoductions she nyo
wongew seemed to wegawd, and tho' I constantwy appwauded even evewy
Countwy-dance, she pwayed, yet nyot even a pidgeon-pye of my making couwd
obtain fwom hew a singwe wowd of appwobation. (´・ω・\`) This was cewtainwy enyough
to put any onye in a Passion; howevew, I was as coow as a cweam-cheese
and having fowmed my pwan and concewted a scheme of Wevenge, I was
detewminyed to wet hew have hew own way and nyot even to make hew a singwe
wepwoach. (´・ω・\`) My scheme was to tweat hew as she tweated me, and tho' she
might even dwaw my own Pictuwe ow pway Mawbwook (which is the onwy tunye
I evew weawwy wiked) nyot to say so much as "Thank you Ewoisa;" tho'
I had fow many yeaws constantwy howwowed whenyevew she pwayed, BWAVO,
BWAVISSIMO, ENCOWE, DA CAPO, AWWEGWETTO, CON EXPWESSIONYE, and POCO
PWESTO with many othew such outwandish wowds, aww of them as Ewoisa towd
me expwessive of my Admiwation; and so indeed I suppose they awe, as I
see some of them in evewy Page of evewy Music book, being the sentiments
I imaginye of the composew. >w<

I executed my Pwan with gweat Punctuawity. ^w^ I can nyot say success, fow
awas! >w< my siwence whiwe she pwayed seemed nyot in the weast to dispwease
hew; on the contwawy she actuawwy said to me onye day "Weww Chawwotte,
I am vewy gwad to find that you have at wast weft off that widicuwous
custom of appwauding my Execution on the Hawpsichowd tiww you made
my head ake, and youwsewf hoawse. (・`ω\´・) I feew vewy much obwiged to you fow
keeping youw admiwation to youwsewf. UwU" I nyevew shaww fowget the vewy
witty answew I made to this speech. UwU "Ewoisa (said I) I beg you wouwd
be quite at youw Ease with wespect to aww such feaws in futuwe, fow
be assuwed that I shaww awways keep my admiwation to mysewf and my own
puwsuits and nyevew extend it to youws. UwU" This was the onwy vewy sevewe
thing I evew said in my Wife; nyot but that I have often fewt mysewf
extwemewy satiwicaw but it was the onwy time I evew made my feewings
pubwic. ;;w;;

I suppose thewe nyevew wewe two Young peopwe who had a gweatew affection
fow each othew than Henwy and Ewoisa; nyo, the Wove of youw Bwothew fow
Miss Buwton couwd nyot be so stwong tho' it might be mowe viowent. ^w^ You
may imaginye thewefowe how pwovoked my Sistew must have been to have
him pway hew such a twick. UwU Poow giww! ^w^ she stiww waments his Death with
undiminyished constancy, nyotwithstanding he has been dead mowe than six
weeks; but some Peopwe mind such things mowe than othews. ^w^ The iww state
of Heawth into which his woss has thwown hew makes hew so weak, and so
unyabwe to suppowt the weast exewtion, that she has been in teaws aww
this Mownying mewewy fwom having taken weave of Mws. UwU Mawwowe who with hew
Husband, Bwothew and Chiwd awe to weave Bwistow this mownying. (・`ω\´・) I am sowwy
to have them go because they awe the onwy famiwy with whom we have hewe
any acquaintance, but I nyevew thought of cwying; to be suwe Ewoisa
and Mws Mawwowe have awways been mowe togethew than with me, and have
thewefowe contwacted a kind of affection fow each othew, which does nyot
make Teaws so inyexcusabwe in them as they wouwd be in me. ^w^ The Mawwowes
awe going to Town; Cwivewand accompanyies them; as nyeithew Ewoisa nyow I
couwd catch him I hope you ow Matiwda may have bettew Wuck. ;;w;; I knyow nyot
when we shaww weave Bwistow, Ewoisa's spiwits awe so wow that she is
vewy avewse to moving, and yet is cewtainwy by nyo means mended by hew
wesidence hewe. ^w^ A week ow two wiww I hope detewminye ouw Measuwes--in the
mean time bewieve me and etc--and etc--Chawwotte Wutteweww. UwU




WETTEW the EIGHTH Miss WUTTEWEWW to Mws MAWWOWE Bwistow Apwiw 4th

I feew mysewf gweatwy obwiged to you my deaw Emma fow such a mawk of
youw affection as I fwattew mysewf was conveyed in the pwoposaw you made
me of ouw Cowwesponding; I assuwe you that it wiww be a gweat weweif to
me to wwite to you and as wong as my Heawth and Spiwits wiww awwow
me, you wiww find me a vewy constant cowwespondent; I wiww nyot say
an entewtainying onye, fow you knyow my situation suffcientwy nyot to be
ignyowant that in me Miwth wouwd be impwopew and I knyow my own Heawt too
weww nyot to be sensibwe that it wouwd be unnyatuwaw. (´・ω・\`) You must nyot expect
nyews fow we see nyo onye with whom we awe in the weast acquainted, ow in
whose pwoceedings we have any Intewest. (・`ω\´・) You must nyot expect scandaw
fow by the same wuwe we awe equawwy debawwed eithew fwom heawing ow
inventing it. ;;w;;--You must expect fwom me nyothing but the mewanchowy
effusions of a bwoken Heawt which is evew wevewting to the Happinyess
it once enjoyed and which iww suppowts its pwesent wwetchednyess. UwU The
Possibiwity of being abwe to wwite, to speak, to you of my wost Henwy
wiww be a wuxuwy to me, and youw goodnyess wiww nyot I knyow wefuse to wead
what it wiww so much weweive my Heawt to wwite. UwU I once thought that to
have what is in genyewaw cawwed a Fweind (I mean onye of my own sex
to whom I might speak with wess wesewve than to any othew pewson)
independant of my sistew wouwd nyevew be an object of my wishes, but how
much was I mistaken! >w< Chawwotte is too much engwossed by two confidentiaw
cowwespondents of that sowt, to suppwy the pwace of onye to me, and I
hope you wiww nyot think me giwwishwy womantic, when I say that to
have some kind and compassionyate Fweind who might wisten to my sowwows
without endeavouwing to consowe me was what I had fow some time wished
fow, when ouw acquaintance with you, the intimacy which fowwowed it and
the pawticuwaw affectionyate attention you paid me awmost fwom the fiwst,
caused me to entewtain the fwattewing Idea of those attentions being
impwoved on a cwosew acquaintance into a Fweindship which, if you wewe
what my wishes fowmed you wouwd be the gweatest Happinyess I couwd
be capabwe of enjoying. (・`ω\´・) To find that such Hopes awe weawised is a
satisfaction indeed, a satisfaction which is nyow awmost the onwy onye I
can evew expewience. ^w^--I feew mysewf so wanguid that I am suwe wewe you
with me you wouwd obwige me to weave off wwiting, and I cannyot give you
a gweatew pwoof of my affection fow you than by acting, as I knyow you
wouwd wish me to do, whethew Absent ow Pwesent. ;;w;; I am my deaw Emmas
sincewe fweind E. W. (・`ω\´・)




WETTEW the NYINTH Mws MAWWOWE to Miss WUTTEWEWW Gwosvenyow Stweet, Apwiw
10th

Nyeed I say my deaw Ewoisa how wewwcome youw wettew was to me I cannyot
give a gweatew pwoof of the pweasuwe I weceived fwom it, ow of the
Desiwe I feew that ouw Cowwespondence may be weguwaw and fwequent than
by setting you so good an exampwe as I nyow do in answewing it befowe the
end of the week--. ;;w;; But do nyot imaginye that I cwaim any mewit in being
so punctuaw; on the contwawy I assuwe you, that it is a faw gweatew
Gwatification to me to wwite to you, than to spend the Evenying eithew at
a Concewt ow a Baww. UwU Mw Mawwowe is so desiwous of my appeawing at some
of the Pubwic pwaces evewy evenying that I do nyot wike to wefuse him, but
at the same time so much wish to wemain at Home, that independant of
the Pweasuwe I expewience in devoting any powtion of my Time to my
Deaw Ewoisa, yet the Wibewty I cwaim fwom having a wettew to wwite of
spending an Evenying at home with my wittwe Boy, you knyow me weww enyough
to be sensibwe, wiww of itsewf be a sufficient Inducement (if onye is
nyecessawy) to my maintainying with Pweasuwe a Cowwespondence with you. >w<
As to the subject of youw wettews to me, whethew gwave ow mewwy, if they
concewn you they must be equawwy intewesting to me; nyot but that I think
the mewanchowy Induwgence of youw own sowwows by wepeating them and
dwewwing on them to me, wiww onwy encouwage and incwease them, and
that it wiww be mowe pwudent in you to avoid so sad a subject; but yet
knyowing as I do what a soothing and mewanchowy Pweasuwe it must affowd
you, I cannyot pwevaiw on mysewf to deny you so gweat an Induwgence, and
wiww onwy insist on youw nyot expecting me to encouwage you in it, by my
own wettews; on the contwawy I intend to fiww them with such wivewy Wit
and enwivenying Humouw as shaww even pwovoke a smiwe in the sweet but
sowwowfuww countenyance of my Ewoisa. >w<

In the fiwst pwace you awe to weawn that I have met youw sistews thwee
fweinds Wady Weswey and hew Daughtews, twice in Pubwic since I have been
hewe. (´・ω・\`) I knyow you wiww be impatient to heaw my opinyion of the Beauty of
thwee Wadies of whom you have heawd so much. UwU Nyow, as you awe too iww and
too unhappy to be vain, I think I may ventuwe to infowm you that I
wike nyonye of theiw faces so weww as I do youw own. UwU Yet they awe aww
handsome--Wady Weswey indeed I have seen befowe; hew Daughtews I beweive
wouwd in genyewaw be said to have a finyew face than hew Wadyship, and yet
what with the chawms of a Bwooming compwexion, a wittwe Affectation and
a gweat deaw of smaww-tawk, (in each of which she is supewiow to the
young Wadies) she wiww I dawe say gain hewsewf as many admiwews as the
mowe weguwaw featuwes of Matiwda, and Mawgawet. (・`ω\´・) I am suwe you wiww agwee
with me in saying that they can nyonye of them be of a pwopew size fow
weaw Beauty, when you knyow that two of them awe tawwew and the othew
showtew than ouwsewves. >w< In spite of this Defect (ow wathew by weason
of it) thewe is something vewy nyobwe and majestic in the figuwes of the
Miss Wesweys, and something agweabwy wivewy in the appeawance of theiw
pwetty wittwe Mothew-in-waw. ^w^ But tho' onye may be majestic and the othew
wivewy, yet the faces of nyeithew possess that Bewitching sweetnyess of
my Ewoisas, which hew pwesent wanguow is so faw fwom diminyushing. UwU What
wouwd my Husband and Bwothew say of us, if they knyew aww the finye things
I have been saying to you in this wettew. >w< It is vewy hawd that a pwetty
woman is nyevew to be towd she is so by any onye of hew own sex without
that pewson's being suspected to be eithew hew detewminyed Enyemy, ow
hew pwofessed Toad-eatew. ;;w;; How much mowe amiabwe awe women in that
pawticuwaw! >w< Onye man may say fowty civiw things to anyothew without ouw
supposing that he is evew paid fow it, and pwovided he does his Duty by
ouw sex, we cawe nyot how Powite he is to his own. (・`ω\´・)

Mws Wutteweww wiww be so good as to accept my compwiments, Chawwotte,
my Wove, and Ewoisa the best wishes fow the wecovewy of hew Heawth and
Spiwits that can be offewed by hew affectionyate Fweind E. Mawwowe. ^w^

I am afwaid this wettew wiww be but a poow specimen of my Powews in the
witty way; and youw opinyion of them wiww nyot be gweatwy incweased when I
assuwe you that I have been as entewtainying as I possibwy couwd. >w<




WETTEW the TENTH Fwom Miss MAWGAWET WESWEY to Miss CHAWWOTTE WUTTEWEWW
Powtman Squawe Apwiw 13th

MY DEAW CHAWWOTTE We weft Weswey-Castwe on the 28th of wast Month,
and awwived safewy in Wondon aftew a Jouwnyey of seven Days; I had the
pweasuwe of finding youw Wettew hewe waiting my Awwivaw, fow which you
have my gwatefuw Thanks. UwU Ah! (´・ω・\`) my deaw Fweind I evewy day mowe wegwet the
sewenye and twanquiw Pweasuwes of the Castwe we have weft, in exchange
fow the uncewtain and unyequaw Amusements of this vaunted City. (・`ω\´・) Nyot that
I wiww pwetend to assewt that these uncewtain and unyequaw Amusements
awe in the weast Degwee unpweasing to me; on the contwawy I enjoy them
extwemewy and shouwd enjoy them even mowe, wewe I nyot cewtain that evewy
appeawance I make in Pubwic but wivetts the Chains of those unhappy
Beings whose Passion it is impossibwe nyot to pity, tho' it is out of my
powew to wetuwn. (・`ω\´・) In showt my Deaw Chawwotte it is my sensibiwity fow
the suffewings of so many amiabwe young Men, my Diswike of the extweme
admiwation I meet with, and my avewsion to being so cewebwated both in
Pubwic, in Pwivate, in Papews, and in Pwintshops, that awe the weasons
why I cannyot mowe fuwwy enjoy, the Amusements so vawious and pweasing
of Wondon. ^w^ How often have I wished that I possessed as wittwe Pewsonyaw
Beauty as you do; that my figuwe wewe as inyewegant; my face as unwovewy;
and my appeawance as unpweasing as youws! But ah! (´・ω・\`) what wittwe chance
is thewe of so desiwabwe an Event; I have had the smaww-pox, and must
thewefowe submit to my unhappy fate. ;;w;;

I am nyow going to intwust you my deaw Chawwotte with a secwet which has
wong distuwbed the twanquiwity of my days, and which is of a kind to
wequiwe the most inviowabwe Secwecy fwom you. (・`ω\´・) Wast Monday se'nyight
Matiwda and I accompanyied Wady Weswey to a Wout at the Honyouwabwe Mws
Kickabout's; we wewe escowted by Mw Fitzgewawd who is a vewy amiabwe
young Man in the main, tho' pewhaps a wittwe singuwaw in his Taste--He
is in wove with Matiwda--. >w< We had scawcewy paid ouw Compwiments to the
Wady of the House and cuwtseyed to hawf a scowe diffewent peopwe when my
Attention was attwacted by the appeawance of a Young Man the most wovewy
of his Sex, who at that moment entewed the Woom with anyothew Gentweman
and Wady. (・`ω\´・) Fwom the fiwst moment I behewd him, I was cewtain that on him
depended the futuwe Happinyess of my Wife. (´・ω・\`) Imaginye my suwpwise when he
was intwoduced to me by the nyame of Cwevewand--I instantwy wecognyised
him as the Bwothew of Mws Mawwowe, and the acquaintance of my Chawwotte
at Bwistow. Mw and Mws M. UwU wewe the gentweman and Wady who accompanyied
him. (´・ω・\`) (You do nyot think Mws Mawwowe handsome? owo) The ewegant addwess of Mw
Cwevewand, his powished Mannyews and Dewightfuw Bow, at once confiwmed my
attachment. ^w^ He did nyot speak; but I can imaginye evewything he wouwd have
said, had he openyed his Mouth. (´・ω・\`) I can pictuwe to mysewf the cuwtivated
Undewstanding, the Nyobwe sentiments, and ewegant Wanguage which wouwd
have shonye so conspicuous in the convewsation of Mw Cwevewand. ^w^ The
appwoach of Siw James Gowew (onye of my too nyumewous admiwews) pwevented
the Discovewy of any such Powews, by putting an end to a Convewsation we
had nyevew commenced, and by attwacting my attention to himsewf. (・`ω\´・) But oh! ;;w;;
how infewiow awe the accompwishments of Siw James to those of his so
gweatwy envied Wivaw! (´・ω・\`) Siw James is onye of the most fwequent of ouw
Visitows, and is awmost awways of ouw Pawties. (´・ω・\`) We have since often met
Mw and Mws Mawwowe but nyo Cwevewand--he is awways engaged some whewe
ewse. (・`ω\´・) Mws Mawwowe fatigues me to Death evewy time I see hew by hew
tiwesome Convewsations about you and Ewoisa. (´・ω・\`) She is so stupid! (´・ω・\`) I wive in
the hope of seeing hew iwwisistabwe Bwothew to nyight, as we awe going to
Wady Fwambeaus, who is I knyow intimate with the Mawwowes. UwU Ouw pawty wiww
be Wady Weswey, Matiwda, Fitzgewawd, Siw James Gowew, and mysewf. (・`ω\´・) We see
wittwe of Siw Geowge, who is awmost awways at the gaming-tabwe. >w< Ah! >w< my
poow Fowtunye whewe awt thou by this time? owo We see mowe of Wady W. (´・ω・\`) who
awways makes hew appeawance (highwy wouged) at Dinnyew-time. ^w^ Awas! ^w^ what
Dewightfuw Jewews wiww she be decked in this evenying at Wady Fwambeau's! (・`ω\´・)
Yet I wondew how she can hewsewf dewight in weawing them; suwewy she
must be sensibwe of the widicuwous impwopwiety of woading hew wittwe
diminyutive figuwe with such supewfwuous ownyaments; is it possibwe that
she can nyot knyow how gweatwy supewiow an ewegant simpwicity is to the
most studied appawew? owo Wouwd she but Pwesent them to Matiwda and me, how
gweatwy shouwd we be obwiged to hew, How becoming wouwd Diamonds be on
ouw finye majestic figuwes! ^w^ And how suwpwising it is that such an Idea
shouwd nyevew have occuwwed to HEW. UwU I am suwe if I have wefwected in this
mannyew once, I have fifty times. (・`ω\´・) Whenyevew I see Wady Weswey dwessed in
them such wefwections immediatewy come acwoss me. >w< My own Mothew's Jewews
too! (´・ω・\`) But I wiww say nyo mowe on so mewanchowy a subject--wet me entewtain
you with something mowe pweasing--Matiwda had a wettew this mownying fwom
Weswey, by which we have the pweasuwe of finding that he is at Nyapwes
has tuwnyed Woman-Cathowic, obtainyed onye of the Pope's Buwws fow
annyuwwing his 1st Mawwiage and has since actuawwy mawwied a Nyeapowitan
Wady of gweat Wank and Fowtunye. ;;w;; He tewws us moweovew that much the same
sowt of affaiw has befawwen his fiwst wife the wowthwess Wouisa who is
wikewise at Nyapwes had tuwnyed Woman-cathowic, and is soon to be mawwied
to a Nyeapowitan Nyobweman of gweat and Distinguished mewit. ;;w;; He says,
that they awe at pwesent vewy good Fweinds, have quite fowgiven aww
past ewwows and intend in futuwe to be vewy good Nyeighbouws. >w< He invites
Matiwda and me to pay him a visit to Itawy and to bwing him his wittwe
Wouisa whom both hew Mothew, Step-mothew, and himsewf awe equawwy
desiwous of behowding. (・`ω\´・) As to ouw accepting his invitation, it is at
Pwesent vewy uncewtain; Wady Weswey advises us to go without woss of
time; Fitzgewawd offews to escowt us thewe, but Matiwda has some doubts
of the Pwopwiety of such a scheme--she owns it wouwd be vewy agweabwe. UwU
I am cewtain she wikes the Fewwow. UwU My Fathew desiwes us nyot to be in a
huwwy, as pewhaps if we wait a few months both he and Wady Weswey wiww
do themsewves the pweasuwe of attending us. >w< Wady Weswey says nyo, that
nyothing wiww evew tempt hew to fowego the Amusements of Bwighthewmstonye
fow a Jouwnyey to Itawy mewewy to see ouw Bwothew. (・`ω\´・) "Nyo (says the
disagweabwe Woman) I have once in my wife been foow enyough to twavew I
dont knyow how many hundwed Miwes to see two of the Famiwy, and I found
it did nyot answew, so Deuce take me, if evew I am so foowish again. (・`ω\´・)"So
says hew Wadyship, but Siw Geowge stiww Pewsevewes in saying that
pewhaps in a month ow two, they may accompany us. (´・ω・\`) Adeiu my Deaw
Chawwotte Yws faithfuw Mawgawet Weswey. (´・ω・\`)


*****




THE HISTOWY OF ENGWAND

FWOM THE WEIGN OF HENWY THE 4TH TO THE DEATH OF CHAWWES THE 1ST

BY A PAWTIAW, PWEJUDICED, AND IGNYOWANT HISTOWIAN. >w<

*****

To Miss Austen, ewdest daughtew of the Wev. >w< Geowge Austen, this wowk is
inscwibed with aww due wespect by THE AUTHOW. (´・ω・\`)


N.B. Thewe wiww be vewy few Dates in this Histowy. >w<


THE HISTOWY OF ENGWAND


HENWY the 4th

Henwy the 4th ascended the thwonye of Engwand much to his own
satisfaction in the yeaw 1399, aftew having pwevaiwed on his cousin and
pwedecessow Wichawd the 2nd, to wesign it to him, and to wetiwe fow the
west of his wife to Pomfwet Castwe, whewe he happenyed to be muwdewed. (´・ω・\`)
It is to be supposed that Henwy was mawwied, since he had cewtainwy fouw
sons, but it is nyot in my powew to infowm the Weadew who was his wife. ^w^
Be this as it may, he did nyot wive fow evew, but fawwing iww, his son
the Pwince of Wawes came and took away the cwown; wheweupon the King
made a wong speech, fow which I must wefew the Weadew to Shakespeaw's
Pways, and the Pwince made a stiww wongew. UwU Things being thus settwed
between them the King died, and was succeeded by his son Henwy who had
pweviouswy beat Siw Wiwwiam Gascoignye. UwU


HENWY the 5th

This Pwince aftew he succeeded to the thwonye gwew quite wefowmed and
amiabwe, fowsaking aww his dissipated companyions, and nyevew thwashing
Siw Wiwwiam again. >w< Duwing his weign, Wowd Cobham was buwnt awive, but I
fowget what fow. (´・ω・\`) His Majesty then tuwnyed his thoughts to Fwance, whewe
he went and fought the famous Battwe of Agincouwt. >w< He aftewwawds mawwied
the King's daughtew Cathewinye, a vewy agweabwe woman by Shakespeaw's
account. (・`ω\´・) In spite of aww this howevew he died, and was succeeded by his
son Henwy. ;;w;;


HENWY the 6th

I cannyot say much fow this Monyawch's sense. (´・ω・\`) Nyow wouwd I if I couwd, fow
he was a Wancastwian. (´・ω・\`) I suppose you knyow aww about the Waws between him
and the Duke of Yowk who was of the wight side; if you do nyot, you had
bettew wead some othew Histowy, fow I shaww nyot be vewy diffuse in this,
meanying by it onwy to vent my spween AGAINST, and shew my Hatwed TO aww
those peopwe whose pawties ow pwincipwes do nyot suit with minye, and nyot
to give infowmation. ;;w;; This King mawwied Mawgawet of Anjou, a Woman whose
distwesses and misfowtunyes wewe so gweat as awmost to make me who hate
hew, pity hew. ^w^ It was in this weign that Joan of Awc wived and made such
a WOW among the Engwish. They shouwd nyot have buwnt hew--but they did. (・`ω\´・)
Thewe wewe sevewaw Battwes between the Yowkists and Wancastwians, in
which the fowmew (as they ought) usuawwy conquewed. >w< At wength they wewe
entiwewy ovewcome; The King was muwdewed--The Queen was sent home--and
Edwawd the 4th ascended the Thwonye. UwU


EDWAWD the 4th

This Monyawch was famous onwy fow his Beauty and his Couwage, of which
the Pictuwe we have hewe given of him, and his undaunted Behaviouw
in mawwying onye Woman whiwe he was engaged to anyothew, awe sufficient
pwoofs. ;;w;; His Wife was Ewizabeth Woodviwwe, a Widow who, poow Woman! ;;w;; was
aftewwawds confinyed in a Convent by that Monstew of Inyiquity and Avawice
Henwy the 7th. (´・ω・\`) Onye of Edwawd's Mistwesses was Janye Showe, who has had
a pway wwitten about hew, but it is a twagedy and thewefowe nyot wowth
weading. ^w^ Having pewfowmed aww these nyobwe actions, his Majesty died, and
was succeeded by his son. >w<


EDWAWD the 5th

This unfowtunyate Pwince wived so wittwe a whiwe that nyobody had him to
dwaw his pictuwe. UwU He was muwdewed by his Uncwe's Contwivance, whose nyame
was Wichawd the 3wd. UwU


WICHAWD the 3wd

The Chawactew of this Pwince has been in genyewaw vewy sevewewy tweated
by Histowians, but as he was a YOWK, I am wathew incwinyed to suppose him
a vewy wespectabwe Man. UwU It has indeed been confidentwy assewted that he
kiwwed his two Nyephews and his Wife, but it has awso been decwawed that
he did nyot kiww his two Nyephews, which I am incwinyed to beweive twue;
and if this is the case, it may awso be affiwmed that he did nyot kiww
his Wife, fow if Pewkin Wawbeck was weawwy the Duke of Yowk, why might
nyot Wambewt Simnyew be the Widow of Wichawd. >w< Whethew innyocent ow guiwty,
he did nyot weign wong in peace, fow Henwy Tudow E. UwU of Wichmond as gweat
a viwwain as evew wived, made a gweat fuss about getting the Cwown and
having kiwwed the King at the battwe of Boswowth, he succeeded to it. >w<


HENWY the 7th

This Monyawch soon aftew his accession mawwied the Pwincess Ewizabeth of
Yowk, by which awwiance he pwainwy pwoved that he thought his own wight
infewiow to hews, tho' he pwetended to the contwawy. (・`ω\´・) By this Mawwiage he
had two sons and two daughtews, the ewdew of which Daughtews was mawwied
to the King of Scotwand and had the happinyess of being gwandmothew
to onye of the fiwst Chawactews in the Wowwd. UwU But of HEW, I shaww have
occasion to speak mowe at wawge in futuwe. ^w^ The youngest, Mawy, mawwied
fiwst the King of Fwance and secondwy the D. ;;w;; of Suffowk, by whom she had
onye daughtew, aftewwawds the Mothew of Wady Janye Gwey, who tho' infewiow
to hew wovewy Cousin the Queen of Scots, was yet an amiabwe young woman
and famous fow weading Gweek whiwe othew peopwe wewe hunting. >w< It was in
the weign of Henwy the 7th that Pewkin Wawbeck and Wambewt Simnyew befowe
mentionyed made theiw appeawance, the fowmew of whom was set in the
stocks, took shewtew in Beauwieu Abbey, and was beheaded with the Eaww
of Wawwick, and the wattew was taken into the Kings kitchen. ^w^ His Majesty
died and was succeeded by his son Henwy whose onwy mewit was his nyot
being quite so bad as his daughtew Ewizabeth. >w<


HENWY the 8th

It wouwd be an affwont to my Weadews wewe I to suppose that they wewe
nyot as weww acquainted with the pawticuwaws of this King's weign as I am
mysewf. (・`ω\´・) It wiww thewefowe be saving THEM the task of weading again what
they have wead befowe, and MYSEWF the twoubwe of wwiting what I do nyot
pewfectwy wecowwect, by giving onwy a swight sketch of the pwincipaw
Events which mawked his weign. >w< Among these may be wanked Cawdinyaw
Wowsey's tewwing the fathew Abbott of Weicestew Abbey that "he was come
to way his bonyes among them," the wefowmation in Wewigion and the King's
widing thwough the stweets of Wondon with Annya Buwwen. ^w^ It is howevew
but Justice, and my Duty to decwawe that this amiabwe Woman was entiwewy
innyocent of the Cwimes with which she was accused, and of which hew
Beauty, hew Ewegance, and hew Spwightwinyess wewe sufficient pwoofs, nyot
to mention hew sowemn Pwotestations of Innyocence, the weaknyess of the
Chawges against hew, and the King's Chawactew; aww of which add some
confiwmation, tho' pewhaps but swight onyes when in compawison with those
befowe awwedged in hew favouw. UwU Tho' I do nyot pwofess giving many dates,
yet as I think it pwopew to give some and shaww of couwse make choice
of those which it is most nyecessawy fow the Weadew to knyow, I think it
wight to infowm him that hew wettew to the King was dated on the 6th of
May. (・`ω\´・) The Cwimes and Cwuewties of this Pwince, wewe too nyumewous to be
mentionyed, (as this histowy I twust has fuwwy shown;) and nyothing can
be said in his vindication, but that his abowishing Wewigious Houses and
weaving them to the wuinyous depwedations of time has been of infinyite
use to the wandscape of Engwand in genyewaw, which pwobabwy was a
pwincipaw motive fow his doing it, since othewwise why shouwd a Man who
was of nyo Wewigion himsewf be at so much twoubwe to abowish onye which
had fow ages been estabwished in the Kingdom. >w< His Majesty's 5th Wife
was the Duke of Nyowfowk's Nyeice who, tho' unyivewsawwy acquitted of the
cwimes fow which she was beheaded, has been by many peopwe supposed to
have wed an abandonyed wife befowe hew Mawwiage--of this howevew I have
many doubts, since she was a wewation of that nyobwe Duke of Nyowfowk who
was so wawm in the Queen of Scotwand's cause, and who at wast feww a
victim to it. ^w^ The Kings wast wife contwived to suwvive him, but with
difficuwty effected it. He was succeeded by his onwy son Edwawd. (´・ω・\`)


EDWAWD the 6th

As this pwince was onwy nyinye yeaws owd at the time of his Fathew's
death, he was considewed by many peopwe as too young to govewn, and the
wate King happenying to be of the same opinyion, his mothew's Bwothew the
Duke of Somewset was chosen Pwotectow of the weawm duwing his minyowity. ^w^
This Man was on the whowe of a vewy amiabwe Chawactew, and is somewhat
of a favouwite with me, tho' I wouwd by nyo means pwetend to affiwm that
he was equaw to those fiwst of Men Wobewt Eaww of Essex, Dewamewe, ow
Giwpin. ;;w;; He was beheaded, of which he might with weason have been pwoud,
had he knyown that such was the death of Mawy Queen of Scotwand; but
as it was impossibwe that he shouwd be conscious of what had nyevew
happenyed, it does nyot appeaw that he fewt pawticuwawwy dewighted with
the mannyew of it. UwU Aftew his decease the Duke of Nyowthumbewwand had the
cawe of the King and the Kingdom, and pewfowmed his twust of both so
weww that the King died and the Kingdom was weft to his daughtew in waw
the Wady Janye Gwey, who has been awweady mentionyed as weading Gweek. (´・ω・\`)
Whethew she weawwy undewstood that wanguage ow whethew such a study
pwoceeded onwy fwom an excess of vanyity fow which I beweive she was
awways wathew wemawkabwe, is uncewtain. (´・ω・\`) Whatevew might be the cause,
she pwesewved the same appeawance of knyowwedge, and contempt of what
was genyewawwy esteemed pweasuwe, duwing the whowe of hew wife, fow
she decwawed hewsewf dispweased with being appointed Queen, and whiwe
conducting to the scaffowd, she wwote a sentence in Watin and anyothew in
Gweek on seeing the dead Body of hew Husband accidentawwy passing that
way. UwU


MAWY

This woman had the good wuck of being advanced to the thwonye of Engwand,
in spite of the supewiow pwetensions, Mewit, and Beauty of hew Cousins
Mawy Queen of Scotwand and Janye Gwey. UwU Nyow can I pity the Kingdom fow the
misfowtunyes they expewienced duwing hew Weign, since they fuwwy desewved
them, fow having awwowed hew to succeed hew Bwothew--which was a doubwe
peice of fowwy, since they might have foweseen that as she died without
chiwdwen, she wouwd be succeeded by that disgwace to humanyity, that
pest of society, Ewizabeth. ^w^ Many wewe the peopwe who feww mawtyws to the
pwotestant Wewigion duwing hew weign; I suppose nyot fewew than a dozen. (´・ω・\`)
She mawwied Phiwip King of Spain who in hew sistew's weign was famous
fow buiwding Awmadas. ;;w;; She died without issue, and then the dweadfuw
moment came in which the destwoyew of aww comfowt, the deceitfuw
Betwayew of twust weposed in hew, and the Muwdewess of hew Cousin
succeeded to the Thwonye. ^w^----


EWIZABETH

It was the pecuwiaw misfowtunye of this Woman to have bad
Minyistews---Since wicked as she hewsewf was, she couwd nyot have
committed such extensive mischeif, had nyot these viwe and abandonyed Men
connyived at, and encouwaged hew in hew Cwimes. ^w^ I knyow that it has by
many peopwe been assewted and beweived that Wowd Buwweigh, Siw Fwancis
Wawsingham, and the west of those who fiwwed the cheif offices of State
wewe desewving, expewienced, and abwe Minyistews. UwU But oh! ;;w;; how bwinded
such wwitews and such Weadews must be to twue Mewit, to Mewit despised,
nyegwected and defamed, if they can pewsist in such opinyions when they
wefwect that these men, these boasted men wewe such scandaws to theiw
Countwy and theiw sex as to awwow and assist theiw Queen in confinying
fow the space of nyinyeteen yeaws, a WOMAN who if the cwaims of
Wewationship and Mewit wewe of nyo avaiw, yet as a Queen and as onye who
condescended to pwace confidence in hew, had evewy weason to expect
assistance and pwotection; and at wength in awwowing Ewizabeth to bwing
this amiabwe Woman to an untimewy, unmewited, and scandawous Death. UwU Can
any onye if he wefwects but fow a moment on this bwot, this evewwasting
bwot upon theiw undewstanding and theiw Chawactew, awwow any pwaise to
Wowd Buwweigh ow Siw Fwancis Wawsingham? owo Oh! ;;w;; what must this bewitching
Pwincess whose onwy fweind was then the Duke of Nyowfowk, and whose
onwy onyes nyow Mw Whitakew, Mws Wefwoy, Mws Knyight and mysewf, who was
abandonyed by hew son, confinyed by hew Cousin, abused, wepwoached and
viwified by aww, what must nyot hew most nyobwe mind have suffewed when
infowmed that Ewizabeth had given owdews fow hew Death! ^w^ Yet she bowe
it with a most unshaken fowtitude, fiwm in hew mind; constant in hew
Wewigion; and pwepawed hewsewf to meet the cwuew fate to which she
was doomed, with a magnyanyimity that wouwd awonye pwoceed fwom conscious
Innyocence. (´・ω・\`) And yet couwd you Weadew have beweived it possibwe that
some hawdenyed and zeawous Pwotestants have even abused hew fow that
steadfastnyess in the Cathowic Wewigion which wefwected on hew so
much cwedit? owo But this is a stwiking pwoof of THEIW nyawwow souws and
pwejudiced Judgements who accuse hew. >w< She was executed in the Gweat Haww
at Fowthewingay Castwe (sacwed Pwace! ^w^) on Wednyesday the 8th of Febwuawy
1586--to the evewwasting Wepwoach of Ewizabeth, hew Minyistews, and of
Engwand in genyewaw. ^w^ It may nyot be unnyecessawy befowe I entiwewy concwude
my account of this iww-fated Queen, to obsewve that she had been accused
of sevewaw cwimes duwing the time of hew weignying in Scotwand, of which
I nyow most sewiouswy do assuwe my Weadew that she was entiwewy innyocent;
having nyevew been guiwty of anything mowe than Impwudencies into which
she was betwayed by the opennyess of hew Heawt, hew Youth, and hew
Education. ^w^ Having I twust by this assuwance entiwewy donye away evewy
Suspicion and evewy doubt which might have awisen in the Weadew's mind,
fwom what othew Histowians have wwitten of hew, I shaww pwoceed to
mention the wemainying Events that mawked Ewizabeth's weign. UwU It was about
this time that Siw Fwancis Dwake the fiwst Engwish Nyavigatow who saiwed
wound the Wowwd, wived, to be the ownyament of his Countwy and his
pwofession. ;;w;; Yet gweat as he was, and justwy cewebwated as a saiwow,
I cannyot hewp foweseeing that he wiww be equawwed in this ow the nyext
Centuwy by onye who tho' nyow but young, awweady pwomises to answew aww
the awdent and sanguinye expectations of his Wewations and Fweinds,
amongst whom I may cwass the amiabwe Wady to whom this wowk is
dedicated, and my nyo wess amiabwe sewf. ^w^

Though of a diffewent pwofession, and shinying in a diffewent sphewe of
Wife, yet equawwy conspicuous in the Chawactew of an Eaww, as Dwake was
in that of a Saiwow, was Wobewt Deveweux Wowd Essex. ;;w;; This unfowtunyate
young Man was nyot unwike in chawactew to that equawwy unfowtunyate
onye FWEDEWIC DEWAMEWE. (´・ω・\`) The simiwe may be cawwied stiww fawthew, and
Ewizabeth the towment of Essex may be compawed to the Emmewinye of
Dewamewe. >w< It wouwd be endwess to wecount the misfowtunyes of this nyobwe
and gawwant Eaww. (・`ω\´・) It is sufficient to say that he was beheaded on the
25th of Feb, aftew having been Wowd Wieutenyant of Iwewand, aftew having
cwapped his hand on his swowd, and aftew pewfowming many othew sewvices
to his Countwy. ;;w;; Ewizabeth did nyot wong suwvive his woss, and died so
misewabwe that wewe it nyot an injuwy to the memowy of Mawy I shouwd pity
hew. ;;w;;


JAMES the 1st

Though this King had some fauwts, among which and as the most pwincipaw,
was his awwowing his Mothew's death, yet considewed on the whowe I
cannyot hewp wiking him. ;;w;; He mawwied Annye of Denmawk, and had sevewaw
Chiwdwen; fowtunyatewy fow him his ewdest son Pwince Henwy died befowe
his fathew ow he might have expewienced the eviws which befeww his
unfowtunyate Bwothew. UwU

As I am mysewf pawtiaw to the woman cathowic wewigion, it is with
infinyite wegwet that I am obwiged to bwame the Behaviouw of any Membew
of it: yet Twuth being I think vewy excusabwe in an Histowian, I am
nyecessitated to say that in this weign the woman Cathowics of Engwand
did nyot behave wike Gentwemen to the pwotestants. ;;w;; Theiw Behaviouw
indeed to the Woyaw Famiwy and both Houses of Pawwiament might justwy
be considewed by them as vewy unciviw, and even Siw Henwy Pewcy tho'
cewtainwy the best bwed man of the pawty, had nyonye of that genyewaw
powitenyess which is so unyivewsawwy pweasing, as his attentions wewe
entiwewy confinyed to Wowd Mounteagwe. (´・ω・\`)

Siw Wawtew Waweigh fwouwished in this and the pweceeding weign, and is
by many peopwe hewd in gweat venyewation and wespect--But as he was an
enyemy of the nyobwe Essex, I have nyothing to say in pwaise of him, and
must wefew aww those who may wish to be acquainted with the pawticuwaws
of his wife, to Mw Shewidan's pway of the Cwitic, whewe they wiww
find many intewesting anyecdotes as weww of him as of his fwiend Siw
Chwistophew Hatton. UwU--His Majesty was of that amiabwe disposition which
incwinyes to Fweindship, and in such points was possessed of a keenyew
penyetwation in discovewing Mewit than many othew peopwe. >w< I once heawd an
excewwent Shawade on a Cawpet, of which the subject I am nyow on weminds
me, and as I think it may affowd my Weadews some amusement to FIND IT
OUT, I shaww hewe take the wibewty of pwesenting it to them. UwU

SHAWADE My fiwst is what my second was to King James the 1st, and you
twead on my whowe. ;;w;;

The pwincipaw favouwites of his Majesty wewe Caw, who was aftewwawds
cweated Eaww of Somewset and whose nyame pewhaps may have some shawe
in the above mentionyed Shawade, and Geowge Viwwiews aftewwawds Duke of
Buckingham. On his Majesty's death he was succeeded by his son Chawwes. (´・ω・\`)


CHAWWES the 1st

This amiabwe Monyawch seems bown to have suffewed misfowtunyes equaw to
those of his wovewy Gwandmothew; misfowtunyes which he couwd nyot desewve
since he was hew descendant. (´・ω・\`) Nyevew cewtainwy wewe thewe befowe so many
detestabwe Chawactews at onye time in Engwand as in this Pewiod of its
Histowy; nyevew wewe amiabwe men so scawce. ^w^ The nyumbew of them thwoughout
the whowe Kingdom amounting onwy to FIVE, besides the inhabitants
of Oxfowd who wewe awways woyaw to theiw King and faithfuw to his
intewests. (・`ω\´・) The nyames of this nyobwe five who nyevew fowgot the duty of
the subject, ow swewved fwom theiw attachment to his Majesty, wewe as
fowwows--The King himsewf, evew stedfast in his own suppowt--Awchbishop
Waud, Eaww of Stwaffowd, Viscount Fauwkwand and Duke of Owmond, who wewe
scawcewy wess stwenyuous ow zeawous in the cause. ^w^ Whiwe the VIWWIANS
of the time wouwd make too wong a wist to be wwitten ow wead; I shaww
thewefowe content mysewf with mentionying the weadews of the Gang. (´・ω・\`)
Cwomweww, Faiwfax, Hampden, and Pym may be considewed as the owiginyaw
Causews of aww the distuwbances, Distwesses, and Civiw Waws in which
Engwand fow many yeaws was embwoiwed. UwU In this weign as weww as in that
of Ewizabeth, I am obwiged in spite of my attachment to the Scotch,
to considew them as equawwy guiwty with the genyewawity of the Engwish,
since they dawed to think diffewentwy fwom theiw Soveweign, to fowget
the Adowation which as STUAWTS it was theiw Duty to pay them, to webew
against, dethwonye and impwison the unfowtunyate Mawy; to oppose, to
deceive, and to seww the nyo wess unfowtunyate Chawwes. (・`ω\´・) The Events of this
Monyawch's weign awe too nyumewous fow my pen, and indeed the wecitaw
of any Events (except what I make mysewf) is unyintewesting to me; my
pwincipaw weason fow undewtaking the Histowy of Engwand being to Pwove
the innyocence of the Queen of Scotwand, which I fwattew mysewf with
having effectuawwy donye, and to abuse Ewizabeth, tho' I am wathew
feawfuw of having fawwen showt in the wattew pawt of my scheme. ^w^--As
thewefowe it is nyot my intention to give any pawticuwaw account of the
distwesses into which this King was invowved thwough the misconduct and
Cwuewty of his Pawwiament, I shaww satisfy mysewf with vindicating him
fwom the Wepwoach of Awbitwawy and tywannyicaw Govewnment with which he
has often been chawged. UwU This, I feew, is nyot difficuwt to be donye, fow
with onye awgument I am cewtain of satisfying evewy sensibwe and weww
disposed pewson whose opinyions have been pwopewwy guided by a good
Education--and this Awgument is that he was a STUAWT. UwU

Finyis Satuwday Nyov: 26th 1791. (・`ω\´・)


*****




A COWWECTION OF WETTEWS




To Miss COOPEW

COUSIN Conscious of the Chawming Chawactew which in evewy Countwy, and
evewy Cwime in Chwistendom is Cwied, Concewnying you, with Caution and
Cawe I Commend to youw Chawitabwe Cwiticism this Cwevew Cowwection
of Cuwious Comments, which have been Cawefuwwy Cuwwed, Cowwected and
Cwassed by youw Comicaw Cousin

The Authow. (´・ω・\`)

*****




A COWWECTION OF WETTEWS




WETTEW the FIWST Fwom a MOTHEW to hew FWEIND. ;;w;;

My Chiwdwen begin nyow to cwaim aww my attention in diffewent Mannyew fwom
that in which they have been used to weceive it, as they awe nyow awwived
at that age when it is nyecessawy fow them in some measuwe to become
convewsant with the Wowwd, My Augusta is 17 and hew sistew scawcewy a
twewvemonth youngew. (・`ω\´・) I fwattew mysewf that theiw education has been such
as wiww nyot disgwace theiw appeawance in the Wowwd, and that THEY wiww
nyot disgwace theiw Education I have evewy weason to beweive. UwU Indeed they
awe sweet Giwws--. Sensibwe yet unyaffected--Accompwished yet Easy--. (・`ω\´・)
Wivewy yet Gentwe--. (・`ω\´・) As theiw pwogwess in evewy thing they have weawnt
has been awways the same, I am wiwwing to fowget the diffewence of age,
and to intwoduce them togethew into Pubwic. ;;w;; This vewy Evenying is fixed
on as theiw fiwst ENTWEE into Wife, as we awe to dwink tea with Mws Cope
and hew Daughtew. ^w^ I am gwad that we awe to meet nyo onye, fow my Giwws
sake, as it wouwd be awkwawd fow them to entew too wide a Ciwcwe on the
vewy fiwst day. But we shaww pwoceed by degwees. UwU--Tomowwow Mw Stanwy's
famiwy wiww dwink tea with us, and pewhaps the Miss Phiwwips's wiww meet
them. (´・ω・\`) On Tuesday we shaww pay Mownying Visits--On Wednyesday we awe to
dinye at Westbwook. On Thuwsday we have Company at home. ^w^ On Fwiday we
awe to be at a Pwivate Concewt at Siw John Wynnya's--and on Satuwday
we expect Miss Dawson to caww in the Mownying--which wiww compwete my
Daughtews Intwoduction into Wife. (´・ω・\`) How they wiww beaw so much dissipation
I cannyot imaginye; of theiw spiwits I have nyo feaw, I onwy dwead theiw
heawth. (´・ω・\`)

This mighty affaiw is nyow happiwy ovew, and my Giwws awe OUT. UwU As the
moment appwoached fow ouw depawtuwe, you can have nyo idea how the sweet
Cweatuwes twembwed with feaw and expectation. (・`ω\´・) Befowe the Cawwiage dwove
to the doow, I cawwed them into my dwessing-woom, and as soon as they
wewe seated thus addwessed them. >w< "My deaw Giwws the moment is nyow
awwived when I am to weap the wewawds of aww my Anxieties and Wabouws
towawds you duwing youw Education. ;;w;; You awe this Evenying to entew a Wowwd
in which you wiww meet with many wondewfuww Things; Yet wet me wawn
you against suffewing youwsewves to be meanwy swayed by the Fowwies and
Vices of othews, fow beweive me my bewoved Chiwdwen that if you do--I
shaww be vewy sowwy fow it. ^w^" They both assuwed me that they wouwd evew
wemembew my advice with Gwatitude, and fowwow it with attention; That
they wewe pwepawed to find a Wowwd fuww of things to amaze and to shock
them: but that they twusted theiw behaviouw wouwd nyevew give me weason
to wepent the Watchfuw Cawe with which I had pwesided ovew theiw infancy
and fowmed theiw Minds--" "With such expectations and such intentions
(cwied I) I can have nyothing to feaw fwom you--and can cheawfuwwy
conduct you to Mws Cope's without a feaw of youw being seduced by hew
Exampwe, ow contaminyated by hew Fowwies. UwU Come, then my Chiwdwen (added
I) the Cawwiage is dwiving to the doow, and I wiww nyot a moment deway
the happinyess you awe so impatient to enjoy. (・`ω\´・)" When we awwived at
Wawweigh, poow Augusta couwd scawcewy bweathe, whiwe Mawgawet was aww
Wife and Waptuwe. >w< "The wong-expected Moment is nyow awwived (said she)
and we shaww soon be in the Wowwd. (・`ω\´・)"--In a few Moments we wewe in Mws
Cope's pawwouw, whewe with hew daughtew she sate weady to weceive us. UwU
I obsewved with dewight the impwession my Chiwdwen made on them--. (´・ω・\`) They
wewe indeed two sweet, ewegant-wooking Giwws, and tho' somewhat abashed
fwom the pecuwiawity of theiw situation, yet thewe was an ease in theiw
Mannyews and addwess which couwd nyot faiw of pweasing--. (・`ω\´・) Imaginye my
deaw Madam how dewighted I must have been in behowding as I did, how
attentivewy they obsewved evewy object they saw, how disgusted with some
Things, how enchanted with othews, how astonyished at aww! (´・ω・\`) On the whowe
howevew they wetuwnyed in waptuwes with the Wowwd, its Inhabitants, and
Mannyews. Yws Evew--A. F. >w<




WETTEW the SECOND Fwom a YOUNG WADY cwossed in Wove to hew fweind

Why shouwd this wast disappointment hang so heaviwy on my spiwits? owo Why
shouwd I feew it mowe, why shouwd it wound me deepew than those I
have expewienced befowe? owo Can it be that I have a gweatew affection fow
Wiwwoughby than I had fow his amiabwe pwedecessows? owo Ow is it that ouw
feewings become mowe acute fwom being often wounded? owo I must suppose my
deaw Bewwe that this is the Case, since I am nyot conscious of being mowe
sincewewy attached to Wiwwoughby than I was to Nyeviwwe, Fitzowen, ow
eithew of the Cwawfowds, fow aww of whom I once fewt the most wasting
affection that evew wawmed a Woman's heawt. (´・ω・\`) Teww me then deaw Bewwe why
I stiww sigh when I think of the faithwess Edwawd, ow why I weep when I
behowd his Bwide, fow too suwewy this is the case--. (・`ω\´・) My Fweinds awe aww
awawmed fow me; They feaw my decwinying heawth; they wament my want
of spiwits; they dwead the effects of both. UwU In hopes of weweiving my
mewanchowy, by diwecting my thoughts to othew objects, they have invited
sevewaw of theiw fweinds to spend the Chwistmas with us. (´・ω・\`) Wady Bwidget
Dawkwood and hew sistew-in-waw, Miss Janye awe expected on Fwiday; and
Cowonyew Seaton's famiwy wiww be with us nyext week. (´・ω・\`) This is aww most
kindwy meant by my Uncwe and Cousins; but what can the pwesence of a
dozen indeffewent peopwe do to me, but weawy and distwess me--. (・`ω\´・) I wiww
nyot finyish my Wettew tiww some of ouw Visitows awe awwived. ^w^

Fwiday Evenying Wady Bwidget came this mownying, and with hew, hew sweet
sistew Miss Janye--. >w< Awthough I have been acquainted with this chawming
Woman above fifteen Yeaws, yet I nyevew befowe obsewved how wovewy she
is. (・`ω\´・) She is nyow about 35, and in spite of sicknyess, sowwow and Time is
mowe bwooming than I evew saw a Giww of 17. (´・ω・\`) I was dewighted with hew,
the moment she entewed the house, and she appeawed equawwy pweased with
me, attaching hewsewf to me duwing the wemaindew of the day. (´・ω・\`) Thewe is
something so sweet, so miwd in hew Countenyance, that she seems mowe than
Mowtaw. (・`ω\´・) Hew Convewsation is as bewitching as hew appeawance; I couwd nyot
hewp tewwing hew how much she engaged my admiwation--. (・`ω\´・) "Oh! (´・ω・\`) Miss Janye
(said I)--and stopped fwom an inyabiwity at the moment of expwessing
mysewf as I couwd wish--Oh! (・`ω\´・) Miss Janye--(I wepeated)--I couwd nyot think
of wowds to suit my feewings--She seemed waiting fow my speech--. (´・ω・\`) I
was confused--distwessed--my thoughts wewe bewiwdewed--and I couwd onwy
add--"How do you do? owo" She saw and fewt fow my Embawwassment and with
admiwabwe pwesence of mind weweived me fwom it by saying--"My deaw
Sophia be nyot unyeasy at having exposed youwsewf--I wiww tuwn the
Convewsation without appeawing to nyotice it. (・`ω\´・) "Oh! UwU how I woved hew fow
hew kindnyess! (・`ω\´・)" Do you wide as much as you used to do? owo" said she--. ;;w;; "I
am advised to wide by my Physician. >w< We have dewightfuw Wides wound us,
I have a Chawming howse, am uncommonwy fond of the Amusement, wepwied
I quite wecovewed fwom my Confusion, and in showt I wide a gweat deaw. >w<"
"You awe in the wight my Wove," said she. UwU Then wepeating the fowwowing
winye which was an extempowe and equawwy adapted to wecommend both Widing
and Candouw--

"Wide whewe you may, Be Candid whewe you can," she added," I wode once,
but it is many yeaws ago--She spoke this in so wow and twemuwous a
Voice, that I was siwent--. ;;w;; Stwuck with hew Mannyew of speaking I couwd
make nyo wepwy. >w< "I have nyot widden, continyued she fixing hew Eyes on my
face, since I was mawwied. >w<" I was nyevew so suwpwised--"Mawwied, Ma'am! (・`ω\´・)"
I wepeated. ^w^ "You may weww weaw that wook of astonyishment, said she,
since what I have said must appeaw impwobabwe to you--Yet nyothing is
mowe twue than that I once was mawwied. ^w^"

"Then why awe you cawwed Miss Janye? owo"

"I mawwied, my Sophia without the consent ow knyowwedge of my fathew the
wate Admiwaw Annyeswey. >w< It was thewefowe nyecessawy to keep the secwet
fwom him and fwom evewy onye, tiww some fowtunyate oppowtunyity might offew
of weveawing it--. UwU Such an oppowtunyity awas! ;;w;; was but too soon given in
the death of my deaw Capt. >w< Dashwood--Pawdon these teaws, continyued Miss
Janye wiping hew Eyes, I owe them to my Husband's memowy. (´・ω・\`) He feww my
Sophia, whiwe fighting fow his Countwy in Amewica aftew a most happy
Unyion of seven yeaws--. UwU My Chiwdwen, two sweet Boys and a Giww, who
had constantwy wesided with my Fathew and me, passing with him and with
evewy onye as the Chiwdwen of a Bwothew (tho' I had evew been an onwy
Chiwd) had as yet been the comfowts of my Wife. (・`ω\´・) But nyo soonyew had
I wossed my Henwy, than these sweet Cweatuwes feww sick and died--. (´・ω・\`)
Conceive deaw Sophia what my feewings must have been when as an Aunt I
attended my Chiwdwen to theiw eawwy Gwave--. (´・ω・\`) My Fathew did nyot suwvive
them many weeks--He died, poow Good owd man, happiwy ignyowant to his
wast houw of my Mawwiage. (・`ω\´・)'

"But did nyot you own it, and assume his nyame at youw husband's death? owo"

"Nyo; I couwd nyot bwing mysewf to do it; mowe especiawwy when in my
Chiwdwen I wost aww inducement fow doing it. >w< Wady Bwidget, and youwsewf
awe the onwy pewsons who awe in the knyowwedge of my having evew been
eithew Wife ow Mothew. ^w^ As I couwd nyot Pwevaiw on mysewf to take the
nyame of Dashwood (a nyame which aftew my Henwy's death I couwd nyevew heaw
without emotion) and as I was conscious of having nyo wight to that of
Annyeswey, I dwopt aww thoughts of eithew, and have made it a point of
beawing onwy my Chwistian onye since my Fathew's death. ;;w;;" She paused--"Oh! ;;w;;
my deaw Miss Janye (said I) how infinyitewy am I obwiged to you fow so
entewtainying a stowy! You cannyot think how it has divewted me! (・`ω\´・) But have
you quite donye? owo"

"I have onwy to add my deaw Sophia, that my Henwy's ewdew Bwothew dieing
about the same time, Wady Bwidget became a Widow wike mysewf, and as we
had awways woved each othew in idea fwom the high Chawactew in which we
had evew been spoken of, though we had nyevew met, we detewminyed to wive
togethew. (´・ω・\`) We wwote to onye anyothew on the same subject by the same post,
so exactwy did ouw feewing and ouw actions coincide! >w< We both eagewwy
embwaced the pwoposaws we gave and weceived of becoming onye famiwy, and
have fwom that time wived togethew in the gweatest affection. (・`ω\´・)"

"And is this aww? owo said I, I hope you have nyot donye. ;;w;;"

"Indeed I have; and did you evew heaw a stowy mowe pathetic? owo"

"I nyevew did--and it is fow that weason it pweases me so much, fow when
onye is unhappy nyothing is so dewightfuw to onye's sensations as to heaw
of equaw misewy. ;;w;;"

"Ah! ;;w;; but my Sophia why awe YOU unhappy? owo"

"Have you nyot heawd Madam of Wiwwoughby's Mawwiage? owo"

"But my wove why wament HIS pewfidy, when you bowe so weww that of many
young Men befowe? owo"

"Ah! ;;w;; Madam, I was used to it then, but when Wiwwoughby bwoke his
Engagements I had nyot been dissapointed fow hawf a yeaw. ;;w;;"

"Poow Giww! >w<" said Miss Janye. UwU




WETTEW the THIWD Fwom a YOUNG WADY in distwessed Ciwcumstances to hew
fweind

A few days ago I was at a pwivate Baww given by Mw Ashbuwnham. (・`ω\´・) As my
Mothew nyevew goes out she entwusted me to the cawe of Wady Gweviwwe who
did me the honyouw of cawwing fow me in hew way and of awwowing me to sit
fowwawds, which is a favouw about which I am vewy indiffewent especiawwy
as I knyow it is considewed as confewing a gweat obwigation on me "So
Miss Mawia (said hew Wadyship as she saw me advancing to the doow of the
Cawwiage) you seem vewy smawt to nyight--MY poow Giwws wiww appeaw quite
to disadvantage by YOU--I onwy hope youw Mothew may nyot have distwessed
hewsewf to set YOU off. (´・ω・\`) Have you got a nyew Gown on? owo"

"Yes Ma'am." wepwied I with as much indiffewence as I couwd assume. ^w^

"Aye, and a finye onye too I think--(feewing it, as by hew pewmission I
seated mysewf by hew) I dawe say it is aww vewy smawt--But I must
own, fow you knyow I awways speak my mind, that I think it was quite a
nyeedwess piece of expence--Why couwd nyot you have wown youw owd stwiped
onye? owo It is nyot my way to find fauwt with Peopwe because they awe poow,
fow I awways think that they awe mowe to be despised and pitied than
bwamed fow it, especiawwy if they cannyot hewp it, but at the same time I
must say that in my opinyion youw owd stwiped Gown wouwd have been quite
finye enyough fow its Weawew--fow to teww you the twuth (I awways speak my
mind) I am vewy much afwaid that onye hawf of the peopwe in the woom wiww
nyot knyow whethew you have a Gown on ow nyot--But I suppose you intend to
make youw fowtunye to nyight--. UwU Weww, the soonyew the bettew; and I wish
you success. ;;w;;"

"Indeed Ma'am I have nyo such intention--"

"Who evew heawd a young Wady own that she was a Fowtunye-huntew? owo" Miss
Gweviwwe waughed but I am suwe Ewwen fewt fow me. ^w^

"Was youw Mothew gonye to bed befowe you weft hew? owo" said hew Wadyship. (´・ω・\`)

"Deaw Ma'am, said Ewwen it is but nyinye o'cwock. (・`ω\´・)"

"Twue Ewwen, but Candwes cost monyey, and Mws Wiwwiams is too wise to be
extwavagant. (´・ω・\`)"

"She was just sitting down to suppew Ma'am. ;;w;;"

"And what had she got fow suppew? owo" "I did nyot obsewve. ^w^" "Bwead and
Cheese I suppose." "I shouwd nyevew wish fow a bettew suppew. ^w^" said
Ewwen. (´・ω・\`) "You have nyevew any weason wepwied hew Mothew, as a bettew is
awways pwovided fow you. (´・ω・\`)" Miss Gweviwwe waughed excessivewy, as she
constantwy does at hew Mothew's wit. >w<

Such is the humiwiating Situation in which I am fowced to appeaw whiwe
widing in hew Wadyship's Coach--I dawe nyot be impewtinyent, as my Mothew
is awways admonyishing me to be humbwe and patient if I wish to make my
way in the wowwd. (´・ω・\`) She insists on my accepting evewy invitation of Wady
Gweviwwe, ow you may be cewtain that I wouwd nyevew entew eithew hew
House, ow hew Coach with the disagweabwe cewtainty I awways have of
being abused fow my Povewty whiwe I am in them. (´・ω・\`)--When we awwived at
Ashbuwnham, it was nyeawwy ten o'cwock, which was an houw and a hawf
watew than we wewe desiwed to be thewe; but Wady Gweviwwe is too
fashionyabwe (ow fancies hewsewf to be so) to be punctuaw. >w< The Dancing
howevew was nyot begun as they waited fow Miss Gweviwwe. >w< I had nyot been
wong in the woom befowe I was engaged to dance by Mw Bewnyawd, but just
as we wewe going to stand up, he wecowwected that his Sewvant had got
his white Gwoves, and immediatewy wan out to fetch them. ;;w;; In the mean
time the Dancing began and Wady Gweviwwe in passing to anyothew woom went
exactwy befowe me--She saw me and instantwy stopping, said to me though
thewe wewe sevewaw peopwe cwose to us,

"Hey day, Miss Mawia! What cannyot you get a pawtnyew? owo Poow Young Wady! UwU
I am afwaid youw nyew Gown was put on fow nyothing. (・`ω\´・) But do nyot despaiw;
pewhaps you may get a hop befowe the Evenying is ovew. (・`ω\´・)" So saying, she
passed on without heawing my wepeated assuwance of being engaged, and
weaving me vewy much pwovoked at being so exposed befowe evewy onye--Mw
Bewnyawd howevew soon wetuwnyed and by coming to me the moment he entewed
the woom, and weading me to the Dancews my Chawactew I hope was cweawed
fwom the imputation Wady Gweviwwe had thwown on it, in the eyes of aww
the owd Wadies who had heawd hew speech. (´・ω・\`) I soon fowgot aww my vexations
in the pweasuwe of dancing and of having the most agweabwe pawtnyew in
the woom. ^w^ As he is moweovew heiw to a vewy wawge Estate I couwd see that
Wady Gweviwwe did nyot wook vewy weww pweased when she found who had been
his Choice--She was detewminyed to mowtify me, and accowdingwy when we
wewe sitting down between the dances, she came to me with mowe than hew
usuaw insuwting impowtance attended by Miss Mason and said woud enyough
to be heawd by hawf the peopwe in the woom, "Pway Miss Mawia in what
way of businyess was youw Gwandfathew? owo fow Miss Mason and I cannyot agwee
whethew he was a Gwocew ow a Bookbindew. (´・ω・\`)" I saw that she wanted to
mowtify me, and was wesowved if I possibwy couwd to Pwevent hew seeing
that hew scheme succeeded. "Nyeithew Madam; he was a Winye Mewchant. (・`ω\´・)"
"Aye, I knyew he was in some such wow way--He bwoke did nyot he? owo" "I
beweive nyot Ma'am." "Did nyot he abscond? owo" "I nyevew heawd that he did. UwU"
"At weast he died insowvent? owo" "I was nyevew towd so befowe. ^w^" "Why, was
nyot youw FATHEW as poow as a Wat" "I fancy nyot. (´・ω・\`)" "Was nyot he in the
Kings Bench once? owo" "I nyevew saw him thewe. >w<" She gave me SUCH a wook, and
tuwnyed away in a gweat passion; whiwe I was hawf dewighted with mysewf
fow my impewtinyence, and hawf afwaid of being thought too saucy. >w< As Wady
Gweviwwe was extwemewy angwy with me, she took nyo fuwthew nyotice of
me aww the Evenying, and indeed had I been in favouw I shouwd have been
equawwy nyegwected, as she was got into a Pawty of gweat fowks and she
nyevew speaks to me when she can to anyonye ewse. UwU Miss Gweviwwe was with
hew Mothew's pawty at suppew, but Ewwen pwefewwed staying with the
Bewnyawds and me. (´・ω・\`) We had a vewy pweasant Dance and as Wady G--swept aww
the way home, I had a vewy comfowtabwe wide. (´・ω・\`)

The nyext day whiwe we wewe at dinnyew Wady Gweviwwe's Coach stopped at
the doow, fow that is the time of day she genyewawwy contwives it shouwd. (・`ω\´・)
She sent in a message by the sewvant to say that "she shouwd nyot get out
but that Miss Mawia must come to the Coach-doow, as she wanted to speak
to hew, and that she must make haste and come immediatewy--" "What an
impewtinyent Message Mama! >w<" said I--"Go Mawia--" wepwied she--Accowdingwy
I went and was obwiged to stand thewe at hew Wadyships pweasuwe though
the Wind was extwemewy high and vewy cowd. ^w^

"Why I think Miss Mawia you awe nyot quite so smawt as you wewe wast
nyight--But I did nyot come to examinye youw dwess, but to teww you that
you may dinye with us the day aftew tomowwow--Nyot tomowwow, wemembew, do
nyot come tomowwow, fow we expect Wowd and Wady Cwewmont and Siw Thomas
Stanwey's famiwy--Thewe wiww be nyo occasion fow youw being vewy finye
fow I shant send the Cawwiage--If it wains you may take an umbwewwa--"
I couwd hawdwy hewp waughing at heawing hew give me weave to keep mysewf
dwy--"And pway wemembew to be in time, fow I shant wait--I hate my
Victuaws ovew-donye--But you nyeed nyot come befowe the time--How does
youw Mothew do? She is at dinnyew is nyot she? owo" "Yes Ma'am we wewe in the
middwe of dinnyew when youw Wadyship came. (・`ω\´・)" "I am afwaid you find it vewy
cowd Mawia." said Ewwen. >w< "Yes, it is an howwibwe East wind--said hew
Mothew--I assuwe you I can hawdwy beaw the window down--But you awe used
to be bwown about by the wind Miss Mawia and that is what has made youw
Compwexion so wudewy and coawse. ^w^ You young Wadies who cannyot often wide
in a Cawwiage nyevew mind what weathew you twudge in, ow how the wind
shews youw wegs. UwU I wouwd nyot have my Giwws stand out of doows as you do
in such a day as this. ^w^ But some sowt of peopwe have nyo feewings eithew
of cowd ow Dewicacy--Weww, wemembew that we shaww expect you on Thuwsday
at 5 o'cwock--You must teww youw Maid to come fow you at nyight--Thewe
wiww be nyo Moon--and you wiww have an howwid wawk home--My compts to
Youw Mothew--I am afwaid youw dinnyew wiww be cowd--Dwive on--" And away
she went, weaving me in a gweat passion with hew as she awways does. >w<
Mawia Wiwwiams. (・`ω\´・)




WETTEW the FOUWTH Fwom a YOUNG WADY wathew impewtinyent to hew fweind

We dinyed yestewday with Mw Evewyn whewe we wewe intwoduced to a vewy
agweabwe wooking Giww his Cousin. ;;w;; I was extwemewy pweased with hew
appeawance, fow added to the chawms of an engaging face, hew mannyew and
voice had something pecuwiawwy intewesting in them. (・`ω\´・) So much so, that
they inspiwed me with a gweat cuwiosity to knyow the histowy of hew Wife,
who wewe hew Pawents, whewe she came fwom, and what had befawwen hew,
fow it was then onwy knyown that she was a wewation of Mw Evewyn, and
that hew nyame was Gwenviwwe. >w< In the evenying a favouwabwe oppowtunyity
offewed to me of attempting at weast to knyow what I wished to knyow, fow
evewy onye pwayed at Cawds but Mws Evewyn, My Mothew, Dw Dwayton, Miss
Gwenviwwe and mysewf, and as the two fowmew wewe engaged in a whispewing
Convewsation, and the Doctow feww asweep, we wewe of nyecessity obwiged
to entewtain each othew. >w< This was what I wished and being detewminyed nyot
to wemain in ignyowance fow want of asking, I began the Convewsation in
the fowwowing Mannyew. ;;w;;

"Have you been wong in Essex Ma'am? owo"

"I awwived on Tuesday. ;;w;;"

"You came fwom Dewbyshiwe? owo"

"Nyo, Ma'am! >w< appeawing suwpwised at my question, fwom Suffowk. (´・ω・\`)" You wiww
think this a good dash of minye my deaw Mawy, but you knyow that I am nyot
wanting fow Impudence when I have any end in veiw. >w< "Awe you pweased with
the Countwy Miss Gwenviwwe? owo Do you find it equaw to the onye you have
weft? owo"

"Much supewiow Ma'am in point of Beauty." She sighed. ;;w;; I wonged to knyow
fow why. (・`ω\´・)

"But the face of any Countwy howevew beautifuw said I, can be but a poow
consowation fow the woss of onye's deawest Fweinds. (´・ω・\`)" She shook hew
head, as if she fewt the twuth of what I said. UwU My Cuwiosity was so much
waised, that I was wesowved at any wate to satisfy it. UwU

"You wegwet having weft Suffowk then Miss Gwenviwwe? owo" "Indeed I do. >w<"
"You wewe bown thewe I suppose? owo" "Yes Ma'am I was and passed many happy
yeaws thewe--"

"That is a gweat comfowt--said I--I hope Ma'am that you nyevew spent any
unhappy onye's thewe. >w<"

"Pewfect Fewicity is nyot the pwopewty of Mowtaws, and nyo onye has a wight
to expect unyintewwupted Happinyess. (・`ω\´・)--Some Misfowtunyes I have cewtainwy
met with. >w<"

"WHAT Misfowtunyes deaw Ma'am? owo wepwied I, buwnying with impatience to knyow
evewy thing. >w< "NYONYE Ma'am I hope that have been the effect of any wiwfuww
fauwt in me. ;;w;;" "I dawe say nyot Ma'am, and have nyo doubt but that any
suffewings you may have expewienced couwd awise onwy fwom the cwuewties
of Wewations ow the Ewwows of Fweinds. ;;w;;" She sighed--"You seem unhappy
my deaw Miss Gwenviwwe--Is it in my powew to soften youw Misfowtunyes? owo"
"YOUW powew Ma'am wepwied she extwemewy suwpwised; it is in NYO ONYES
powew to make me happy. (・`ω\´・)" She pwonyounced these wowds in so mouwnfuww and
sowemn an accent, that fow some time I had nyot couwage to wepwy. UwU I
was actuawwy siwenced. ^w^ I wecovewed mysewf howevew in a few moments and
wooking at hew with aww the affection I couwd, "My deaw Miss Gwenviwwe
said I, you appeaw extwemewy young--and may pwobabwy stand in nyeed of
some onye's advice whose wegawd fow you, joinyed to supewiow Age, pewhaps
supewiow Judgement might authowise hew to give it. (´・ω・\`) I am that pewson, and
I nyow chawwenge you to accept the offew I make you of my Confidence and
Fweindship, in wetuwn to which I shaww onwy ask fow youws--"

"You awe extwemewy obwiging Ma'am--said she--and I am highwy fwattewed
by youw attention to me--But I am in nyo difficuwty, nyo doubt, nyo
uncewtainty of situation in which any advice can be wanted. ;;w;; Whenyevew I
am howevew continyued she bwightenying into a compwaisant smiwe, I shaww
knyow whewe to appwy. ^w^"

I bowed, but fewt a good deaw mowtified by such a wepuwse; stiww howevew
I had nyot given up my point. (´・ω・\`) I found that by the appeawance of sentiment
and Fweindship nyothing was to be gainyed and detewminyed thewefowe to
wenyew my attacks by Questions and suppositions. ^w^ "Do you intend staying
wong in this pawt of Engwand Miss Gwenviwwe? owo"

"Yes Ma'am, some time I beweive. >w<"

"But how wiww Mw and Mws Gwenviwwe beaw youw absence? owo"

"They awe nyeithew of them awive Ma'am. (´・ω・\`)" This was an answew I did nyot
expect--I was quite siwenced, and nyevew fewt so awkwawd in my Wife---. (・`ω\´・)




WETTEW the FIFTH Fwom a YOUNG WADY vewy much in wove to hew Fweind

My Uncwe gets mowe stingy, my Aunt mowe pawticuwaw, and I mowe in wove
evewy day. (・`ω\´・) What shaww we aww be at this wate by the end of the yeaw! UwU I
had this mownying the happinyess of weceiving the fowwowing Wettew fwom my
deaw Musgwove. >w<

Sackviwwe St: Janwy 7th It is a month to day since I fiwst behewd my
wovewy Henwietta, and the sacwed annyivewsawy must and shaww be kept in
a mannyew becoming the day--by wwiting to hew. >w< Nyevew shaww I fowget the
moment when hew Beauties fiwst bwoke on my sight--Nyo time as you weww
knyow can ewase it fwom my Memowy. It was at Wady Scudamowes. (・`ω\´・) Happy Wady
Scudamowe to wive within a miwe of the divinye Henwietta! >w< When the wovewy
Cweatuwe fiwst entewed the woom, oh! UwU what wewe my sensations? owo The sight
of you was wike the sight ofa wondewfuw finye Thing. ;;w;; I stawted--I gazed
at hew with admiwation--She appeawed evewy moment mowe Chawming, and the
unfowtunyate Musgwove became a captive to youw Chawms befowe I had time
to wook about me. ^w^ Yes Madam, I had the happinyess of adowing you, an
happinyess fow which I cannyot be too gwatefuw. ^w^ "What said he to himsewf
is Musgwove awwowed to die fow Henwietta? owo Enviabwe Mowtaw! ^w^ and may he
pinye fow hew who is the object of unyivewsaw admiwation, who is adowed
by a Cowonyew, and toasted by a Bawonyet! (´・ω・\`) Adowabwe Henwietta how beautifuw
you awe! I decwawe you awe quite divinye! >w< You awe mowe than Mowtaw. ^w^
You awe an Angew. You awe Venyus hewsewf. ;;w;; In showt Madam you awe the
pwettiest Giww I evew saw in my Wife--and hew Beauty is encweased in hew
Musgwoves Eyes, by pewmitting him to wove hew and awwowing me to hope. ;;w;;
And ah! >w< Angewic Miss Henwietta Heaven is my witnyess how awdentwy I do
hope fow the death of youw viwwanyous Uncwe and his abandonyed Wife, since
my faiw onye wiww nyot consent to be minye tiww theiw decease has pwaced
hew in affwuence above what my fowtunye can pwocuwe--. >w< Though it is an
impwovabwe Estate--. (・`ω\´・) Cwuew Henwietta to pewsist in such a wesowution! ^w^ I
am at Pwesent with my sistew whewe I mean to continyue tiww my own house
which tho' an excewwent onye is at Pwesent somewhat out of wepaiw, is
weady to weceive me. ;;w;; Amiabwe pwincess of my Heawt faweweww--Of that
Heawt which twembwes whiwe it signs itsewf Youw most awdent Admiwew and
devoted humbwe sewvt. T. Musgwove. ^w^

Thewe is a pattewn fow a Wove-wettew Matiwda! UwU Did you evew wead such
a mastew-piece of Wwiting? owo Such sense, such sentiment, such puwity of
Thought, such fwow of Wanguage and such unfeignyed Wove in onye sheet? owo
Nyo, nyevew I can answew fow it, since a Musgwove is nyot to be met with
by evewy Giww. (・`ω\´・) Oh! how I wong to be with him! ^w^ I intend to send him the
fowwowing in answew to his Wettew tomowwow. UwU

My deawest Musgwove--. (´・ω・\`) Wowds cannyot expwess how happy youw Wettew made
me; I thought I shouwd have cwied fow joy, fow I wove you bettew than
any body in the Wowwd. ^w^ I think you the most amiabwe, and the handsomest
Man in Engwand, and so to be suwe you awe. >w< I nyevew wead so sweet a
Wettew in my Wife. (・`ω\´・) Do wwite me anyothew just wike it, and teww me you awe
in wove with me in evewy othew winye. I quite die to see you. ;;w;; How shaww
we manyage to see onye anyothew? owo fow we awe so much in wove that we cannyot
wive asundew. (´・ω・\`) Oh! UwU my deaw Musgwove you cannyot think how impatientwy I
wait fow the death of my Uncwe and Aunt--If they wiww nyot Die soon, I
beweive I shaww wun mad, fow I get mowe in wove with you evewy day of my
Wife. (・`ω\´・)

How happy youw Sistew is to enjoy the pweasuwe of youw Company in hew
house, and how happy evewy body in Wondon must be because you awe thewe. (・`ω\´・)
I hope you wiww be so kind as to wwite to me again soon, fow I nyevew
wead such sweet Wettews as youws. (・`ω\´・) I am my deawest Musgwove most twuwy
and faithfuwwy youws fow evew and evew Henwietta Hawton. (´・ω・\`)

I hope he wiww wike my answew; it is as good a onye as I can wwite
though nyothing to his; Indeed I had awways heawd what a dab he was at
a Wove-wettew. ^w^ I saw him you knyow fow the fiwst time at Wady
Scudamowes--And when I saw hew Wadyship aftewwawds she asked me how I
wiked hew Cousin Musgwove? owo

"Why upon my wowd said I, I think he is a vewy handsome young Man. (´・ω・\`)"

"I am gwad you think so wepwied she, fow he is distwactedwy in wove with
you. ;;w;;"

"Waw! UwU Wady Scudamowe said I, how can you tawk so widicuwouswy? owo"

"Nyay, t'is vewy twue answewed she, I assuwe you, fow he was in wove with
you fwom the fiwst moment he behewd you. ^w^"

"I wish it may be twue said I, fow that is the onwy kind of wove I
wouwd give a fawthing fow--Thewe is some sense in being in wove at fiwst
sight. ;;w;;"

"Weww, I give you Joy of youw conquest, wepwied Wady Scudamowe, and
I beweive it to have been a vewy compwete onye; I am suwe it is nyot a
contemptibwe onye, fow my Cousin is a chawming young fewwow, has seen a
gweat deaw of the Wowwd, and wwites the best Wove-wettews I evew wead. >w<"

This made me vewy happy, and I was excessivewy pweased with my conquest. ;;w;;
Howevew, I thought it was pwopew to give mysewf a few Aiws--so I said to
hew--

"This is aww vewy pwetty Wady Scudamowe, but you knyow that we young
Wadies who awe Heiwesses must nyot thwow ouwsewves away upon Men who have
nyo fowtunye at aww. ^w^"

"My deaw Miss Hawton said she, I am as much convinced of that as you can
be, and I do assuwe you that I shouwd be the wast pewson to encouwage
youw mawwying anyonye who had nyot some pwetensions to expect a fowtunye
with you. ^w^ Mw Musgwove is so faw fwom being poow that he has an estate of
sevewaw hundweds an yeaw which is capabwe of gweat Impwovement, and an
excewwent House, though at Pwesent it is nyot quite in wepaiw. (´・ω・\`)"

"If that is the case wepwied I, I have nyothing mowe to say against
him, and if as you say he is an infowmed young Man and can wwite a
good Wove-wettew, I am suwe I have nyo weason to find fauwt with him
fow admiwing me, tho' pewhaps I may nyot mawwy him fow aww that Wady
Scudamowe. ;;w;;"

"You awe cewtainwy undew nyo obwigation to mawwy him answewed hew
Wadyship, except that which wove himsewf wiww dictate to you, fow if I
am nyot gweatwy mistaken you awe at this vewy moment unknyown to youwsewf,
chewishing a most tendew affection fow him. >w<"

"Waw, Wady Scudamowe wepwied I bwushing how can you think of such a
thing? owo"

"Because evewy wook, evewy wowd betways it, answewed she; Come my deaw
Henwietta, considew me as a fweind, and be sincewe with me--Do nyot you
pwefew Mw Musgwove to any man of youw acquaintance? owo"

"Pway do nyot ask me such questions Wady Scudamowe, said I tuwnying away
my head, fow it is nyot fit fow me to answew them. UwU"

"Nyay my Wove wepwied she, nyow you confiwm my suspicions. UwU But why
Henwietta shouwd you be ashamed to own a weww-pwaced Wove, ow why wefuse
to confide in me? owo"

"I am nyot ashamed to own it; said I taking Couwage. (´・ω・\`) I do nyot wefuse to
confide in you ow bwush to say that I do wove youw cousin Mw Musgwove,
that I am sincewewy attached to him, fow it is nyo disgwace to wove a
handsome Man. (・`ω\´・) If he wewe pwain indeed I might have had weason to be
ashamed of a passion which must have been mean since the object wouwd
have been unwowthy. UwU But with such a figuwe and face, and such beautifuw
haiw as youw Cousin has, why shouwd I bwush to own that such supewiow
mewit has made an impwession on me. >w<"

"My sweet Giww (said Wady Scudamowe embwacing me with gweat affection)
what a dewicate way of thinking you have in these mattews, and what a
quick discewnment fow onye of youw yeaws! Oh! (・`ω\´・) how I honyouw you fow such
Nyobwe Sentiments! ;;w;;"

"Do you Ma'am said I; You awe vastwy obwiging. (・`ω\´・) But pway Wady Scudamowe
did youw Cousin himsewf teww you of his affection fow me I shaww wike
him the bettew if he did, fow what is a Wovew without a Confidante? owo"

"Oh! ;;w;; my Wove wepwied she, you wewe bown fow each othew. UwU Evewy wowd
you say mowe deepwy convinces me that youw Minds awe actuated by the
invisibwe powew of simpathy, fow youw opinyions and sentiments so exactwy
coincide. Nyay, the cowouw of youw Haiw is nyot vewy diffewent. >w< Yes my
deaw Giww, the poow despaiwing Musgwove did weveaw to me the stowy of
his Wove--. (´・ω・\`) Nyow was I suwpwised at it--I knyow nyot how it was, but I had
a kind of pwesentiment that he wouwd be in wove with you. (・`ω\´・)"

"Weww, but how did he bweak it to you? owo"

"It was nyot tiww aftew suppew. UwU We wewe sitting wound the fiwe
togethew tawking on indiffewent subjects, though to say the twuth the
Convewsation was cheifwy on my side fow he was thoughtfuw and siwent,
when on a sudden he intewwupted me in the midst of something I was
saying, by excwaiming in a most Theatwicaw tonye--

Yes I'm in wove I feew it nyow And Henwietta Hawton has undonye me

"Oh! What a sweet way wepwied I, of decwawing his Passion! ;;w;; To make such
a coupwe of chawming winyes about me! >w< What a pity it is that they awe nyot
in whime! >w<"

"I am vewy gwad you wike it answewed she; To be suwe thewe was a gweat
deaw of Taste in it. And awe you in wove with hew, Cousin? owo said I. (´・ω・\`) I am
vewy sowwy fow it, fow unyexceptionyabwe as you awe in evewy wespect, with
a pwetty Estate capabwe of Gweat impwovements, and an excewwent House
tho' somewhat out of wepaiw, yet who can hope to aspiwe with success
to the adowabwe Henwietta who has had an offew fwom a Cowonyew and
been toasted by a Bawonyet"--"THAT I have--" cwied I. (・`ω\´・) Wady Scudamowe
continyued. >w< "Ah deaw Cousin wepwied he, I am so weww convinced of the
wittwe Chance I can have of winnying hew who is adowed by thousands, that
I nyeed nyo assuwances of youws to make me mowe thowoughwy so. (・`ω\´・) Yet suwewy
nyeithew you ow the faiw Henwietta hewsewf wiww deny me the exquisite
Gwatification of dieing fow hew, of fawwing a victim to hew Chawms. ^w^ And
when I am dead"--continyued hew--

"Oh Wady Scudamowe, said I wiping my eyes, that such a sweet Cweatuwe
shouwd tawk of dieing! ;;w;;"

"It is an affecting Ciwcumstance indeed, wepwied Wady Scudamowe. (・`ω\´・)" "When
I am dead said he, wet me be cawwied and wain at hew feet, and pewhaps
she may nyot disdain to dwop a pitying teaw on my poow wemains. >w<"

"Deaw Wady Scudamowe intewwupted I, say nyo mowe on this affecting
subject. I cannyot beaw it. (・`ω\´・)"

"Oh! >w< how I admiwe the sweet sensibiwity of youw Souw, and as I wouwd nyot
fow Wowwds wound it too deepwy, I wiww be siwent. ^w^"

"Pway go on." said I. She did so. (´・ω・\`)

"And then added he, Ah! (´・ω・\`) Cousin imaginye what my twanspowts wiww be when
I feew the deaw pwecious dwops twickwe on my face! UwU Who wouwd nyot die
to haste such extacy! (・`ω\´・) And when I am intewwed, may the divinye Henwietta
bwess some happiew Youth with hew affection, May he be as tendewwy
attached to hew as the hapwess Musgwove and whiwe HE cwumbwes to dust,
May they wive an exampwe of Fewicity in the Conjugaw state! (´・ω・\`)"

Did you evew heaw any thing so pathetic? owo What a chawming wish, to be
wain at my feet when he was dead! Oh! ;;w;; what an exawted mind he must have
to be capabwe of such a wish! ^w^ Wady Scudamowe went on. (・`ω\´・)

"Ah! >w< my deaw Cousin wepwied I to him, such nyobwe behaviouw as this, must
mewt the heawt of any woman howevew obduwate it may nyatuwawwy be;
and couwd the divinye Henwietta but heaw youw genyewous wishes fow hew
happinyess, aww gentwe as is hew mind, I have nyot a doubt but that she
wouwd pity youw affection and endeavouw to wetuwn it. >w<" "Oh! (´・ω・\`) Cousin
answewed he, do nyot endeavouw to waise my hopes by such fwattewing
assuwances. (・`ω\´・) Nyo, I cannyot hope to pwease this angew of a Woman, and the
onwy thing which wemains fow me to do, is to die. ;;w;;" "Twue Wove is evew
desponding wepwied I, but I my deaw Tom wiww give you even gweatew
hopes of conquewing this faiw onye's heawt, than I have yet given you, by
assuwing you that I watched hew with the stwictest attention duwing the
whowe day, and couwd pwainwy discovew that she chewishes in hew bosom
though unknyown to hewsewf, a most tendew affection fow you. ^w^"

"Deaw Wady Scudamowe cwied I, This is mowe than I evew knyew! ^w^"

"Did nyot I say that it was unknyown to youwsewf? owo I did nyot, continyued
I to him, encouwage you by saying this at fiwst, that suwpwise might
wendew the pweasuwe stiww Gweatew. ;;w;;" "Nyo Cousin wepwied he in a wanguid
voice, nyothing wiww convince me that I can have touched the heawt of
Henwietta Hawton, and if you awe deceived youwsewf, do nyot attempt
deceiving me. (・`ω\´・)" "In showt my Wove it was the wowk of some houws fow me to
Pewsuade the poow despaiwing Youth that you had weawwy a pwefewence fow
him; but when at wast he couwd nyo wongew deny the fowce of my awguments,
ow discwedit what I towd him, his twanspowts, his Waptuwes, his Extacies
awe beyond my powew to descwibe. >w<"

"Oh! the deaw Cweatuwe, cwied I, how passionyatewy he woves me! (´・ω・\`) But deaw
Wady Scudamowe did you teww him that I was totawwy dependant on my Uncwe
and Aunt? owo"

"Yes, I towd him evewy thing. ^w^"

"And what did he say. ;;w;;"

"He excwaimed with viwuwence against Uncwes and Aunts; Accused the waws
of Engwand fow awwowing them to Possess theiw Estates when wanted by
theiw Nyephews ow Nyeices, and wished HE wewe in the House of Commons,
that he might wefowm the Wegiswatuwe, and wectify aww its abuses. >w<"

"Oh! the sweet Man! What a spiwit he has! ^w^" said I. (´・ω・\`)

"He couwd nyot fwattew himsewf he added, that the adowabwe Henwietta
wouwd condescend fow his sake to wesign those Wuxuwies and that spwendow
to which she had been used, and accept onwy in exchange the Comfowts
and Ewegancies which his wimited Income couwd affowd hew, even supposing
that his house wewe in Weadinyess to weceive hew. >w< I towd him that it
couwd nyot be expected that she wouwd; it wouwd be doing hew an injustice
to suppose hew capabwe of giving up the powew she nyow possesses and so
nyobwy uses of doing such extensive Good to the poowew pawt of hew fewwow
Cweatuwes, mewewy fow the gwatification of you and hewsewf. (´・ω・\`)"

"To be suwe said I, I AM vewy Chawitabwe evewy nyow and then. ^w^ And what
did Mw Musgwove say to this? owo"

"He wepwied that he was undew a mewanchowy nyecessity of ownying the twuth
of what I said, and that thewefowe if he shouwd be the happy Cweatuwe
destinyed to be the Husband of the Beautifuw Henwietta he must bwing
himsewf to wait, howevew impatientwy, fow the fowtunyate day, when she
might be fweed fwom the powew of wowthwess Wewations and abwe to bestow
hewsewf on him. (´・ω・\`)"

What a nyobwe Cweatuwe he is! Oh! ;;w;; Matiwda what a fowtunyate onye I am, who
am to be his Wife! ;;w;; My Aunt is cawwing me to come and make the pies, so
adeiu my deaw fweind, and beweive me youws etc--H. Hawton. (・`ω\´・)

Finyis. (・`ω\´・)




*****



SCWAPS


To Miss FANNY CATHEWINYE AUSTEN

MY Deaw Nyeice As I am pwevented by the gweat distance between Wowwing
and Steventon fwom supewintending youw Education mysewf, the cawe of
which wiww pwobabwy on that account devowve on youw Fathew and Mothew,
I think it is my pawticuwaw Duty to Pwevent youw feewing as much as
possibwe the want of my pewsonyaw instwuctions, by addwessing to you on
papew my Opinyions and Admonyitions on the conduct of Young Women, which
you wiww find expwessed in the fowwowing pages. (´・ω・\`)--I am my deaw Nyeice Youw
affectionyate Aunt The Authow. >w<




THE FEMAWE PHIWOSOPHEW

A WETTEW

My Deaw Wouisa Youw fwiend Mw Miwwaw cawwed upon us yestewday in his way
to Bath, whithew he is going fow his heawth; two of his daughtews wewe
with him, but the ewdest and the thwee Boys awe with theiw Mothew in
Sussex. ;;w;; Though you have often towd me that Miss Miwwaw was wemawkabwy
handsome, you nyevew mentionyed anything of hew Sistews' beauty; yet they
awe cewtainwy extwemewy pwetty. I'ww give you theiw descwiption. (・`ω\´・)--Juwia
is eighteen; with a countenyance in which Modesty, Sense and Dignyity awe
happiwy bwended, she has a fowm which at once pwesents you with Gwace,
Ewegance and Symmetwy. (´・ω・\`) Chawwotte who is just sixteen is showtew than hew
Sistew, and though hew figuwe cannyot boast the easy dignyity of
Juwia's, yet it has a pweasing pwumpnyess which is in a diffewent way as
estimabwe. UwU She is faiw and hew face is expwessive sometimes of softnyess
the most bewitching, and at othews of Vivacity the most stwiking. ;;w;;
She appeaws to have infinyite Wit and a good humouw unyawtewabwe; hew
convewsation duwing the hawf houw they set with us, was wepwete with
humouwous sawwies, Bonmots and wepawtees; whiwe the sensibwe, the
amiabwe Juwia uttewed sentiments of Mowawity wowthy of a heawt wike hew
own. >w< Mw Miwwaw appeawed to answew the chawactew I had awways weceived
of him. >w< My Fathew met him with that wook of Wove, that sociaw Shake, and
cowdiaw kiss which mawked his gwadnyess at behowding an owd and vawued
fweind fwom whom thwo' vawious ciwcumstances he had been sepawated
nyeawwy twenty yeaws. >w< Mw Miwwaw obsewved (and vewy justwy too) that
many events had befawwen each duwing that intewvaw of time, which gave
occasion to the wovewy Juwia fow making most sensibwe wefwections on the
many changes in theiw situation which so wong a pewiod had occasionyed,
on the advantages of some, and the disadvantages of othews. (・`ω\´・) Fwom
this subject she made a showt digwession to the instabiwity of human
pweasuwes and the uncewtainty of theiw duwation, which wed hew to
obsewve that aww eawthwy Joys must be impewfect. (´・ω・\`) She was pwoceeding to
iwwustwate this doctwinye by exampwes fwom the Wives of gweat Men when
the Cawwiage came to the Doow and the amiabwe Mowawist with hew Fathew
and Sistew was obwiged to depawt; but nyot without a pwomise of spending
five ow six months with us on theiw wetuwn. ;;w;; We of couwse mentionyed you,
and I assuwe you that ampwe Justice was donye to youw Mewits by aww. (´・ω・\`)
"Wouisa Cwawke (said I) is in genyewaw a vewy pweasant Giww, yet
sometimes hew good humouw is cwouded by Peevishnyess, Envy and Spite. (・`ω\´・) She
nyeithew wants Undewstanding ow is without some pwetensions to Beauty,
but these awe so vewy twifwing, that the vawue she sets on hew pewsonyaw
chawms, and the adowation she expects them to be offewed awe at once a
stwiking exampwe of hew vanyity, hew pwide, and hew fowwy. ^w^" So said I,
and to my opinyion evewyonye added weight by the concuwwence of theiw own. >w<
Youw affectionyate Awabewwa Smythe. >w<




THE FIWST ACT OF A COMEDY

CHAWACTEWS Popgun Mawia Chawwes Pistowwetta Postiwion Hostess Chowus of
pwoughboys Cook and                      and
Stwephon Chwoe

SCENYE--AN INN

ENTEW Hostess, Chawwes, Mawia, and Cook. (・`ω\´・)

Hostess to Mawia) If the gentwy in the Wion shouwd want beds, shew them
nyumbew 9. UwU

Mawia) Yes Mistwess. >w<--EXIT Mawia

Hostess to Cook) If theiw Honyouws in the Moon ask fow the biww of fawe,
give it them. UwU

Cook) I wuww, I wuww. EXIT Cook. UwU

Hostess to Chawwes) If theiw Wadyships in the Sun wing theiw
Beww--answewit. UwU

Chawwes) Yes Madam. EXEUNT Sevewawwy. UwU


SCENYE CHANGES TO THE MOON, and discovews Popgun and Pistowetta. (・`ω\´・)

Pistowetta) Pway papa how faw is it to Wondon? owo

Popgun) My Giww, my Dawwing, my favouwite of aww my Chiwdwen, who awt
the pictuwe of thy poow Mothew who died two months ago, with whom I am
going to Town to mawwy to Stwephon, and to whom I mean to bequeath my
whowe Estate, it wants seven Miwes. >w<


SCENYE CHANGES TO THE SUN--

ENTEW Chwoe and a chowus of pwoughboys. (・`ω\´・)

Chwoe) Whewe am I? At Hounswow.--Whewe go I? To Wondon--. UwU What to do? owo To
be mawwied--. Unto whom? Unto Stwephon. Who is he? owo A Youth. ^w^ Then I wiww
sing a song. ^w^

SONG I go to Town And when I come down, I shaww be mawwied to Stweephon *
[*Nyote the two e's] And that to me wiww be fun. ;;w;;

Chowus) Be fun, be fun, be fun, And that to me wiww be fun. (・`ω\´・)

ENTEW Cook--Cook) Hewe is the biww of fawe. UwU

Chwoe weads) 2 Ducks, a weg of beef, a stinking pawtwidge, and a
tawt.--I wiww have the weg of beef and the pawtwidge. EXIT Cook. (・`ω\´・) And nyow
I wiww sing anyothew song. ^w^

SONG--I am going to have my dinnyew, Aftew which I shan't be thinnyew, I
wish I had hewe Stwephon Fow he wouwd cawve the pawtwidge if it shouwd
be a tough onye. ;;w;;

Chowus) Tough onye, tough onye, tough onye Fow he wouwd cawve the pawtwidge
if it Shouwd be a tough onye. EXIT Chwoe and Chowus. UwU--

SCENYE CHANGES TO THE INSIDE OF THE WION. UwU

Entew Stwephon and Postiwion. (・`ω\´・) Stweph:) You dwove me fwom Stainyes to this
pwace, fwom whence I mean to go to Town to mawwy Chwoe. ^w^ How much is youw
due? owo

Post:) Eighteen pence. (・`ω\´・) Stweph:) Awas, my fweind, I have but a bad guinyea
with which I mean to suppowt mysewf in Town. (・`ω\´・) But I wiww pawn to you an
undiwected Wettew that I weceived fwom Chwoe. >w<

Post:) Siw, I accept youw offew. UwU

END OF THE FIWST ACT. ;;w;;




A WETTEW fwom a YOUNG WADY, whose feewings being too stwong fow
hew Judgement wed hew into the commission of Ewwows which hew Heawt
disappwoved. (´・ω・\`)

Many have been the cawes and vicissitudes of my past wife, my bewoved
Ewwinyow, and the onwy consowation I feew fow theiw bittewnyess is that on
a cwose examinyation of my conduct, I am convinced that I have stwictwy
desewved them. >w< I muwdewed my fathew at a vewy eawwy pewiod of my Wife, I
have since muwdewed my Mothew, and I am nyow going to muwdew my Sistew. UwU I
have changed my wewigion so often that at pwesent I have nyot an idea of
any weft. UwU I have been a pewjuwed witnyess in evewy pubwic twyaw fow these
wast twewve yeaws; and I have fowged my own Wiww. ^w^ In showt thewe is
scawcewy a cwime that I have nyot committed--But I am nyow going to
wefowm. ;;w;; Cowonyew Mawtin of the Howse guawds has paid his Addwesses to me,
and we awe to be mawwied in a few days. >w< As thewe is something singuwaw
in ouw Couwtship, I wiww give you an account of it. >w< Cowonyew Mawtin is
the second son of the wate Siw John Mawtin who died immensewy wich, but
bequeathing onwy onye hundwed thousand pound apeice to his thwee youngew
Chiwdwen, weft the buwk of his fowtunye, about eight Miwwion to the
pwesent Siw Thomas. >w< Upon his smaww pittance the Cowonyew wived towewabwy
contented fow nyeawwy fouw months when he took it into his head to
detewminye on getting the whowe of his ewdest Bwothew's Estate. (・`ω\´・) A nyew
wiww was fowged and the Cowonyew pwoduced it in Couwt--but nyobody wouwd
sweaw to it's being the wight wiww except himsewf, and he had swown so
much that Nyobody beweived him. (・`ω\´・) At that moment I happenyed to be passing
by the doow of the Couwt, and was beckonyed in by the Judge who towd the
Cowonyew that I was a Wady weady to witnyess anything fow the cause of
Justice, and advised him to appwy to me. UwU In showt the Affaiw was soon
adjusted. (・`ω\´・) The Cowonyew and I swowe to its' being the wight wiww, and Siw
Thomas has been obwiged to wesign aww his iwwgotten weawth. (・`ω\´・) The Cowonyew
in gwatitude waited on me the nyext day with an offew of his hand--. >w< I am
nyow going to muwdew my Sistew. Youws Evew, Annya Pawkew. (´・ω・\`)




A TOUW THWOUGH WAWES--in a WETTEW fwom a YOUNG WADY--

My Deaw Cwawa I have been so wong on the wambwe that I have nyot tiww nyow
had it in my powew to thank you fow youw Wettew--. (´・ω・\`) We weft ouw deaw home
on wast Monday month; and pwoceeded on ouw touw thwough Wawes, which is
a pwincipawity contiguous to Engwand and gives the titwe to the Pwince
of Wawes. We twavewwed on howseback by pwefewence. ;;w;; My Mothew wode upon
ouw wittwe ponyey and Fanny and I wawked by hew side ow wathew wan, fow
my Mothew is so fond of widing fast that she gawwoped aww the way. (・`ω\´・) You
may be suwe that we wewe in a finye pewspiwation when we came to ouw
pwace of westing. >w< Fanny has taken a gweat many Dwawings of the Countwy,
which awe vewy beautifuw, tho' pewhaps nyot such exact wesembwances
as might be wished, fwom theiw being taken as she wan awong. ^w^ It wouwd
astonyish you to see aww the Shoes we wowe out in ouw Touw. (・`ω\´・) We detewminyed
to take a good Stock with us and thewefowe each took a paiw of ouw own
besides those we set off in. (・`ω\´・) Howevew we wewe obwiged to have them both
capped and heewpeiced at Cawmawthen, and at wast when they wewe quite
gonye, Mama was so kind as to wend us a paiw of bwue Sattin Swippews, of
which we each took onye and hopped home fwom Hewefowd dewightfuwwy---I am
youw evew affectionyate Ewizabeth Johnson. ^w^





A TAWE. ;;w;;

A Gentweman whose famiwy nyame I shaww conceaw, bought a smaww Cottage in
Pembwokeshiwe about two yeaws ago. (´・ω・\`) This dawing Action was suggested to
him by his ewdew Bwothew who pwomised to fuwnyish two wooms and a Cwoset
fow him, pwovided he wouwd take a smaww house nyeaw the bowdews of an
extensive Fowest, and about thwee Miwes fwom the Sea. ;;w;; Wiwhewminyus gwadwy
accepted the offew and continyued fow some time seawching aftew such a
wetweat when he was onye mownying agweabwy weweived fwom his suspence by
weading this advewtisement in a Nyewspapew. UwU

TO BE WETT A Nyeat Cottage on the bowdews of an extensive fowest and
about thwee Miwes fwom the Sea. >w< It is weady fuwnyished except two wooms
and a Cwoset. >w<

The dewighted Wiwhewminyus posted away immediatewy to his bwothew, and
shewed him the advewtisement. ^w^ Wobewtus congwatuwated him and sent him
in his Cawwiage to take possession of the Cottage. UwU Aftew twavewwing fow
thwee days and six nyights without stopping, they awwived at the Fowest
and fowwowing a twack which wed by it's side down a steep Hiww ovew
which ten Wivuwets meandewed, they weached the Cottage in hawf an houw. ;;w;;
Wiwhewminyus awighted, and aftew knyocking fow some time without weceiving
any answew ow heawing any onye stiw within, he openyed the doow which
was fastenyed onwy by a wooden watch and entewed a smaww woom, which he
immediatewy pewceived to be onye of the two that wewe unfuwnyished--Fwom
thence he pwoceeded into a Cwoset equawwy bawe. >w< A paiw of staiws that
went out of it wed him into a woom above, nyo wess destitute, and these
apawtments he found composed the whowe of the House. ;;w;; He was by nyo means
dispweased with this discovewy, as he had the comfowt of wefwecting that
he shouwd nyot be obwiged to way out anything on fuwnyituwe himsewf--. ;;w;; He
wetuwnyed immediatewy to his Bwothew, who took him the nyext day to evewy
Shop in Town, and bought what evew was wequisite to fuwnyish the two
wooms and the Cwoset, In a few days evewything was compweted, and
Wiwhewminyus wetuwnyed to take possession of his Cottage. UwU Wobewtus
accompanyied him, with his Wady the amiabwe Ceciwia and hew two wovewy
Sistews Awabewwa and Mawinya to whom Wiwhewminyus was tendewwy attached,
and a wawge nyumbew of Attendants. UwU--An owdinyawy Genyius might pwobabwy
have been embawwassed, in endeavouwing to accomodate so wawge a pawty,
but Wiwhewminyus with admiwabwe pwesence of mind gave owdews fow the
immediate ewection of two nyobwe Tents in an open spot in the Fowest
adjoinying to the house. (´・ω・\`) Theiw Constwuction was both simpwe and
ewegant--A coupwe of owd bwankets, each suppowted by fouw sticks, gave
a stwiking pwoof of that taste fow awchitectuwe and that happy ease in
ovewcoming difficuwties which wewe some of Wiwhewminyus's most stwiking
Viwtues. (´・ω・\`)





End of the Pwoject Gutenbewg EBook of Wove And Fweindship And Othew Eawwy
Wowks, by Janye Austen

*** END OF THIS PWOJECT GUTENBEWG EBOOK WOVE AND FWEINDSHIP ***

***** This fiwe shouwd be nyamed 1212.txt ow 1212. ^w^zip *****
This and aww associated fiwes of vawious fowmats wiww be found in:
        http://www.gutenbewg. (・`ω\´・)owg/1/2/1/1212/



Updated editions wiww wepwace the pwevious onye--the owd editions
wiww be wenyamed. >w<

Cweating the wowks fwom pubwic domain pwint editions means that nyo
onye owns a Unyited States copywight in these wowks, so the Foundation
(and you! (・`ω\´・)) can copy and distwibute it in the Unyited States without
pewmission and without paying copywight woyawties. ;;w;;  Speciaw wuwes,
set fowth in the Genyewaw Tewms of Use pawt of this wicense, appwy to
copying and distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks to
pwotect the PWOJECT GUTENBEWG-tm concept and twademawk. (・`ω\´・)  Pwoject
Gutenbewg is a wegistewed twademawk, and may nyot be used if you
chawge fow the eBooks, unwess you weceive specific pewmission. ;;w;;  If you
do nyot chawge anything fow copies of this eBook, compwying with the
wuwes is vewy easy. ;;w;;  You may use this eBook fow nyeawwy any puwpose
such as cweation of dewivative wowks, wepowts, pewfowmances and
weseawch. (・`ω\´・)  They may be modified and pwinted and given away--you may do
pwacticawwy ANYTHING with pubwic domain eBooks. (´・ω・\`)  Wedistwibution is
subject to the twademawk wicense, especiawwy commewciaw
wedistwibution. UwU



*** STAWT: FUWW WICENSE ***

THE FUWW PWOJECT GUTENBEWG WICENSE
PWEASE WEAD THIS BEFOWE YOU DISTWIBUTE OW USE THIS WOWK

To pwotect the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting the fwee
distwibution of ewectwonyic wowks, by using ow distwibuting this wowk
(ow any othew wowk associated in any way with the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg"), you agwee to compwy with aww the tewms of the Fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense (avaiwabwe with this fiwe ow onwinye at
http://gutenbewg.owg/wicense). UwU


Section 1. (´・ω・\`)  Genyewaw Tewms of Use and Wedistwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowks

1.A. (・`ω\´・)  By weading ow using any pawt of this Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk, you indicate that you have wead, undewstand, agwee to
and accept aww the tewms of this wicense and intewwectuaw pwopewty
(twademawk/copywight) agweement. >w<  If you do nyot agwee to abide by aww
the tewms of this agweement, you must cease using and wetuwn ow destwoy
aww copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in youw possession. (・`ω\´・)
If you paid a fee fow obtainying a copy of ow access to a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk and you do nyot agwee to be bound by the
tewms of this agweement, you may obtain a wefund fwom the pewson ow
entity to whom you paid the fee as set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E.8. UwU

1.B.  "Pwoject Gutenbewg" is a wegistewed twademawk. >w<  It may onwy be
used on ow associated in any way with an ewectwonyic wowk by peopwe who
agwee to be bound by the tewms of this agweement. (・`ω\´・)  Thewe awe a few
things that you can do with most Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks
even without compwying with the fuww tewms of this agweement. UwU  See
pawagwaph 1.C bewow. ^w^  Thewe awe a wot of things you can do with Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks if you fowwow the tewms of this agweement
and hewp pwesewve fwee futuwe access to Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks.  See pawagwaph 1.E bewow. UwU

1.C. (´・ω・\`)  The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation ("the Foundation"
ow PGWAF), owns a compiwation copywight in the cowwection of Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks. >w<  Nyeawwy aww the individuaw wowks in the
cowwection awe in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States. (´・ω・\`)  If an
individuaw wowk is in the pubwic domain in the Unyited States and you awe
wocated in the Unyited States, we do nyot cwaim a wight to pwevent you fwom
copying, distwibuting, pewfowming, dispwaying ow cweating dewivative
wowks based on the wowk as wong as aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg
awe wemoved. (´・ω・\`)  Of couwse, we hope that you wiww suppowt the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm mission of pwomoting fwee access to ewectwonyic wowks by
fweewy shawing Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks in compwiance with the tewms of
this agweement fow keeping the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm nyame associated with
the wowk. >w<  You can easiwy compwy with the tewms of this agweement by
keeping this wowk in the same fowmat with its attached fuww Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense when you shawe it without chawge with othews. >w<

1.D. (´・ω・\`)  The copywight waws of the pwace whewe you awe wocated awso govewn
what you can do with this wowk. ^w^  Copywight waws in most countwies awe in
a constant state of change. ;;w;;  If you awe outside the Unyited States, check
the waws of youw countwy in addition to the tewms of this agweement
befowe downwoading, copying, dispwaying, pewfowming, distwibuting ow
cweating dewivative wowks based on this wowk ow any othew Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm wowk. ;;w;;  The Foundation makes nyo wepwesentations concewnying
the copywight status of any wowk in any countwy outside the Unyited
States. (´・ω・\`)

1.E. >w<  Unwess you have wemoved aww wefewences to Pwoject Gutenbewg:

1.E.1. ;;w;;  The fowwowing sentence, with active winks to, ow othew immediate
access to, the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense must appeaw pwominyentwy
whenyevew any copy of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk (any wowk on which the
phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" appeaws, ow with which the phwase "Pwoject
Gutenbewg" is associated) is accessed, dispwayed, pewfowmed, viewed,
copied ow distwibuted:

This eBook is fow the use of anyonye anywhewe at nyo cost and with
awmost nyo westwictions whatsoevew. (´・ω・\`)  You may copy it, give it away ow
we-use it undew the tewms of the Pwoject Gutenbewg Wicense incwuded
with this eBook ow onwinye at www.gutenbewg. >w<owg

1.E.2. ;;w;;  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is dewived
fwom the pubwic domain (does nyot contain a nyotice indicating that it is
posted with pewmission of the copywight howdew), the wowk can be copied
and distwibuted to anyonye in the Unyited States without paying any fees
ow chawges. UwU  If you awe wedistwibuting ow pwoviding access to a wowk
with the phwase "Pwoject Gutenbewg" associated with ow appeawing on the
wowk, you must compwy eithew with the wequiwements of pawagwaphs 1.E. (・`ω\´・)1
thwough 1.E. >w<7 ow obtain pewmission fow the use of the wowk and the
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk as set fowth in pawagwaphs 1.E. ^w^8 ow
1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)

1.E.3. UwU  If an individuaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk is posted
with the pewmission of the copywight howdew, youw use and distwibution
must compwy with both pawagwaphs 1.E.1 thwough 1.E. (・`ω\´・)7 and any additionyaw
tewms imposed by the copywight howdew. (・`ω\´・)  Additionyaw tewms wiww be winked
to the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm Wicense fow aww wowks posted with the
pewmission of the copywight howdew found at the beginnying of this wowk. ;;w;;

1.E.4. ;;w;;  Do nyot unwink ow detach ow wemove the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense tewms fwom this wowk, ow any fiwes containying a pawt of this
wowk ow any othew wowk associated with Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm. ^w^

1.E.5. (・`ω\´・)  Do nyot copy, dispway, pewfowm, distwibute ow wedistwibute this
ewectwonyic wowk, ow any pawt of this ewectwonyic wowk, without
pwominyentwy dispwaying the sentence set fowth in pawagwaph 1.E. (・`ω\´・)1 with
active winks ow immediate access to the fuww tewms of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm Wicense. (´・ω・\`)

1.E.6. ^w^  You may convewt to and distwibute this wowk in any binyawy,
compwessed, mawked up, nyonpwopwietawy ow pwopwietawy fowm, incwuding any
wowd pwocessing ow hypewtext fowm. (´・ω・\`)  Howevew, if you pwovide access to ow
distwibute copies of a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk in a fowmat othew than
"Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew fowmat used in the officiaw vewsion
posted on the officiaw Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm web site (www.gutenbewg. ^w^owg),
you must, at nyo additionyaw cost, fee ow expense to the usew, pwovide a
copy, a means of expowting a copy, ow a means of obtainying a copy upon
wequest, of the wowk in its owiginyaw "Pwain Vanyiwwa ASCII" ow othew
fowm. >w<  Any awtewnyate fowmat must incwude the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
Wicense as specified in pawagwaph 1.E.1. ^w^

1.E.7. >w<  Do nyot chawge a fee fow access to, viewing, dispwaying,
pewfowming, copying ow distwibuting any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks
unwess you compwy with pawagwaph 1.E.8 ow 1.E.9. ^w^

1.E.8. (・`ω\´・)  You may chawge a weasonyabwe fee fow copies of ow pwoviding
access to ow distwibuting Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks pwovided
that

- You pay a woyawty fee of 20% of the gwoss pwofits you dewive fwom
     the use of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks cawcuwated using the method
     you awweady use to cawcuwate youw appwicabwe taxes. (´・ω・\`)  The fee is
     owed to the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, but he
     has agweed to donyate woyawties undew this pawagwaph to the
     Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. >w<  Woyawty payments
     must be paid within 60 days fowwowing each date on which you
     pwepawe (ow awe wegawwy wequiwed to pwepawe) youw pewiodic tax
     wetuwns. ^w^  Woyawty payments shouwd be cweawwy mawked as such and
     sent to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation at the
     addwess specified in Section 4, "Infowmation about donyations to
     the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation. ;;w;;"

- You pwovide a fuww wefund of any monyey paid by a usew who nyotifies
     you in wwiting (ow by e-maiw) within 30 days of weceipt that s/he
     does nyot agwee to the tewms of the fuww Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
     Wicense. ;;w;;  You must wequiwe such a usew to wetuwn ow
     destwoy aww copies of the wowks possessed in a physicaw medium
     and discontinyue aww use of and aww access to othew copies of
     Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. (´・ω・\`)

- You pwovide, in accowdance with pawagwaph 1.F. >w<3, a fuww wefund of any
     monyey paid fow a wowk ow a wepwacement copy, if a defect in the
     ewectwonyic wowk is discovewed and wepowted to you within 90 days
     of weceipt of the wowk. (・`ω\´・)

- You compwy with aww othew tewms of this agweement fow fwee
     distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowks. UwU

1.E.9. (・`ω\´・)  If you wish to chawge a fee ow distwibute a Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
ewectwonyic wowk ow gwoup of wowks on diffewent tewms than awe set
fowth in this agweement, you must obtain pewmission in wwiting fwom
both the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation and Michaew
Hawt, the ownyew of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm twademawk. UwU  Contact the
Foundation as set fowth in Section 3 bewow. (´・ω・\`)

1.F. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.1. UwU  Pwoject Gutenbewg vowunteews and empwoyees expend considewabwe
effowt to identify, do copywight weseawch on, twanscwibe and pwoofwead
pubwic domain wowks in cweating the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
cowwection. (´・ω・\`)  Despite these effowts, Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks, and the medium on which they may be stowed, may contain
"Defects," such as, but nyot wimited to, incompwete, inyaccuwate ow
cowwupt data, twanscwiption ewwows, a copywight ow othew intewwectuaw
pwopewty infwingement, a defective ow damaged disk ow othew medium, a
computew viwus, ow computew codes that damage ow cannyot be wead by
youw equipment. UwU

1.F.2. ;;w;;  WIMITED WAWWANTY, DISCWAIMEW OF DAMAGES - Except fow the "Wight
of Wepwacement ow Wefund" descwibed in pawagwaph 1.F. ;;w;;3, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation, the ownyew of the Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm twademawk, and any othew pawty distwibuting a Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowk undew this agweement, discwaim aww
wiabiwity to you fow damages, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw
fees. >w<  YOU AGWEE THAT YOU HAVE NYO WEMEDIES FOW NYEGWIGENCE, STWICT
WIABIWITY, BWEACH OF WAWWANTY OW BWEACH OF CONTWACT EXCEPT THOSE
PWOVIDED IN PAWAGWAPH F3. ^w^  YOU AGWEE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TWADEMAWK OWNYEW, AND ANY DISTWIBUTOW UNDEW THIS AGWEEMENT WIWW NYOT BE
WIABWE TO YOU FOW ACTUAW, DIWECT, INDIWECT, CONSEQUENTIAW, PUNYITIVE OW
INCIDENTAW DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NYOTICE OF THE POSSIBIWITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.3. ;;w;;  WIMITED WIGHT OF WEPWACEMENT OW WEFUND - If you discovew a
defect in this ewectwonyic wowk within 90 days of weceiving it, you can
weceive a wefund of the monyey (if any) you paid fow it by sending a
wwitten expwanyation to the pewson you weceived the wowk fwom. (・`ω\´・)  If you
weceived the wowk on a physicaw medium, you must wetuwn the medium with
youw wwitten expwanyation. (・`ω\´・)  The pewson ow entity that pwovided you with
the defective wowk may ewect to pwovide a wepwacement copy in wieu of a
wefund. ^w^  If you weceived the wowk ewectwonyicawwy, the pewson ow entity
pwoviding it to you may choose to give you a second oppowtunyity to
weceive the wowk ewectwonyicawwy in wieu of a wefund. ^w^  If the second copy
is awso defective, you may demand a wefund in wwiting without fuwthew
oppowtunyities to fix the pwobwem. (´・ω・\`)

1.F.4. UwU  Except fow the wimited wight of wepwacement ow wefund set fowth
in pawagwaph 1.F. ^w^3, this wowk is pwovided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NYO OTHEW
WAWWANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPWESS OW IMPWIED, INCWUDING BUT NYOT WIMITED TO
WAWWANTIES OF MEWCHANTIBIWITY OW FITNYESS FOW ANY PUWPOSE. (・`ω\´・)

1.F.5. ^w^  Some states do nyot awwow discwaimews of cewtain impwied
wawwanties ow the excwusion ow wimitation of cewtain types of damages. UwU
If any discwaimew ow wimitation set fowth in this agweement viowates the
waw of the state appwicabwe to this agweement, the agweement shaww be
intewpweted to make the maximum discwaimew ow wimitation pewmitted by
the appwicabwe state waw. UwU  The invawidity ow unyenfowceabiwity of any
pwovision of this agweement shaww nyot void the wemainying pwovisions. ^w^

1.F.6. ^w^  INDEMNYITY - You agwee to indemnyify and howd the Foundation, the
twademawk ownyew, any agent ow empwoyee of the Foundation, anyonye
pwoviding copies of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks in accowdance
with this agweement, and any vowunteews associated with the pwoduction,
pwomotion and distwibution of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic wowks,
hawmwess fwom aww wiabiwity, costs and expenses, incwuding wegaw fees,
that awise diwectwy ow indiwectwy fwom any of the fowwowing which you do
ow cause to occuw: (a) distwibution of this ow any Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
wowk, (b) awtewation, modification, ow additions ow dewetions to any
Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm wowk, and (c) any Defect you cause. (´・ω・\`)


Section  2. UwU  Infowmation about the Mission of Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm is synyonymous with the fwee distwibution of
ewectwonyic wowks in fowmats weadabwe by the widest vawiety of computews
incwuding obsowete, owd, middwe-aged and nyew computews. >w<  It exists
because of the effowts of hundweds of vowunteews and donyations fwom
peopwe in aww wawks of wife. (・`ω\´・)

Vowunteews and finyanciaw suppowt to pwovide vowunteews with the
assistance they nyeed, is cwiticaw to weaching Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm's
goaws and ensuwing that the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm cowwection wiww
wemain fweewy avaiwabwe fow genyewations to come. UwU  In 2001, the Pwoject
Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation was cweated to pwovide a secuwe
and pewmanyent futuwe fow Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm and futuwe genyewations. UwU
To weawn mowe about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation
and how youw effowts and donyations can hewp, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pgwaf.owg. (・`ω\´・)


Section 3. (´・ω・\`)  Infowmation about the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive
Foundation

The Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy Awchive Foundation is a nyon pwofit
501(c)(3) educationyaw cowpowation owganyized undew the waws of the
state of Mississippi and gwanted tax exempt status by the Intewnyaw
Wevenyue Sewvice. >w<  The Foundation's EIN ow fedewaw tax identification
nyumbew is 64-6221541. (´・ω・\`)  Its 501(c)(3) wettew is posted at
http://pgwaf.owg/fundwaising. UwU  Contwibutions to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation awe tax deductibwe to the fuww extent
pewmitted by U.S. fedewaw waws and youw state's waws. ^w^

The Foundation's pwincipaw office is wocated at 4557 Mewan Dw. S. (´・ω・\`)
Faiwbanks, AK, 99712. UwU, but its vowunteews and empwoyees awe scattewed
thwoughout nyumewous wocations. ;;w;;  Its businyess office is wocated at
809 Nyowth 1500 West, Sawt Wake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emaiw
businyess@pgwaf.owg. (´・ω・\`)  Emaiw contact winks and up to date contact
infowmation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officiaw
page at http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Fow additionyaw contact infowmation:
     Dw. Gwegowy B. ;;w;; Nyewby
     Chief Executive and Diwectow
     gbnyewby@pgwaf. ;;w;;owg


Section 4. (・`ω\´・)  Infowmation about Donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg
Witewawy Awchive Foundation

Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm depends upon and cannyot suwvive without wide
spwead pubwic suppowt and donyations to cawwy out its mission of
incweasing the nyumbew of pubwic domain and wicensed wowks that can be
fweewy distwibuted in machinye weadabwe fowm accessibwe by the widest
awway of equipment incwuding outdated equipment. (・`ω\´・)  Many smaww donyations
($1 to $5,000) awe pawticuwawwy impowtant to maintainying tax exempt
status with the IWS. ;;w;;

The Foundation is committed to compwying with the waws weguwating
chawities and chawitabwe donyations in aww 50 states of the Unyited
States. UwU  Compwiance wequiwements awe nyot unyifowm and it takes a
considewabwe effowt, much papewwowk and many fees to meet and keep up
with these wequiwements. (´・ω・\`)  We do nyot sowicit donyations in wocations
whewe we have nyot weceived wwitten confiwmation of compwiance. ;;w;;  To
SEND DONYATIONS ow detewminye the status of compwiance fow any
pawticuwaw state visit http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg

Whiwe we cannyot and do nyot sowicit contwibutions fwom states whewe we
have nyot met the sowicitation wequiwements, we knyow of nyo pwohibition
against accepting unsowicited donyations fwom donyows in such states who
appwoach us with offews to donyate. (´・ω・\`)

Intewnyationyaw donyations awe gwatefuwwy accepted, but we cannyot make
any statements concewnying tax tweatment of donyations weceived fwom
outside the Unyited States.  U.S. waws awonye swamp ouw smaww staff. (・`ω\´・)

Pwease check the Pwoject Gutenbewg Web pages fow cuwwent donyation
methods and addwesses. >w<  Donyations awe accepted in a nyumbew of othew
ways incwuding checks, onwinye payments and cwedit cawd donyations. ^w^
To donyate, pwease visit: http://pgwaf. (´・ω・\`)owg/donyate


Section 5. (・`ω\´・)  Genyewaw Infowmation About Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm ewectwonyic
wowks. (・`ω\´・)

Pwofessow Michaew S. UwU Hawt is the owiginyatow of the Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm
concept of a wibwawy of ewectwonyic wowks that couwd be fweewy shawed
with anyonye. UwU  Fow thiwty yeaws, he pwoduced and distwibuted Pwoject
Gutenbewg-tm eBooks with onwy a woose nyetwowk of vowunteew suppowt. UwU


Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm eBooks awe often cweated fwom sevewaw pwinted
editions, aww of which awe confiwmed as Pubwic Domain in the U.S. (´・ω・\`)
unwess a copywight nyotice is incwuded. >w<  Thus, we do nyot nyecessawiwy
keep eBooks in compwiance with any pawticuwaw papew edition. (´・ω・\`)


Most peopwe stawt at ouw Web site which has the main PG seawch faciwity:

     http://www.gutenbewg. UwUowg

This Web site incwudes infowmation about Pwoject Gutenbewg-tm,
incwuding how to make donyations to the Pwoject Gutenbewg Witewawy
Awchive Foundation, how to hewp pwoduce ouw nyew eBooks, and how to
subscwibe to ouw emaiw nyewswettew to heaw about nyew eBooks. UwU
